---
title: Genesis - part 1
description: Interpretation of the First Book of Moses (Genesis). First part.
---

This page is under construction and what you see can be called the first step or the beginning of a work or process to get the best responsive websites for mobile phones and devices, which until now (2024) has not been created yet with Lutheran writings and books.

## Genesis - part 1

**Dr. Martin Luther\'s**

**Complete Writings,**

published by

**Dr. Joh. Georg Walch.**

**First volume.**

**Interpretation of the first book of Moses.**

First part.

**[New revised stereotype edition.]{.underline}**

St. Louis, Mo.

**CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.**

**\
Dr. Martin Luther\'s**

**Interpretation of the first book of Moses.**

**First part.**

Published in German language

from

**Dr. J. G. Walch.**

**Newly published on behalf of the Ministry of the German Lutheran
Church.**

**Synod of Missouri, Ohio and other states.**

St. Louis, Mo.

**CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.**

**\
\
Foreword.**

In the name of God, the first volume of the old Walch edition of Dr.
Luther\'s works, well known and highly esteemed in the Lutheran Church,
is hereby presented to the public in a renewed form and shape! The
Pastoral Conference of the Western District of the Lutheran Synod of
Missouri, Ohio and other states dealt in September 1879 with the
question whether a new edition of the works of Luther by Dr. J. G. Walch
would not be in the interest of our Synod. Reference was made to the
twofold circumstance that the copies of the old edition are becoming
increasingly rare, and that the Erlangen edition, which lacks the
valuable, longer prefaces and the translations of the Latin writings,
does not replace Walch\'s edition. Thus, the conference decided, in the
name of the ministry of the Lutheran Synod of Missouri, Ohio, and other
states, to procure a new, revised edition of Luther\'s works according
to Dr. Joh. G. Walch, and determined that P. G. Stöckhardt, with the
assistance of E. W. Kähler, should take over the editing.

After the Ministry of the Synod and the Directorate of the Synodal
Printing Office had agreed to this project, the aforementioned went to
work together and first tackled the revision of the first volume of this
edition, containing the first part of the interpretation of the first
book of Moses. In difficult cases, they sought the opinion of Doctor and
Professor of Theology C. F. W. Walther, who was placed at their side by
the conference as a counselor. The old translation with its
comprehensible, popular language was to be essentially retained. Since,
however, the most important thing in an edition of Luther\'s works is to
capture the meaning and opinion of Luther himself as accurately as
possible, the translation published by Walch was again compared with the
Latin original. The following changes seemed to be necessary in such a
revision. The incorrect and inaccurate versions have been corrected,
incomprehensible expressions have been replaced by clearer ones, complex
paraphrases have been shortened, superfluous additions, e.g., the
passages preceding each chapter, have been removed.

**\
VI Foreword . VII**

The book has been edited for clarity and clarity, but supplementary
remarks from the more recent Luther literature have been included, and
from time to time explanatory notes have been added. Printing and layout
will commend themselves to the readers. Above each page, the
corresponding page number of the old Walch edition is noted under W. I,
II 2c., of the Erlangen Latin edition under E. I, II 2c. The German of
the old translation has been clarified according to the rules of the
newer orthography. The rather laborious correction of the printed sheets
was done by Mr. Christian Körner.

May this new edition of Luther\'s works stimulate and spur Lutheran
Christians to diligently and eagerly listen to the voice of their
teacher, the prophet of the last days.

listen! Just the interpretation of the first book of Moses contains, as
is also noted in the prefaces, a short, clear summa of Luther\'s
teaching, which is taken directly from God\'s Word. The double
anniversary of this year, the 350th anniversary of the handing over of
the Augsburg Confession, as well as the 300th anniversary of the first
publication of the Book of Concord, has seriously reminded Lutheran
Christianity to be faithful with the treasures handed down to it by the
Fathers. Among these treasures are especially Luther\'s writings. By
God\'s great grace, the unadulterated teachings of Luther, long
forgotten and buried, have been made accessible anew to the Lutheran
Church in North America. Let us prove our gratitude for this blessing of
God also by researching and studying Luther\'s teachings from Luther
himself - for the strengthening and fortification of our most holy
faith!

**St. Louis, on Reformation Day, 1880.**

> **The Editors.**

**\
Foreword by Dr. Walch.**

**I.**

Among the glorious gifts of grace that God had placed in the blessed D.
Martin Luther, as the chosen instrument of the blessed Church
Reformation, one of the most distinguished was that he not only loved
the divine Word with all his heart and indeed held it higher than many
thousands of pieces of gold and silver; but also possessed a deep
insight into it and was proficient in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments. The goodness and wisdom of God had united both in a high
degree in his soul. He was indeed a great lover of the divine word, and
found in it his greatest pleasure, when he could deal with it, recognize
from it the way he should walk, fortify himself in his faith by it, and
in the many and various tribulations he had to experience, draw from it
some consolation, of which he gave many samples and at the same time
left behind unimpeachable testimonies, which confirm what is praised of
him in this respect. For he showed such love and respect for the
Scriptures at every opportunity. From the beginning of his academic
office until its conclusion, he read constantly and tirelessly about it
and sought to make it known to his listeners: he based his teachings
solely on it and was therefore firm and immovable in them. Against his
adversaries he used it as the sword of the spirit; thereby he drove them
into a corner and refuted them with all their errors, so that they were
unable to do anything against him, which happened especially with the
papists. He gives the most emphatic praise to such divine Scripture and
admonishes all,

to read it diligently and to call upon God for true enlightenment if
they want to attain the right knowledge and promote their salvation.
Among other things, he says: \"Therefore, the word of God should be held
in honor and esteem. For it bringeth forth much fruit; and though it
doeth not so with the crude and ungodly, yet it doeth so with the
thirsty that receive it, and they are made superfluous, and are
refreshed with a river thereby\"; and again, \"Thou shalt know that the
holy scriptures are such a book, which maketh foolish the wisdom of all
other books, because none teacheth of eternal life without this only.\"
As he also writes in another place: \"Therefore see, read gladly in the
holy Scriptures; do not become weary; nor let yourself think that you
are full and know everything well, otherwise you will understand nothing
of it, if you think you have understood everything, that a man of God is
perfect, sent to all good work. Although there are many books that are
very useful, and can make fine, skilful, learned people, yet everything
is directed to this transitory life alone. But worldly wisdom and
righteousness, if one learns from such \"books,\" cannot make a man of
God, nor teach him, punish him, correct him, chasten him to
righteousness, and make him skillful or perfect for all good works. All
this must be done by the Holy Scriptures, inspired and taught by God
Himself.\" Many more such testimonies could be cited, if necessary. As
much as the blessed man loved the divine books, he was well versed in
them, and God had given him great gifts to understand and use them.

**[X Foreword by Dr. Walch. XI]{.underline}**

He did not get stuck on the outer shells, nor did he seek to apply a
broad human scholarship to his interpretations. He did not get stuck on
the outer shells, nor did he try to apply a broad human erudition to his
interpretations; but came to the right ground, to the true and proper
intention of the Spirit of God, he might have the legal or evangelical
word before him, and knew how to show in a clear and emphatic way what
is the true meaning and will of God in this and that passage, especially
of the sinful general and very deep corruption of men, of the grace and
merciful love of God, of Jesus, the core of the entire Holy Scripture,
of righteousness by faith, of the active and active nature of faith, as
well as other points of teaching and life, which he did no less in the
stories told in Scripture.

**II.**

Luther received such gifts from God precisely because he had been chosen
as an instrument of the Reformation and they were necessary for this.
For through the Scriptures, light had to dawn in the darkness that
covered the land and the abominations of the papacy had to be made
manifest. Therefore, he took it upon himself to seek them out again,
since they had been hidden for so long, to bring them into the hands of
the people, to explain them, and to show what one should believe
according to these guidelines, and how one should live, if one wanted to
attain salvation. He did this by translating the Bible with much effort
and care from the basic text into the German language in a pure, clear
and understandable way, and thus promoted the progress of the
Reformation in such a way that the evangelical truth spread quickly and
the pabstry received an enormous blow in a short time, precisely because
everyone now had the opportunity to recognize the truth from God\'s Word
itself and to see the errors of the Roman Church. This was such an
important matter that it must be said that if the blessed Luther had
earned his merit with nothing else than with such a translation of the
Scriptures, nevertheless, his thereby attained

The author is not to be held in low esteem, and the effort expended in
the process is to be acknowledged with constant gratitude. It is true
that a German translation already existed before, and that the one that
Luther made afterwards did not turn out so perfect that one and the
other could not be improved on it; but just as that one was taken more
from the Latin than from the basic text and was thereby written in a
dark and incomprehensible manner, so the work of the blessed Luther does
not lose anything of its value by the fact that here and there some
deficiencies still show up in it. It is well known and easy to
understand that no translation expresses the original perfectly, and
even if we now find something to improve in the one that we have to
thank the blessed Luther for, we would not recognize it if he had not
preceded us and if we had not reached such insight through his
instruction. Suffice it to say that he correctly expressed all the
truths on which our faith is based and according to which we must
conduct our lives and lives, according to the true meaning of the
spirit, showed great experience in the Hebrew language, and used a good
and clear German style of writing, especially in accordance with the
times; and thus his translation remains an excellent work and a special
blessing of God. However, he did not leave it at that. He gave the Bible
back into the hands of the people in such a way that he showed at the
same time how all Christians who wanted to attain blessedness had a
right to read it, and were even obliged to do so, and since in the
papacy poor people had been drawn away from God and His Word to people
and their sayings with power and cunning, he, on the other hand, turned
the matter around and proved how one had to base one\'s faith not on
human but on divine prestige, consequently on the Scriptures, and from
them recognize for oneself the truths necessary for blessedness. His
merits in this were even greater, in that he diligently explained the
Scriptures in his sermons, academic lectures and otherwise, produced
many splendid interpretations of the divine books, and showed how one
should understand the Word of God and fruitfully apply it for his
edification.

**XII** [Foreword by Dr. Walch.]{.underline} **XIII**

**III.**

Just these interpretations and exegetical writings of the blessed Luther
are composed with a special skill, and they have always had a special
blessing, although it cannot be denied that one has an advantage over
the other. Among the best is his explanation of the first book of Moses,
of which I will now give a brief historical account. He produced it at
Wittenberg in his lectures and spent about ten years on it, beginning
the work in 1536 and finishing it on November 17, 1545, thus a few
months before his end. This is reported by Joh. Mathesius in his sermons
on the life of Luther, and after he mentions how he left Wittenberg for
a while because of an annoyance and stayed with the Prince of Anhalt in
Merseburg, he writes: \"When he came home again, he finished his Genesis
on November 17, 1545, on which he had worked for ten years with the
greatest diligence. That he began the work in 1536, however, is noted by
Veit Ludwig von Seckendorf in the third register of his Historia
Lutheranismi; and that in particular the interpretation of the second
and twentieth chapters was begun on October 27, 1539, is indicated in
the Latin copy in the margin. Such work he brought, as already thought,
not long before his death to an end, and there he made a strange
conclusion of the same with these words: \"This is now the dear Genesis.
Our Lord God wants others to do better after me. I cannot do it anymore:
I am weak. Orate Deum pro me (pray to God for me) that He may give me a
blessed hour.\" When he began it, he is said to have said that this
would be his last work, and with it, if it were God\'s will, he wanted
to conclude his life, as Mathesius mentioned, adding: \"Of course, the
last thoughts are the best, if they are directed to God\'s word and
spring from it, and old people\'s sermons and books are well to remember
and keep. The intention, which the blessed man had at the beginning, was
not that this interpretation should be made known by printing; but

he only wanted to serve his listeners at that time and to practice
himself in God\'s word, which he says himself in the preface of the
first part of this interpretation: \"These lectures and interpretations
of mine on the first book of Moses I have never undertaken in such an
opinion that I would have been inclined to let them go into print
publicly, which has been my least thought; but rather so that first of
all I would serve this school of ours, as it is now, somewhat after the
passage of time, and would have cause to exercise not only my listeners
but also myself in God\'s words, and not to conclude with a rotten and
useless age the dying of my body, which I feel in myself daily.\"

**IV.**

In the meantime, God, according to His wisdom, saw to it that this
glorious treasure did not remain hidden, but was brought to light for
the awakening of many souls, and that gradually in various parts. The
beginning of such publication was made during the lifetime of the
blessed Luther. For since D. Caspar Cruciger, professor of theology at
Wittenberg, and M. Georg Rorarius, deacon at Wittenberg, had copied
these lections and considered it good that they be published by
printing, also M. Veit Dietrich, who was studying at Wittenberg at the
time, took up the matter seriously and contributed his part by comparing
the copies and putting them in order, Luther put up with this and agreed
to the proposed and requested printing. He himself writes about this in
the preface of the first part of the interpretation of the first book of
Moses: \"Now it happened to these lections of mine that they fell into
the hands of two pious and God-fearing men, who caught and collected
them, namely D. Caspar Crucigern, to whom the books he has published
give sufficient evidence of the spirit and diligence with which he
teaches and promotes God\'s Word, and M. Georgius Rorarius, deacon of
our church here in Wittenberg, who has also taken both of these men\'s
diligence and work before him and has done his part.

**[XIV Foreword by Dr. Walch. XV]{.underline}**

And so these three, all of whom are faithful and diligent workers and
servants in the word of God, have deemed it good that these lectures of
mine should also be communicated to others by means of public printing
and that they should be of use and benefit. Thus, the first part of this
work, with a short preface by Luther and a note by the aforementioned
Veit Dietrich to Johann Ernst, Duke of Saxony, came to light in
Wittenberg in 1544, and it conceived the interpretation of the first
eleven chapters of the first book of Moses. After this, Luther and the
aforementioned Dietrich both died, but Hieronymus Besoldus, preacher at
Nuremberg, continued the work he had begun and published the other three
parts at Nuremberg, namely the second with a preface by Michael Roting,
professor at Nuremberg, in 1550, which goes from the twelfth chapter to
the tenth verse of the fifth and twentieth; the third up to the sixth
and thirtieth chapter in 1552, with a preface by Philipp Melanchthon,
and the fourth up to the end of the first book of Moses in 1554, which
he himself prefaced with a preface. For as the work begun by Dietrich on
the second part of this commentary was interrupted by his death,
Hieronymus Baumgärtner, city councilor at Nuremberg and a great lover of
Luther\'s writings, instructed Hieronymus Besoldus to also promote the
remaining parts for printing, which he then also undertook and happily
completed the work. Melanchthon and Rorarius had approved of this.
Hieronymus Besoldus had studied at the University of Wittenberg, had
been in Luther\'s house and at his table, had listened to his lectures
on Genesis and had diligently copied them, and when he undertook this
work, he had received what had been awarded by Cruciger, Rorarius and
Stoltz. He mentions this himself in his preface to the fourth part, and
reports that when Veit Dietrich died blessedly in the Lord in 1549 and
thus could not finish the work begun with the other part, the enemies of
the Gospel had sought to suppress the work and to prevent the further
production of the book in the terrible violence of darkness that raged
and raged over all of Germany at that time.

It was therefore deemed advisable to place it in safekeeping with the
aforementioned Hieronymus Baumgärtner. And although under these
circumstances there was little hope that one would see such a Commentary
completely in print, God had nevertheless graciously heard the sighing
of the blessed, who in these same sorrowful times always had a desire
for their dear Luther\'s last and noblest work, and had brought this
work completely to light, whereupon Besoldus adds: \"And he, Hieronymus
Baumgärtner, has himself taken great pains to ensure that the least of
what he, Veit, had written would ever go to print, since the adversaries
were still raging and subordinating themselves in many ways. And since
he could easily assume that everyone would like to see the entire
Historia go to print, he requested that I complete the remaining part,
as I also heard D. Luther in the school in Wittenberg, since he had read
and taught the same, and this pleased Mr. Philippus and M. Rörer well,
and M. Stoltz also gave me what he had written out, which is then very
easy to read. In addition, I had also written out much myself from D.
Luther\'s mouth, which he had read, which helped me very much, since I
was not yet accustomed to the foreign hand or writing, and was very dear
to me, since I saw that all copies were so finely tuned and so similar
to each other. Since I was indebted to those who gave me this work for
many great benefits, and since they were dear to me, and since I had
come to become Luther\'s housemate through their and Vitus\'s
recommendation and bragging, it would not have been proper for me to
deny this to such great respectable people. In this way, this Hieronymus
Besoldus not only published the fourth part of Luther\'s interpretation
of the first book of Moses, but also brought the third part to print,
and completed what Veit Dietrich had left in the other.

**V.**

This commentary was written in Latin, and after it had become completely
too

**XVIV [Foreword by Dr. Walch.]{.underline} XVII**

When the first part had been translated into German, a German
translation was also made, and Basilius Faber, who died as Rector in
Erfurt and was a famous schoolman, and Johannes Guden, the elder, a
preacher in Brunswick, applied their praiseworthy diligence, since the
former translated the first two parts into German, while the latter
translated the other two. The letter of the former, which he addressed
to Christoph von Steinberg, is dated in Magdeburg on the day of
Michaelmas 1557, and in it it is remembered that it was considered a sin
that such a treasure should have remained in the Latin language alone,
and that others who did not understand it should have been deprived of
it, especially since Luther was a teacher and prophet of the Germans.
\"Now,\" Faber adds, \"so that everyone, and especially the fathers of
the household and the common people, may benefit, improve, and be
comforted by this treasure, I have, to the best of my ability,
translated the first two parts of such interpretations in the simplest
and most faithful manner. The dedication of the other, or Johann Guden,
was also addressed to Christoph von Steinberg in the same year as the
first, 1557, and was written earlier, namely on the day of Christ\'s
appearing, so it can be concluded that these two men undertook such work
together and at the same time, according to a previous agreement, and
divided it between themselves, although neither of them remembers the
other. This first edition of the Latin and German Commentary was
followed by others, and it was not only specially reprinted, but also
included in the collections of Luther\'s writings. The Latin copy was
printed and published at various times, namely soon after the first
publication, at Frankfurt, where the first part was printed in 1545, the
second in 1550, the third in 1553, and the fourth in 1555 in octavo;
likewise at Nuremberg, where several Latin editions were published. One
of them came out in 1563, and another I have at hand, whose first part
came out of print in 1555, the other in 1556, the third in 1555, and the
fourth in 1554, as can be seen from the title, as well as at the end of
each part, these reported years.

are shown. But how it came that the latter two were printed earlier than
the former two, since they nevertheless belong together, if one is to
judge by their external form and arrangement, I can not determine so
precisely, although it is to be assumed that when one printed the fourth
part in Nuremberg in 1554 for the first time in Latin, one then the
others in the following years, as required by the circumstances, again
with this and thus want to make the work complete. Be that as it may,
the Nuremberg edition, as I have indicated it, is available, which was
followed by a Wittenberg edition in 1556 and a newer one with
annotations in 1712. In addition, this commentary can be found in Latin
in the Wittenberg edition; in German also in the Wittenberg, Altenburg
and Leipzig collections of Luther\'s writings.

**VI.**

Such an interpretation is to be regarded as a beautiful and splendid
work and to be placed at the top of the list of Luther\'s writings,
which have a special preference over the others. Luther himself did not
make much of this work of his, and after he had thought how Creutziger,
Rorarius and Dietrich found the publication of the same to be good and
therefore took a lot of trouble, he added: \"However, I would rather
that they had spent so much Christian diligence and so many good hours
on a better book and scribes; for I do not recognize myself for the one,
nor am I the one of whom one could say: Neither am I the one of whom one
would like to say, \"He tried to do it\"; but I am among the last, and
may hardly boast of myself and say, \"I wanted to do it. And only God
would have me be worthy to be the very last and least among these last
and hindmost. For all that I have introduced in these lessons, I have
not considered so precisely; but have spoken it simply and plainly, as
my thoughts have given it to me in a hurry and the words have come to
me; have also often spoken German with them, and have made almost more
words,

**XVIII [Foreword by Dr. Walch.]{.underline}. XIX**

than is dear to me.\" But this is to be seen as a sample of his special
modesty and humility, according to which he held himself and all his
books in low esteem, attributed nothing to himself and everything to the
grace of God. If he had published such a declaration himself and could
have spent the necessary time on it, there is no doubt that he would
have arranged it even better in some parts and would have presented the
whole work in a more beautiful and perfect state than it is now. In the
meantime, however, it remains a beautiful and excellent book, even in
the form in which it actually came to light, and is worthy of all the
praise that has been heaped upon it. Such praise can be found from time
to time. In the privilege granted by the Elector August on the German
translation it says: \"We know that this is one of Mr. D. Luther\'s last
and best books, which he made shortly before his death with special high
diligence and enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, and certainly consider
that many God-fearing people, who do not know the Latin language, will
draw from this interpretation not little understanding of the Scriptures
and benefit. This very book was called by our ancestors in the Concordia
formula \"commentarius praeclarus\", or a magnificent interpretation.
\*) When the Leipzig and Wittenberg theologians in their final report
and explanation, especially against Flacius P. 16. (Wittenberg 1571),
consider that Luther\'s postils and other sermons, which were full of
rich doctrine and powerful consolation of the Holy Spirit, and all other
doctrinal books of the same, especially those written after the Diet of
Augsburg in 1530, were in agreement with the Augsburg Confession, but
among the most important were the explanation of several prophets and
psalms, and also the epistle to the Galatians, so they include the
interpretation of the first book of Moses; They call it a \"rich
interpretation, with which he blessedly concluded his profession,
ministry and life: because of which it is rightly held in high esteem.
For he

\*) St. Louis edition of the Concordia Book, p. 408.

In the same commentary, he has completely and totally expressed and left
behind his last opinion and confession of most articles of Christian
doctrine.

**VII.**

Other divine scholars of our church have judged this commentary in the
same way: indeed, it has been consistently held that it is to be highly
respected and that Luther is to be recognized from it as a great
interpreter of Scripture. If I am to cite some such judgments as proof,
Basilius Faber adds this praise to such an interpretation and writes: It
is true that the good man Luther \"served the Church in these last times
with many and various great labors, and with the interpretation of the
prophetic and apostolic writings he explained, promoted and defended the
doctrine of forgiveness of sins, righteousness before God and eternal
blessedness in the most faithful manner, as everyone must recognize; the
interpretations of his \'dear Genesin\', as he used to call him, would
be an exception above all his other writings and books, and a very rich
treasure, in which an excellent theology is brought together and
compiled, as every diligent reader will find for himself. For what has
been dealt with from time to time in many of Luther\'s writings, comes
together here in one work, which one might reasonably call D. Martin\'s
Theology.\" With which also Joh. Guden agrees. He says that Luther has
left behind him a rich treasure in this commentary, and adds: \"What an
excellent treasure this is, will be found by those who will read this
interpretation with diligence. In sum, one finds in it the right core of
the teaching that our Lord God revealed to us through D. Luther. Luther,
as the Lord Philip, D. Jonas and other spiritual men have rightly
judged.\" To these I add Johann Mathesius, who by the grace of God had
acquired a very good taste in spiritual things, and could well know and
recognize what a revivalist and spiritual book was. He believed that
anyone who wanted to get to know Christ in Genesis should have
instruction in the power of the divine word.

**[XX Foreword by Dr. Walch. XXI]{.underline}**

and know what sin and righteousness are, which alone are valid and exist
before God; whoever desires to understand how one must comfortably hope,
endure his God, be refreshed in anguish and distress, see how one must
make use of the great saints\' errors and faith, and what a teacher must
pay particular attention to in the Scriptures, and how he must present
old and new things to his listeners: He should read this commentary,
especially if he is in the holy cross and thinks that God is not at home
and has completely forgotten us. If one does this, one will indeed learn
what the old Doctor Luther, in his last days, in which he endured
manifold temptations, had put together in this book. After Mathesius had
made this confession in his sermons about Luther\'s life, he added: \"I
leave my testimony of this blessed commentary behind me, so that my
children and parishioners do not forget it and learn to respect it
highly throughout their lives, and all those who want to tell other
people about useful and necessary church matters. My Genesis and
especially the last parts, which I have often read through and
underlined and described for the sake of learning and comfort, will give
me testimony and evidence. Notice that this interpretation has explained
Christ\'s word and will to me, and God has spoken comfort, peace and
life into my troubled and saddened heart from it. For if our cases agree
with the patriarchs\' cross, and the interpretation strikes one heart,
as if the Doctor were actually speaking to us, then the Commentary lives
and revives, and refreshes and revives one heart!\" If further Joachim
Mörlin in the writing, \"Wie die Bücher und Schriften des theuren und
seligen Mannes GOttes D. Martini Lutheri\", he wants to give
instructions for just such useful reading, so he praises this
interpretation above all others as an excellent book and says: \"Read
the following consummatum est (It is accomplished) of the holy man, the
dear Genesis, in which he, as in a new world, has brought forth and
opened not individual pieces, but all the treasures and all the riches
of the wisdom of the divine word, so that such a thing as this can be
read and understood.

Book after the apostle time did not come on earth. What do they say
about all the theologians? Genesis of Luther makes them all disciples.\"
Hieronymus Weller had an equal special regard for this work of Luther,
and in the following words of his Commentary on 1 Reg. IX. (sect. I.
oper. latinor, p. 258.): \"Luther\'s interpretation of the 1st Book of
Moses is in truth his swan song. For although all of Luther\'s writings
are full of manifold teaching and comfort, his interpretation of Genesis
I far surpasses all others. One can hardly think of a challenge for
which he would not have given a sure remedy in this explanation; indeed,
Luther has surpassed himself in this commentary. Therefore, I admonish
all students of theology over and over again to read this Commentary
diligently and diligently and never to put it down and to try to become
as familiar with it as possible. For I dare to assure without hesitation
that I have had more benefit from this Commentary than from almost all
of Luther\'s other writings; that is why I never get tired of reading
it. If everything that has ever been written in the church from the
times of the apostles onwards were put in a heap, it could not bear
comparison with this Commentary. I know that I speak the truth, and that
all truly experienced and learned theologians will agree with my
opinion.\"

**VIII.**

I could leave it at these praises, with which Luther\'s interpretation
of the first book of Moses is documented, especially since it is not
important and the work praises itself; however, I will add a few more,
so that one may recognize all the better how this work has been held in
great esteem not only by some, but consistently by the teachers of our
church and how it has always rightly maintained this esteem. Timotheus
Kirchner in the preface of his German Thesaurus D. Luthers (1565) has
judged: All theologians must go to school for this book, and no one will
study it. The Man of God Lu-

**XXII [Foreword by Dr. Walch.]{.underline} XXIII**

In it, he has dealt with almost the noblest and greatest articles of our
Christian faith so clearly and abundantly that nothing like it, with the
exception of the Holy Bible, has come into the world, nor, of course,
will it. It will probably be and remain thesaurus thesaurorum (treasure
of all treasures) and an inexhaustible fountain of all consolation next
to the Bible. David Chyträus in Dedicat, commentar, in genesin (1557)
also does not know how to praise this work enough, and says: \"There
exists an interpretation of the 1st Book of Moses by the venerable D.
Martin Luther, which he delivered in the last decade of his life at the
University of Wittenberg. This is, as it were, his swan song, a work
that is perfect in all respects. This highly enlightened expositor, who
in this our time is awakened and called to the restoration of the true
divine teaching, has not only laid down in it a rich treasure of
spiritual wisdom and learning, and that in excellent, rich words, and
given an exact explanation of all passages and intricate questions, but
has also developed in this speech of his a peculiar power which moves
the minds of the readers and inspires them to true piety, fear of God,
faith and other virtues.\" Whereupon he admonishes all the pious to read
this last work of Luther\'s carefully and diligently, and to make it
known to themselves before other writings, which, though learned, are
not as inspiring as this one. Daniel Crämer is of the same opinion with
these theologians now mentioned, and as he thinks that Luther has an
advantage over all interpreters of the first book of Moses, so he says
of his explanation of this divine scripture in Isagog. Petri Palladii ad
libr. prophetic. et apostolic. (1630): \"Whoever has not read this book
is unworthy of the name of a theologian. Therefore it must be welcome to
the younger ones.\" Abraham Calov in the preface to his commentarii in
Genesin p. 19. (1671) calls this Commentary a golden book, Thomas
Crenius in the Exercitiis sacris, priora quaedam Mosis tractantib. p.
76. (1704), a work which cannot be praised enough. Christian Gerber in
the continuation of the unrecognized sins of the

World part. I. p. 395. sq. wishes that the writings of the blessed
Luther be used more diligently; God has put such a glorious light and
knowledge into this man that his books should be held in higher esteem
and used more diligently; his interpretation of the first book of Moses
is an excellent writing, which is not only pleasant, but also very
useful and edifying to read: in it he has described and presented the
virtues and piety of the holy patriarchs so beautifully that one can
hardly get tired of reading once one begins. One could draw an excellent
patriarchal or Christian ethics from such a commentary, and it is to be
wished that a practiced Christian theologian would undertake this work,
which should certainly be a very useful and splendid writing. I add that
Joh. Heinrich von Seelen Philocal. epistol. p. 93. passed this judgment
on such a Commentary: \"It is a treasure, more precious than gold, in
which priceless riches of holy thoughts are hidden, so that quite
rightly some have judged that this is the best of all Luther\'s books.
As Herr von Seckendorf in Historia Lutheranismi lib. ΙII. § 139. p. 669.
sq. of this very work, he remarks, among other things, that one has to
admire Luther\'s unbelievable gifts of explaining the Holy Scriptures in
the most thorough and clear manner without much meditation, and at the
same time to ridicule Pallavicinus, Maimburgen, and other clumsy judges
who ridicule Luther\'s gifts, which they do not find among their people,
and despise them in a haughty manner. He had studied these lessons very
well and had looked up the most famous commentators of the time, as can
be seen from the entire work; however, he had paid little attention to
the words and phrases and had not dictated anything, even repeating a
matter at times on other occasions, but with different words, of which
he was not lacking. Other such testimonies that could still be cited,
not to mention.

**IX.**

Such splendid testimonies and favorable judgments that one can draw from
this commentary of the

**XXIV [Foreword by Dr. Walch.]{.underline} XXV**

blessed Luther are, however, well founded. Those who love and accept the
truth, who are not in the habit of judging a matter other than without
partiality, who have a taste for a witty and inspiring lecture, and who
look more at the things themselves than at the words, phrases, their
combinations, and their elegant arrangement, who above all have read
this book diligently and attentively, will have to confess that the
praise that has been attached to it is justly due to it, and that it can
stand against the objections of its opponents. It is well that Richard
Simon exposed various things about it, and after he judged Luther\'s
interpretations of the Holy Scriptures in general to have interspersed
all kinds of theological questions and innumerable things that did not
belong to the matter, and thus to have made more theological lections
and disputations than truthful explanations, he referred in particular
to the Commentary on the First Book of Moses as proof, in which one
encounters a large number of clumsy and not thoroughly considered
digressions. Instead of explaining the words and the text of the holy
scripture, he moralized and disputes vehemently against his opponents.
He was not sufficiently experienced in the Hebrew language and wanted to
look more at the things than at the words and their meaning, therefore
he often left the true understanding behind and made many clumsy
interpretations. But as one can easily see from what kind of source of
mind this judgment flowed, and it is not unknown how this Richard Simon
was otherwise in his opinions and testified in the censures made about
other writings, one can also soon recognize that he was hasty in what he
said about Luther\'s interpretations of the holy scriptures and
especially of the first book of Moses, and that he gave in too much to
his unfounded affect. Luther understood the Hebrew language well, and
even if in his explanations one and the other error was expressed, that
he sometimes did not explain the meaning of the words correctly, one has

The author\'s commentary on the first book of Moses is well-founded and
edifying, so that the book\'s value and moral value may be increased by
the fact that he was a human being subject to human errors and lived at
a time when the aids necessary for interpreting Scripture were not as
abundant as they are now, and when it is easy to improve here and there
what others have done wrong. The elaboration of some theological matters
and the moral remarks found in his Commentary on the First Book of Moses
are well-founded and edifying; consequently, the book cannot be deprived
of the value and esteem in which it is held; rather, it is to be held in
high esteem for that very reason. In the interpretation of Scripture,
however, it is better and more in accordance with the intention of the
Holy Spirit that, instead of a lengthy explanation of words and all
sorts of philological and critical digressions, the matter itself is
explained, and after showing what the Holy Spirit actually wants to
imply, it is then explained and instructions are given on how to apply
everything to faith and life in a blessed way. Therefore, when the Herr
von Seckendorf in Histor. Lutheran. libr. ΙII. § 139. p. 671. wants to
give an excerpt of the commentary on the first book of Moses, he rightly
remarks beforehand that there are so many important things and passages
that with such a large number of them one almost does not know which one
should precede the others.

**X.**

This writing of the blessed Luther remains a magnificent work, from
which scholars and unscholars can draw great benefit for the true
understanding of the first book of Moses as well as for the thorough
understanding of many theological matters and for their own edification.
Therefore, it has been well done that such a book has been reprinted and
thus given the opportunity to be read by several, especially since this
edition has been put in such a state that it can claim an advantage over
the previous ones. It is more correct and more accurate than those. It
has been found that in the German translation and the previous editions
of the same, something is often omitted, and not only individual words,

**XXVI [Foreword by Dr. Walch.]{.underline} XXVII**

but even entire sentences, that very often something is added that was
not in the Latin or original copy, and although such additions sometimes
serve some explanation, they are nevertheless sometimes unnecessary;
that passages are found that have no meaning at all, since in the Latin
everything is to be found clearly and distinctly; Indeed, many passages
have been translated quite incorrectly, and some of them are of such a
nature that they not only do not reflect the true meaning of the blessed
Luther, but also contain the opposite of what he said according to the
Latin copy. Such deficiencies have been corrected in this new edition,
and in the end the Latin text has been carefully compared with the
German translation according to the two previous editions, the Frankfurt
edition, which came out in 1545, and the Nuremberg edition in 1563; what
was previously omitted has been added; the reprinting of the words and
phrases in the Latin copy, as much as could be done; that which is not
in the Latin and was nevertheless brought into the German version, as
far as it was found to be useless, omitted; that, on the other hand,
which could only be done to a certain extent.

The translation, too, has been improved where it was either completely
wrong or where it obscured the meaning of the blessed Luther and was
incomprehensible. All of this has been taken care of and accomplished by
the special and praiseworthy diligence of M. Joh. Gottgetreu Müller, who
in this way has rendered great service to this new edition, especially
since he did not leave it at that alone. For he has also indicated
before each chapter the content of the matters contained and occurring
therein exactly and correctly, so that one can immediately see in a
beautiful context what one has to look for and find in the same. Thus,
this edition is not only more correct than the previous ones, but also
more useful and convenient, especially since the publisher, who has no
other intention than God\'s honor and his neighbor\'s true salvation,
has chosen a convenient format in addition to good paper and printing.
May the Lord make this work of the blessed Luther a blessing, so that
through it His most holy name may be further glorified and many souls
may be strengthened in the beatific knowledge of the Gospel or
encouraged to it, for the sake of His merciful love, amen.

Jena, April 6, 1739.

**Johann Georg Walch.**

**The translator Basil Faber\'s Inscription.**

To the rigorous, respectable, and honorable Christoph von Steinberg,

My favorable Junker.

How Moses is to be read and what one is to learn from it is abundantly
indicated by the venerable, our dear father, Doctor Luther in many
places of his writings, namely, that one is to look in it everywhere
especially to the very sweet and comforting promises of the Lord Christ,
some of which are written very clearly and distinctly in Moses, as
Genesis 3:15: \"I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between
your seed and her seed. He shall bruise your head\" 2c.; item Gen. 22,
18: \"By your seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed\"; and
Deut. 18, 15: \"A prophet like me shall the LORD your God raise up for
you\" 2c. Secondly, to the glorious and beautiful examples of faith,
love, the cross, patience, invocation and other spiritual exaltations in
the saints, as in Adam, Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the
others. And how God stood by them, governed them, protected them and
heard them. Thirdly, the examples of unbelief in the wicked and of
divine wrath and judgment, as in Cain, Ishmael, Esau, in the Flood, the
fall of Sodom and Gomorrah. For all these things are nowhere more truly
and abundantly described than in Moses; and such examples, if one pays
proper attention to them, show how the entire Old Testament is to be put
to useful use, namely, that we may learn from the examples of the
saints, in which it is presented to us how God took care of them,
repented of them, and how they were punished.

The people who have been guided, led and wonderfully protected by God
will learn to trust and believe in God, and from the examples of God\'s
wrath and judgment they will fear Him.

And we have such pieces not only now and then in the whole of Moses, but
also in the first book alone, about these main pieces: from whence all
creatures came, and especially mankind; item, what sin and death are,
and how one may get rid of them again, and come to right piety, which
everyone strives and strives for, which are the most distinguished main
items of the entire holy scripture; item, how the church had its
beginning, how it increased, how it often stood in danger and distress
and was miraculously preserved by God.

This is what one should know if one wants to read Moses and especially
his first book, Genesis. As far as the salutary and useful lectures and
interpretations on this first book of Moses by the venerable father D.
Martin Luther, of blessed memory, are concerned, I will give a short
report. First of all, it is true that this noble man, our dear father
and prophet, D. Martin Luther, served the Church in these last times
with many and various great works, and with the interpretation of the
prophetic and apostolic writings, he explained the doctrine of
forgiveness of sins, righteousness before God and eternal blessedness in
the most faithful way, as everyone must recognize, and he promoted and
taught it.

**[XXX The translation of Basil Faber\'s letter. XXXI]{.underline}**

However, these interpretations about his \'dear Genesin\', as he used to
call him, are an exception above all his other writings and books, and a
very rich treasure, in which an excellent theology is brought together
and compiled, as every diligent reader will find for himself. For what
is dealt with now and then in many of Luther\'s writings, comes together
here in one work, which one would like to cheaply call D. Martin\'s
Theology. And first of all, you will find in it many useful accounts of
all kinds of spiritual and theological matters, as they can always
occur, and especially thorough and proper instruction of almost every
article of Christian doctrine, as, of God, of the three persons in the
divine being, of creation, of sin, of faith and forgiveness of sins; of
the Law and the Gospel and how both doctrines are to be distinguished
from one another, which is nowhere more abundantly and better dealt with
than in this book; item, of the right church, against the papacy at
Rome, against which you will find in this quite tremendous storms,
almost on every leaf. Against the Jews and all their lies, dreams and
fantasies, there are also several powerful disputations and strong
refutations of all their condemnations, glosses, falsifications and
misunderstandings. Likewise, one finds here correct reports of other
pieces of Christian doctrine, too long to tell. In addition, there are
also correct interpretations of many difficult sayings in Scripture; as
well as strong consolation against all kinds of spiritual distress and
challenge, such as against doubt and unbelief, against fear of death and
distress, and the like. Item, Against

The book also contains many heresies and aberrations, both old and new.
In addition, several fine and useful histories of how the gospel has
fared in our time. Item, prophecies of Germany, how it shall fare
because of contempt of the word and great ingratitude; of which some
have already won their outcome and have come to pass, but some are still
to come. Finally, at times, according to the opportunity of the
interpretations, there is also a good counsel and report on external and
worldly things, which are necessary, useful and pleasant to know.

Therefore, I considered it a sin that such a treasure should remain in
the Latin language alone, and that others who were inexperienced in it
should be deprived of it, especially because D. Martin the German
teacher and prophet has been: and so that everyone and especially the
fathers and common people this treasure may also come to use,
improvement and comfort, I have, according to my little understanding,
the first two parts of such interpretations in the simplest and most
faithful German, and Ew. Honourable and Honorable Gestrengigkeit, along
with other Christian nobles, who have been Christianly exhorted by E. G.
to promote such work, as a testimony and glory that E. E. G. is
Christianly and praiseworthily minded and cordially inclined to promote
such and such useful church works. Our dear God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ grant that many pious Christians may be served thereby.
Hereby E. G. and good-hearted Christians of the praiseworthy nobility
command God into His faithful protection and protection.

Date Magdeburg, on the day Michaelis, Anno 1557.

**Your E. G.**

> willing
>
> **Basil Faber.**

**M. Veit Dietrich\'s Letter**

To the Most Serene Prince and Lord,

Johann Ernst, Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of
Meissen.

This glorious and beautiful building, the world, heaven and earth, with
all that is in it, such as the heavenly bodies, elements, trees and
plants, and all kinds of animals, was created for this purpose and very
wisely arranged by God, so that we should recognize him as an eternal
and almighty creator and right master builder, and understand that he
himself also created us for this life, and gave us body and soul, reason
and wit, so that he would have served himself with it. And such
knowledge would have been beautiful and pure in the hearts of all men,
without all doubt and error, if human nature had not fallen into such
terrible disruption, blindness and other innumerable miseries through
disobedience.

For what blindness and ignorance there is in all men\'s hearts, in this
corrupt and weakened nature, of God, and of His essence and will, of the
providence, order and government of God, is evident from the doubtful
and unbelieving nature that is in everyone\'s heart, and of this Plato
has rightly and wisely said that men\'s hearts are more convicted by the
orderly and certain movements of heavenly things and other testimonies
in nature, that we must confess that this world was built and created by
an eternal and omnipotent divine being. And yet we find that such sense
and knowledge is greatly obscured and driven back when we look upon and
think that all things in the world and this life are so

We find in ourselves that we are often left in great misery and distress
without help and salvation, as if there were no God.

Such doubts have given the philosophers cause to fall into many
nonsensical and foolish thoughts, and some of them, such as the
Epicureans, have entirely held and taught that there is no God at all;
but some, such as Aristotle and the Stoics, have had the good sense to
conclude that there must be a God, or a spiritual, eternal and
omnipotent being. But if a man\'s heart allows itself to be thus
beguiled and charmed by such nonsensical and clumsy thoughts, it can
neither ask nor expect anything good from God, since everything that
happens and occurs daily is balanced and rhymes with the natural causes
that everyone understands. And since the philosophers discussed this,
they not only revealed their wrong thoughts, but also the common errors
of the human race. Even today, most people look only at the common and
ordinary processes of nature, but will not consider looking to God, who
governs all this, nor will they look to Him to either abolish natural
and common processes, or to restrain, turn around, and alleviate them;
as Elijah did to God, when he asked for rain in the greatest heat and
drought and received it, but Isaiah drove out and chased the enemies
with his prayers.

**XXXIV M. Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XXXV**

Therefore, since the fall of the first parents in human nature was
followed by such blindness, God once again divested Himself of His
divine essence, stepped out of His hidden seat, and immediately revealed
Himself through an audible public word and new testimony that the human
race was not created in vain, and to death alone and ruin. Creation is
indeed an excellent work and great blessing of God, but it is a much
richer and greater gift that He has revealed Himself to the human race
from the beginning of the world through certain testimonies, and has
proclaimed the promise of eternal life, presented and established in a
public word, in which after this life there will be a distinction
between the pious and the godless. And although the law of nature was
known and implanted beforehand, he renewed it with his own voice, and
instructed us what the right services of God were, and after that he
also showed himself with signs, and that not with bad or small signs and
miracles, but which were so designed that they could not be done other
than by the abundant power and authority of God, than that he raised the
dead, kept the heavens still, and withdrew the course of the sun: all
for the sole purpose of disgracing the mad and nonsensical thoughts of
human reason, which God so tightly binds to common lusts and natural
causes.

Finally, the Son of God Himself took on human nature, allowed Himself to
be seen and touched, preached, became a sacrifice for us, overcame
death, came to life again and rose from the dead, then showed Himself
again to His own, dealt kindly with them, spoke to them and taught and
preached in the presence of a large crowd of listeners. And although the
world considers such things to be fictitious because they are too great
and high, they are nevertheless assured and sealed by certain
testimonies and with miraculous works that they are as certain as it is
noon when the sun is at its highest.

In addition to all these great benefits, there is also the fact that God
has from the beginning

He has had the histories of the human race and the glorious testimonies
by which he has revealed himself to them described and always planted
and preserved from one time to the next, does not want to be known in
any other way than by such testimonies, and does not consider any people
or assembly that does not know about these books or accept them to be
his church; just as he does not accept the prayers and invocations of
those who do not direct them to the same God and address him who has
revealed himself in such his testimonies. The Turks and Mahomedists also
call upon God as the Creator of heaven and earth and all of nature, but
they do not accept His Son and His teachings, saying that this is not
the true God who approves and allows the same teachings. But the Son of
God, in whom God reveals Himself most of all and of whom He said Matth.
3, 17: \"This is My beloved Son, whom you shall hear\", they persecute
with horrible blasphemy and mock Him.

What does Plato do in this? He does not deal with the thoughts that most
other people have, and he also stops and dissuades others from them,
namely, that images and idols are not gods; but he pursues God with very
wise thoughts, and finally concludes that God is an eternal, omnipotent,
divine being, a causer and creator of all good in nature: and yet he
still lacks the right God. How then? someone might say; how should Plato
have spoken and concluded more accurately about God, what he is in his
essence and what he accomplishes? In my opinion, I am not opposed to the
fact that these are wisely conceived thoughts, especially that he says
that God is a cause of good in nature. But still Plato himself doubts
what God\'s will is, and lets others remain in doubt and argue about God
according to human reason from uncertain thoughts. And neither Plato nor
Mahomed is certain whether God accepts and listens to the unworthy, and
why he accepts them.

Therefore Plato should not only have thought about how God would have
revealed Himself with the creation of things, and how He would have
formed Himself into nature, so that one can feel and notice Him in it;
but he would have

**XXXVIM M.. Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XXXVII**

should have looked around to see if God had not revealed Himself in a
word and certain testimonies, and how the same word had arisen and had
always been propagated. And at the time when he heard the astrologers
and mathematicians in Egypt, the Jews, whom he did not have far from him
at that time, could easily have been instructed. But so it goes at all
times, that in the world the greatest number of people despise God\'s
word and his church.

But where does such a widely sought entrance go and what is meant by it?
Answer: This alone, that we should know that the true and real Church of
God is nowhere else, but only among those who accept the books of the
prophets and apostles, and that God is nowhere truly called upon, except
where the teachings written in these books shine and flourish. In this
way, one should also consider this special grace and blessing of God,
that He willed that the entire history, as it would have been at any
time in the Church, be brought together and compiled, and that He
Himself preserved and maintained these histories and books; indeed, that
for the preservation of these books, the Mosaic police and regiment was
primarily established, and was nothing other than a school and library
of these books.

Now the origin and original of the same books is the first book of
Moses, which has the title: Genesis, the book of the creation; which
perhaps unchristian and godless people despise and laugh at, also do not
consider a better book than Plato\'s Timaeus, in which is also described
how the world was built and created. But a Christian reader knows that
between the same pagan descriptions and this report, which God Himself
did and received about the creation of the world, there is a very big
difference. For here it is not only said how heaven and earth, sun and
moon, stars, leaves and grass, and the whole of nature took its
beginning; but also God is described therein, what he is and how he
revealed himself. In addition, it is also told how the Church began, for
whose sake the other things came into being.

It is necessary to know this, so that one can be sure where the teaching
of the church came from and how it is planted.

The pagan false worship and idolatries suddenly appeared among the
people, so that no one knew how or where they came from. Afterwards,
impious and presumptuous people have sought various causes and
opportunities here and there, by which they have been increased. But
here we learn that the doctrine of the church was given to our first
parents by the mouth of God Himself at the beginning, and has been
planted ever since, not without certain testimonies; as Enoch, who was
taken up alive into heaven; Noah, who proclaimed the flood to the secure
world and was preserved in it afterwards. After these, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, the priests and teachers, were called by God; as we have
many signs that very certainly testify that the doctrine they accepted,
confessed and taught was a divine doctrine.

Symmachus reproaches the Christians that it is more in accordance with
the truth that the doctrine, which is the oldest, is the right doctrine;
but the apostle\'s doctrine, he says, is new and invented. But in this
he is far wrong, and it can be clearly proved that the doctrine of the
church is the first among all the others. And this is shown and proven
here, after the doctrine is told, which God Himself gave to the day, and
it is reported next to it, where and how far these peoples have gone and
extended, who have fallen away from the first divine and pure doctrine,
and have thought up and invented new thoughts of God and idolatry.
Therefore, the beginning of the church and the testimonies of how it was
spread, and even what its doctrine actually is, are to be based on this
and read together.

For where sin, death and other great miseries in the human race come
from, and how such must all be counseled, of this the philosophers know
nothing. How often they ask: Where does so much misery and wretchedness
come from in the excellent nature of the human race? How often do they
complain and cry out about the fact that

**[XXXVIII M]{.underline}.[. Veit Dietrich\'s letter.
XXXIX]{.underline}**

a man has such violent and swift inclinations to sins and vices? For
they see and find that the inclination to good in man is weak and soon
passes away; as can be seen in Pausanias, Alexander, and also in
Themistocles and many others. Aristotle goes to the thought that the
cause of death is the frailty and weakness of the things that are in man
as in other animals. Therefore, he also includes the defects of
necessary things and tools in man and animals among the principles of
natural things, so that he may, as much as possible, demonstrate and
show how corruptible things are always changing, sending and directing
themselves to another and yet another form.

But this book shows a very different cause where death and sin come
from, namely from the fact that human nature has turned away from God,
has rejected God\'s knowledge and life, and has been a cause for itself,
that in it the strength and ability have been set apart and weakened,
and consequently the tyranny of the devil and death have overpowered and
taken it. The first parents saw such great and terrible misery
immediately, since Cain strangled his brother and other terrible things
happened, when the human race was still new and in bloom, and therefore
nature was still somewhat purer and better than afterwards.

After that, in the description of how the church has been propagated,
expanded and renewed at all times, a beautiful picture is presented to
us, from which it can be seen that the church is not a worldly kingdom
or police force, guarded and surrounded by military power and force; but
such a people, now and then divided into many clusters, yet not
unrecognizable, but having God\'s word, about which they meet publicly
and honestly, teach about it, and communicate it to kings, princes,
lords, and cities, and now and then bring their many to knowledge and
true invocation of God, and promote it, even if they should be ridiculed
about it, expelled and driven out by the tyrants and the majority of the
people.

Melchizedek, of whom the ancient teachers wrote that he was Shem son of
Noah, who lived a long life and was famous for wisdom and righteousness
in the sight of all who lived in his time, will no doubt have preached
in Sodom and thereabouts for a long time. For he dwelt not above eight
of our German miles from Sodom, and had a fine congregation there round
about, namely, Abraham\'s and Lot\'s seed and seedlings, and others
more. For though the church is always a small company, yet it is a
company that is known and not hidden, and at the same time protects such
a school and church as Melchizedek had, God Himself. For there were many
great and mighty cities round about, such as Sodom and others, which
utterly despised the heavenly doctrine, and hated and persecuted the
preachers who punished them for it.

Therefore, this picture of the. Therefore, this picture of the church
should be diligently considered here, and in such histories especially
note these six pieces:

The first is the teaching of the fathers, that the prophets and apostles
took much from these histories, and at the same time the fathers and
prophets of the Lord Christ learned benefits first from the promise made
to Abraham, and then from other pieces of such histories.

For see how masterly St. Paul Rom. 4, 3. Gal. 3, 6. Hebr. 11, 8. bases
the article on the righteousness of faith and builds on the saying Gen.
15, 6.: \"Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted it to him as
righteousness.\"

David Ps. 110, 4. points the priesthood of Melchizedek to Christ, and
thus distinguishes the ministry of blessing, as Melchizedek promised
Abraham in Gen. 14, 18. ff. with the most kind and loving words of
God\'s favor and help, from the Levitical priesthood.

This is a rich teaching, as is often shown in this interpretation, and a
Christian reader who understands that such histories must be read with a
much different mind than the pagan ones will easily notice and find it
in the history itself. For the pagans\' histories report examples of the
world\'s

**XL** M**. Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XLI**

They show that good and honest intentions and conduct were well advised
at times, but that great sin, injustice, violence and evil deeds were
followed by great and terrible punishments and misery; for apart from
this, nothing more is found in the pagan histories. But these prophetic
histories teach and report of other, much greater things, namely, of
God\'s teachings and divine testimonies, of eternal goods, of the
government of the church 2c.

For this reason, the miracles and even miraculous works that have taken
place in the church should be noted for the rest, not that we want to
strengthen human presumption, which always takes pleasure in new things
and is astonished by them, but that we may have testimonies that show us
what doctrine is revealed by God and what teachers He allows Himself to
be pleased with. And such wonderful and unusual works, which are above
all nature and reason, are seals of doctrine. For we are not to believe
that it was a joke or a diversion on God\'s part to have preached of the
Flood long before, and then, when the Flood came, to have preserved Noah
alone with his own. Such excellent and high things were testimonies of
God\'s government and providence, and of the teaching that old Noah led
and preached.

Thirdly, one should look at how God governs and protects His Church;
although it is outwardly regarded as not respecting God, it has in its
teachings and histories many glorious and apparent testimonies that God
is with it and cares for it.

Emperor Augustus rules the world by order, right and laws, has his war
people now and then lying in the country, by which these are ordered and
kept in custody, has also money and property, from which he can maintain
such crews and orders. Such a secular government is established and
maintained by human laws, order, wisdom, and suggestions. But it is much
different with the government of the church.

For Abraham, Isaac, Jacob move in the

They are strangers in the land, having neither command nor office, and
bring God together a church through His Word and the Holy Spirit; and
even though they have to endure great danger, misery and hardship
because of this, they still find and experience that God stands by them,
protects and saves them.

When Jacob is to pass through his brother Esau\'s land with his
household, possessions and goods, he stands in worry and fear, and at
that time lets himself look at the matter as if there were neither
counsel nor help to be found: but when he has wrestled with the angel in
the night, he is strengthened and thereafter finds protection.

There are many such examples in this first book of Moses, small as it
is, that teach us that God helps His church and that we can confidently
ask for help and protection and wait for it. And all these things are
described and held up to us and our descendants, so that we may draw
strength and courage from such examples and believe that God will not
abandon us with His help and protection.

The fourth part to be considered here is what should be considered of
the proper succession, preference and precedence of one over the other,
of the parents, and of the places where they were seated, fame and
profession; of which human reason holds much and great. For Cain,
Ishmael, Esau arrogated to themselves the rule of the church, because
they were born earlier than their brothers. The Babylonians alone want
to have the right doctrine of God, because there the fathers had their
seat from time immemorial and Babel had been the capital of the regime
on earth; just as now the bishops and high schools, for the sake of the
proper succession, gain this glory and honor, so that they cannot err,
and they alone are the ones in whom the truth is kept and preserved.

But that such thoughts and judgments are punished and refuted in this
first book of Moses is proven to us by Paul Rom. 9, 6. ff., where he
strongly argues that the church is not founded and planted on any
advantage of gender or place, but on the calling and the word of God.
Thus Jacob\'s house is the church, because it adheres to the doctrine of

XLII . M**.** Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XLIII

of the Word revealed from heaven, but Esau does not abide by it.

And since the church in the Jewish land has fallen and been destroyed,
it will be restored again through Abraham, whom God raises up as a
teacher there, renews the promise and hangs testimonies on it. Which
example and history testifies that God takes care of His Church, cares
for it, and when it suffers hardship and is in danger, always restores
and renews it; as St. Paul says in Eph. 4:8, 11: \"He gave gifts to men,
and appointed some to be prophets, some to be apostles, some to be
pastors and teachers.\"

Therefore, neither the high titles of office or dignities, nor the place
and orderly succession, should enable or induce us to take for the
church those who are contrary to the gospel, and to kill pious and
honest people for the sake of the confession of Christian doctrine, as
Cain did.

Fifth, in these histories one should look at the life and outward walk
of the saints. Previously we said about the doctrine of the church and
how it is governed: to which pieces one should pay special attention.
But those who do not pay attention to them cannot think much of the
books of the Holy Scriptures. For they seek nothing else in the
histories than how uprisings have taken place in countries, cities and
regiments, how lords and princes have kept themselves, how wars have
gone out in a strange way 2c. But when they read this book of Moses,
they regard it as if it were not a much better book than Virgil\'s
Bucolica, because it allows itself to be regarded by disgruntled and
industrious readers as if it dealt with nothing special, except how men
and women have intermarried, lived together, begotten children, and how
women have quarreled among themselves. But such disgusting and hopeful
people are very far lacking, and do not have so much sense that they
could see that here in this book the church is depicted and described;
which, although it is low and contemptible, and not equal to the
regiments in the world, it nevertheless goes on in this life with
domestic and external worldly values.

ken around according to their profession, need and opportunity.

Abraham teaches and instructs those who shelter him about God, as they
themselves confess that he is an angel of God. Now it is truly a great
work, yes, the highest of all, to teach about God. For this purpose, he
also wages war when necessity demands it, puts the great warrior people
of the Chaldeans to flight with a small number, and thus proves that
right strength and manhood are an inspiration from God. He is also a
father of the house, kind-hearted and fatherly-minded, loves his wife
and child dearly, keeps house well and diligently, looks after his own,
cares for and tills the livestock, demonstrates justice and fairness in
buying and selling with special diligence, and understands that equal
and cheap means in the exchange of things, buying and selling, are
ordered by God. He directs his outward and domestic life primarily so
that his faith and confession may be revealed and shine through such
works. In addition, he practices the fear of God, his faith, patience,
invocation and prayer, even in common misfortunes and sorrows that tend
to follow this life, and finds and experiences that God helps and saves
him.

And all this is described so that people\'s false faith and fictitious
useless devotion and spirituality may be punished and refuted as unjust.
As superstitious people at all times have invented ceremonies and
strange special works, which they have praised and extolled to the
people under the title and name of religion and spiritual devotion. For
not to be married, not to eat meat on special days, to mortify and
torture one\'s body, to see sour things and to devote oneself devoutly,
these things have been considered special holiness and spirituality from
time immemorial. On the other hand, against the foolish and nonsensical
pretensions of the fathers, one should keep a common life in one\'s
profession and home practice, which is full of all kinds of examples of
faith, love and all honorableness, service to the people and heartfelt
loyalty to one\'s own. Even though they were not so devoid of all
ceremonies, but rather had

**XLIV** M**. Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XLV**

They had their sacrifices, read the Scriptures on certain prescribed
days, and engaged in other practices and church discipline. For as far
as church doctrine and good arts are concerned, all this has been with
these people. And we have received from them as much as we have
instruction in theology, history and medicine. It follows, then, that
they must have had much domestic training, by which the youth was
educated to virtue and good arts.

Sixthly, in such high people we should also consider what infirmities
and weaknesses they have had. Since we find this, that they take great
care and guard themselves so that they do not fall into sins that are
against their conscience. But still it happens to them that at times
they go against their will or ignorantly and sin; as Lot in his great
sorrow and heartache, having drunk too much wine, falls into the shame
of putting his own daughters to sleep.

But here we must look at this difference. The saints, as I said, are
careful not to sin against their conscience: But if they nevertheless
fall from weakness, they lament and weep over such weakness and frailty
of the human race, learn what God has promised for help and good deeds
for the sake of the future Savior, and also recognize that God, out of
mercy that He has promised for the sake of the same Savior, accepts
those who turn to Him out of trust in the same promised grace and mercy.
Therefore they come to grace and are redeemed from sins and the same
punishment: as Jacob boasts of the angel, that is, of the Son of God,
and confesses that through him he is redeemed from all evil, that is,
from sin and eternal punishment. On the other hand, the wicked, as Cain,
the tyrants and Sodomites, who in public contempt of God stain
themselves with many gross sins, fall into eternal damnation. Such
inequality of sins and punishments on both sides should also be taken
into account.

For the sake of those who have not yet been informed of such things, I
have recently indicated and reminded them of this at the beginning,
since

so that they may know that in such short histories a very rich doctrine
of great and important things has been written; as then these
interpretations will sufficiently explain and even masterfully expound
such doctrine: and let those who will read them always look at these
pieces, as I have told them so far, and direct everything to awaken them
to the fear of God, to faith and prayer under the thoughts and
contemplations of such examples.

Since none of the old teachers has given such a correct and complete
interpretation of this first book of Moses, and since it is useful and
necessary that this book be well known and understood by everyone, I
thank at the same time for myself and other pious Christians much more
the venerable Doctor Martin Luther, our father and most beloved teacher,
that he has undertaken such lectures and interpretations of this book:
so that he not only does a very useful work for us and our descendants
by explaining such high and useful things, but also serves the honor of
those excellent people and high lights of the world, as Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, whose gifts and virtues are made more knowable and
manifest by this interpretation and explanation.

For before that time, when the common people heard such people called,
they did not think that there was anything praiseworthy or special about
them, nor did they hold them much higher than common shepherds. But now
let it be known by them that God stood by them, governed and guided
them; let it give thanks to God for their profession and for the same
wonderful government and preservation of His Church. Learn also from
them examples of the fear of God, of faith and confession, of patience
and other virtues. Look upon them as outstanding heroes and high lights;
follow their teachings to strengthen your faith. In sum, honor them as
our fathers, that is, teachers of those who call on Christ, and
understand that they do not find fathers of murderers, Jews, and others
who mock, revile, and daily crucify the Lord Christ.

**XLVI . Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XLVII**

And this is truly no small improvement in Christian doctrine and godly
life, that one knows what teachers one has in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, and holds such people in high esteem.

So that this interpretation may be useful to many and especially to our
descendants, but D. Luther did not have so much leisure to write it
himself, I have colligated it, as I heard it here in this school in
Wittemberg from D. Luther, with all my diligence and with the helpful
assistance of my friends, D. Caspar Creutziger and M. Georg Rörer, and
with all fidelity I have brought it together and put it into print. I
therefore hope that pious Christians who read such interpretations will
take pleasure in my diligence and service and accept it with good
thanks.

But attribute, Most Serene Prince and Lord, such useful and glorious
work to E. F. G., and do not doubt. They will esteem it more highly and
prefer it to other golden or silver jewels. For I know that it is E. F.
G.\'s will and opinion that this book be in print for the benefit and
betterment of the church, which E. F. G. loves and promotes out of a
Christian spirit. I have also found that E. F. G. loves and values the
dear man of God, D. Martin Luther. And in this E. F. G. does it
according to the example of His Lord Father, the Sublime Prince of
Saxony and Elector Johann Friedrich, whom we praise and praise as a
Christian prince endowed with high virtues.

For although he is not at all like the heroes I have told before,
Abraham, Isaac, Joseph, we may count him among the Egyptian king
Pharaoh, whom Joseph instructed in the true knowledge of God, and who
allowed Jacob to dwell in his land with his church and servants in peace
and comfort. For this is how E.,F. G. Herr Vater learned and meant the
Gospel with all seriousness; and in order to serve God, he helped,
honored and promoted the churches, and at the same time, with the
highest wisdom and modesty, directed his proposals to the common peace
and prosperity of the German country.

Therefore, E. F. G. should accept such veneration, so that when she runs
into such wonderful histories of government, need, danger and protection
of the church, she can also govern and comfort her heart from them.

But the fact that this book is not completely finished at one time is
the cause and obstacle that the collecting and rewriting costs a lot of
work, and we do not have as much leisure in our office and business as
those think who value and esteem their work alone. However, I had hoped
that I would do pious Christians all the more favors, and that they
would also accept it, as this was meant faithfully and sincerely, if I
did not delay them too long with this wonderful treasure, but rather,
the sooner the better, shared a fair portion of this Christian work with
them. But I am of the opinion that the rest should follow shortly. For
as a pagan poet says there: Vicit iter durum pietas (love and
faithfulness overcome a difficult path).

Thus, in the church, for the sake of God\'s glory and our blessedness,
we must not only bear this work of teaching and writing, but also endure
and overcome much greater hardships with strong courage.

And for my own part, I am not deterred by this, neither by the fact that
there are some who judge such work unequally and unfairly, and who do
not want us to write at all; nor by our opponents who are hostile to and
blaspheme this doctrine, which, thanks be to God, is so widespread in
our churches. For God wants to be praised by His church with the mouth,
words and writings; as it is said of the oral confession in the 8th
Psalm, v. 3: \"Out of the mouth of babes Thou hast prepared praise for
Thee.\" But of the Scriptures Ps. 102, v. 19: \"Let this be written on
the descendants.\" For God wants us to pass on faithfully and purely to
our descendants the teaching that He has revealed to us, and also wants
us to imprint it on ourselves with thoughts, words and writings, to make
it known and common. And such reflection and diligent writing brings
much benefit and improvement to a Christian.

**XLVIII . Veit Dietrich\'s letter. XLIX**

What could we think and write more usefully than of such divine
dealings? What others put for diligence on good arts, I praise
everything and let it please me. Praise also those who write about the
properties and effects of herbs and plants, and praise and spread other
arts that God has given. But even so, it is not necessary to write and
teach about such things as herbs and plants or the nature of the limbs
in a man\'s body, nor is it more due to men than that which God has
revealed to us of Himself through certain testimonies and given to day
with a Christian spirit.

The first line is to read together with effort and diligence. As before
the pagan priests, when they wanted to attack their victims, said
beforehand: Here one must do no other than holy works, and say what is
praiseworthy.

But that our adversaries and enemies of our churches punish and
blaspheme the doctrine which we lead in them, all this is refuted in
this book by the very wisest and truest witnesses, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, who are like-minded with us in religion, indeed, are our
teachers; therefore we should not allow ourselves to be challenged by
such blasphemies and blasphemies of godless people.

God commanded.

**Datde on Christmas Day, Anno 1544.**

**D. Martin Luther\'s Foreword**

**to the Christian reader.**

These lectures and interpretations of mine on the first book of Moses I
have never made in this opinion, that I would have been inclined to let
them go into print publicly, which then have been my least thoughts; but
that I might first of all serve this school of ours, as it is now, after
the opportunity of the time, and have cause to exercise not only my
hearers, but also myself in God\'s words, and not to conclude with a
rotten and useless old age the dying of my body, which I feel in myself
daily; as then the 146th Psalm made me lively and cheerful. Psalm, in
which v. 2 says: \"I will praise the Lord as long as I live, and sing
praises to my God as long as I am here.\"

After that I took such work upon myself, so that when I should depart
from here, I would be found in the same small group of minors and little
ones, from whose mouths God praises him, to destroy the enemy and the
avenger of revenge, Ps. 8:3. For without this, the world before has more
than too many such devils and abominable people, who blaspheme,
counterfeit and pervert God\'s word, so that God is deprived of his
honor and the devil is worshipped in his place.

But now it has happened to these lectures of mine that they have come to
two pious and God-fearing men who have caught and collected them, namely
D. Caspar Creutzigern, to whom his books given to the day give
sufficient testimony, with what spirit and diligence he teaches and
promotes God\'s word, and \^1. Georgius Rorarius, our church\'s deacon
here in Wittenberg, who both diligence and work M. Vitus Theodorus,
preacher in Nuremberg, also before him.

and has done his part. And so these three, all of whom are faithful and
diligent workers and servants in the word of God, have considered it
good that these lessons of mine should also be communicated to others
through public printing and that they should benefit from them. I gladly
let them be sure in their opinion, as St. Paul says Rom. 14:5,
especially because I have seen that they have a Christian zeal and do
great diligence, so that the churches of the Lord Christ may be
counseled, helped and served everywhere. For this reason, I take
pleasure in their undertaking and praise it; I also wish them from the
bottom of my heart that they may have God\'s rich blessing in this.

However, I would rather that they had spent so much Christian diligence
and so many good hours on a better book and scribes; for I do not
recognize myself for the one, nor am I the one of whom one could say:
Nor am I the one of whom one would like to say, \"He tried to do it\";
rather, I stand behind among the last, and may hardly boast of myself
and say, \"I wanted to do it. And only God would have me be worthy to be
the very last and least among these last and hindmost. For all that I
have introduced in these lectures, I have not considered so precisely;
but have spoken it plainly and simply, as my thoughts have given it to
me in a hurry and the words have come to me; I have also often spoken
German with them, and have made almost more words than I like.

Not that I am aware that I have taught or said anything wrong in this;
for I am most concerned about that.

**2D. Martin Luther\'s Foreword. 3**

I have been most careful to leave out everything that would be obscure
and unacceptable in the interpretation, and to present clearly and
distinctly, according to my understanding and ability, what I wanted
everyone to understand. Unfortunately, I feel and find all too much that
such important things, of which Moses writes, are much too weak and
insignificant on my part, since necessity demands better and I should
have done better. In the meantime, I take comfort in the common saying:
God gives an evil year to the one who does a thing better than he can;
item that one should not push anyone beyond his ability.

But what need is there of many words? It is Scripture; yes\' Scripture
of the Holy Spirit, which we act; and who can be capable of the same, as
St. Paul says 2 Cor. 3, 5. It is, as St. Gregory says, a water, in which
a lamb can be founded and can stand, but an elephant must swim; that is,
it is God\'s wisdom, which makes the wise of this world and the prince
of the world himself fools, the unlearned ready and eloquent, and the
wise and eloquent unlearned and dumb.

So he is not always the best who achieves everything, grasps everything
and forgets nothing or leaves nothing out (although none of those who
could do this has ever been, nor will ever be born); but he is the best
who lets God\'s word be dear to him; as the first Psalm v. 2. says:
\"Blessed is he who delights in the law of the Lord and speaks of it.
Therefore it is left enough that we let ourselves like this high wisdom
of God, love it, contemplate it and talk about it day and night.

We also see the books of the Fathers; we also find that they did not
lack good will, but they could not reach perfection. And how ridiculous
they make themselves nowadays, who dare to comprehend such great and
high trades of the holy scriptures with a fine, exquisite and pure
Latin, as they themselves call it, and

to paraphrase a little more broadly; yet they themselves are without all
spirit and understanding, and, to act such high things, are not much
more skilful than (as they say in the proverb) the ass is to the
bagpipe.

St. Jerome rightly says: \"For the tabernacle of the Lord, each one
brings according to his ability: one gold, silver, precious stones, the
other skins and goats\' hair; for the Lord needs all these and is well
pleased with the good will of all those who offer and bring to it, even
if they do not all offer the same gifts.

Therefore, I am also satisfied that these lectures of mine go out
publicly in print and are brought and sacrificed as goats\' hair to the
temple of God. But I ask God through my Lord Christ that he may let
these lessons be a guide for others, so that they may be prompted to do
something better, or at least to make an effort to interpret and do
everything better than I have been able to do. For without this I have
given my adversaries and the devil, their God, sufficient cause to
blaspheme, reproach, and master (as I have always gladly done from the
beginning), as I hope and may proudly defy and boast in the Lord; as
they find worthy and well deserve, that they can do nothing but reproach
and blaspheme, because they neither want nor are able to do anything
good, but their mind and conscience, as Paul Tit. 1, 15. 16. is unclean,
and they are incapable of all good works.

May our dear Lord Jesus Christ strengthen and accomplish the work he has
begun in us, and hasten on to the glorious day of our redemption, which
we desire by the grace of God with lifted up heads, therefore sighing
and waiting for it in a right faith and good conscience, so that we have
served the ungrateful world and the devil, in whom no improvement can be
hoped, but is at the same time an enemy of his own and our salvation.
Come, dear Lord Jesus! And he who loves you, say: Come, dear Lord Jesus!
Amen.

**D. Martin Luther\'s**

thorough and edifying

**Interpretation of the first Book of Moses.**

**The first chapter.**

**I. Preliminary Report.**

This first chapter is described with the simplest words, but it contains
the most important and darkest things. Therefore it was forbidden to
both Jews (as St. Jerome writes) that anyone should read this first book
of Moses before his thirtieth year, nor interpret it to others. For they
held that whoever should read or understand this chapter must first have
known, learned, and practiced the whole of the Scriptures. Although
their rabbis have done nothing with it, since there are many of them who
have been over twice thirty years and more, and yet in their
commentaries and Talmuds they have given very childish and trivial
things about such excellent and high things.

2\) In the church, too, there has been no one so far who has interpreted
everything everywhere actually and correctly enough, without the
teachers having mixed together so many strange and innumerable questions
about this chapter; so that it can well be seen from this that God has
reserved this majesty of His wisdom and right understanding of this
chapter for Himself, and has given us this in general.

let know that the world had a beginning and was created from nothing by
God. Such a common knowledge can be clearly obtained from the text. But
as far as each piece in particular is concerned, there is a great deal
in it of which one cannot be entirely certain, and of which innumerable
questions are raised from time to time.

Now we know from Moses that six thousand years ago the world has not yet
been; however, a philosopher is not to be moved at all. For Aristotle
does not want to know anything about the first and last man. Although he
leaves this question, whether the world will stand eternally, in doubt,
he nevertheless steers completely to this opinion that it is eternal.
And human reason cannot come higher, because it must conclude that the
world is eternal and that countless people have been before us, will
also follow us. Human reason must rest and stand still over these
thoughts. But from this follows even a dangerous delusion and thought,
namely, that the soul is mortal, because philosophy does not know
several infinita (infinite beings). For it cannot be lacking, human-

**6L. l, \"-ia. Introduction to Genesis 1. W. 1, 3-b. 7**

The reason of man must stumble and tarnish in such great and divine
matters.

4 Plato, as it can be seen, may have gathered in Egypt some scraps from
the sermons of the fathers and the prophets, therefore he has come
closer to the truth. For he admits an eternal matter and idea; but says
that the world had its beginning and was created from matter. But such
uncertain and unfounded thoughts of the philosophers I do not want to
mention further, because Lyra also tells them, but does not explain
them. Therefore, I do not find anyone among the Hebrews, Greeks or
Latins whom I could follow in so many important and difficult matters;
but I hope that we will be satisfied when we have done what we have been
able to do in this. For according to this common knowledge, that the
world came into being and was created from nothing, there is almost
nothing in which the theologians would all be one at the same time.

Hilarius and Augustine, as the two greatest lights of the church, are of
this opinion that the world was created suddenly and at once, not
successively through six days. And Augustine plays strangely with the
six days, from which he makes days of secret interpretation of the
knowledge in the angels, and does not leave six natural days. Therefore,
in schools and churches there has been much dispute about the angels\'
knowledge, which they have divided into cognitionem vespertinam et
matutinam (knowledge in the evening and in the morning); which is first
conceived by Augustine, and diligently narrated by Lyra. Whoever wants
to know about it, may read Lyra.

6 Although these are subtle disputations, they are nevertheless
irrelevant. For what need is there to make two kinds of knowledge? And
what is the use of making allegories and mysteries out of Moses so soon
in the beginning? Because he does not want to teach us about allegorical
creatures or an allegorical world, but about essential creatures and a
visible world, which can be seen, felt and grasped, he calls every thing
by its name, day and evening, as we know it, without any allegories. As
the evangelist Matthew also keeps this way of speaking, since he writes
in the last chapter v. 1, Christ

was raised on the evening of the first day of the Sabbath. But since we
cannot sufficiently understand how these days happened, and why God
wanted to keep such a difference of times, let us rather confess our
ignorance, because the words can be directed and interpreted to foreign
opinions without any need. As far as St. Augustine\'s opinion is
concerned, we think that Moses actually spoke, not allegorically or
figuratively; namely, that the world with all creatures was created
within the six days, as the words read. But since we cannot reach or
understand the cause with our wit and reason, let us remain disciples
and let the Holy Spirit have his mastery.

7 These days are distinguished in this way, that on the first day the
shapeless mass of heaven and earth was created, to which God also added
the light afterwards. On the second day the firmament. On the third day
the earth was brought forth from the waters with all its fruits. On the
fourth day the sky was adorned and decorated with the creation of the
sun, the moon and the stars. On the fifth the fishes in the sea and the
birds under the sky. On the sixth all animals of the country and the
human being were created. Now I also leave this, that the others divide
all this into the work of creation, the distinction, and decoration;
because it does not seem to me, as if it rhymes well everywhere.
However, Lyra may read about it, whoever feels like it.

8\) But that Lyra thinks that one must necessarily know the teaching and
doctrine of the philosophers about matter, because without it one cannot
understand the effect of the six days, I do not know whether Lyra also
understood what Aristotle called matter; because Aristotle does not call
it matter, like Ovidius, namely a shapeless and coarse lump of all
things. Therefore, let us leave all this as unnecessary, and listen to
Moses, as a better master, whom we may follow more surely than the
philosophers, who disputes without God\'s word about unknown things.

**[8 n. iv-ir. Interpretation of Genesis 1:1. 2. W. i, 7-10.
9]{.underline}**

**II. The six day works in particular.**

**First part.**

**From the first day\'s work.**

I.

**V. 1. In the beginning God created heaven and earth.**

\(9\) Here a necessary and very difficult question arises, namely, that
Moses says of the creation of heaven and earth, and yet remembers
neither the day nor the word by which heaven and earth were created. For
one wonders why Moses did not rather put these words in this way, as he
does in the other pieces in which he remembers the Word in this way: In
the beginning God said, Let there be heaven and earth. For here he says
that first the heavens and the earth were created before God said
anything, when the Ten Commandments and all Scripture testify that in
six days God made the heavens and the earth and all that is in them. Now
I have said before that we have no one to follow in this interpretation;
therefore let us leave to each his own judgment and discretion in this
matter, and say what is our opinion of it. Moses calls the heavens and
the earth here, not as they are now, but as they were at the beginning,
unformed and coarse. The water was dark, and since it is lighter by
nature, it surrounded the unformed earth like a glue or thick mist. And
now God did not create this first matter (that I thus call it) of the
future following work outside of the six days, but in the beginning of
the first day; as the words in the Ten Commandments clearly read.

\(10\) But for this reason, as far as I can see, Moses is still silent
on the first day, that afterward the heavens and the earth were formed
and, as it were, worked out, polished and distinguished, which at first
were mixed together, coarse and unformed. For what he called the depths
and waters afterwards, namely unformed and not yet distinguished and
decorated waters, he calls here heaven.

If Moses had spoken differently, and said: In the beginning God said:
Let the heavens be created 2c., he would not have been able to repeat
these words afterwards: God spoke when he wrote how the waters were
formed and the light was created. That therefore Mosi\'s plain and
simple opinion is that everything that exists was created by God and
that in the beginning of the first day a \"formed lump of glue or earth,
and mist or water was created, to which God afterwards in the remaining
time of the first day poured a light and let the day shine, in which
this unformed sky and coarse earth may have been seen and at that time
was not almost unlike an unformed and raw seed, from which nevertheless
something can be begotten and raised.

V. 2. **But the earth was desolate and empty.**

\(11\) The Hebrew words tohu and bohu are much more emphatic than they
can be given, and are often used in Scripture; tohu means desolate. That
the earth is first of all a tohu, that is, in itself bad, empty, in it
no way, no difference of the Oerter, no mountain, no valley, and neither
grass, herbs, animals nor humans have been. For such was the first and
unbuilt form of the earth, that, because earth and water were mingled
together, no difference could be perceived, as now, after it has been
worked out and built up, it can be felt and perceived. Thus says Isaiah
Cap. 34:11, when he threatens that the whole earth will become empty and
desolate: \"He will draw a line across it to make it desolate, and a
plumb line to make it desolate\"; that is, it will become so desolate
that neither men nor cattle will be left on it; that the houses will be
desolate and all things will be mixed up and mixed with one another. As
afterwards Jerusalem by the Romans, and Rome by the Goths, were so
utterly devastated and desolate, that no footsteps can be traced from
such an excellent ancient city. Therefore, as you now see that the earth
is exalted above the waters, the heavens with stars, and the earth with
the stars.

**10 L. I, U-K interpretation of Genesis 1, 3. W. 1, 10-IS. 11**

Moses calls the earth, as it was without all this and mixed into a
disorderly and shapeless lump, tohu and bohu.

\(12\) And as the earth was surrounded with darkness, or with waters
wherein was darkness: so also the heaven was without form, and was a
tohu; not only because it was yet without ornament and adornment of
stars, and a bohu, because it was not yet separated from the earth; but
because it was without light, and was a dark and gloomy deep, which drew
and lay as a very thick mist round the earth. For how the waters were
separated and divided from it will follow hereafter. Now we have for the
first that Moses teaches that on the first day heaven and earth were
created; but a shapeless heaven, that is, from which the waters were not
yet separated, also without light and not yet raised up; item, a
shapeless earth, without animals, water rivers and mountains.

Lyra disputes that matter is nothing more in itself than pura potentia,
that is, such a thing as by its nature is possible and convenient to
take a form and substance in itself. And Augustine says in his book,
which he calls Confessiones, that matter is almost a void thing, so that
between it and another, which is nothing, no means can be conceived. I
cannot at all believe that such a thing is rightly said. For how can one
call such a thing nothing at all, which is such an essential thing that
Moses calls it heaven and earth? You wanted to call matter then, as one
calls a wood, which is not yet a box or bench, a matter: but this the
philosophers call materiam secundam.

14 On the contrary, it can be seen that St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3, 5. 6.
where he speaks of the wicked, says: \"They do not want to know that the
heavens also existed in former times, and that the earth consisted of
water and in water; nevertheless, at that time the world was destroyed
by them with the flood. For St. Peter says that the earth was first of
all

was founded of water and by water, and then was brought forth out of the
water and came into the day; as it can still be seen as floating on the
sea. This, says St. Peter, the wicked knew well, relied on it, and did
not worry about any danger from the water, which they knew to be the
foundation of the earth; and yet the evil one destroyed the earth as it
held and carried it, just as it will finally perish by fire. So, I
think, St. Peter looks here at Moses, because he writes that the earth
was in the water and was created from it. Let this be enough of the
matter; for I cannot see nor understand why it is useful and necessary
to discuss it more subtly.

**And it was dark on the deep.**

\(15\) Water, depth and heaven are here put for one thing, namely for
the dark and shapeless creature, which afterwards was distinguished and
made light by the Word. For a shapeless and disorderly load, and which
is brought forth from nothing, thus adorning and distinguishing, belongs
to another person, namely Christ, the Son of God. Which Moses
undoubtedly also considered, and therefore first of all did not use the
word: God spoke; for some consider this to be the cause.

**And the Spirit of the Lord floated on the water.**

Some interpret the spirit of the Lord as the wind. But I, if anything
material here should be understood by the Spirit, would rather have it
that the shapeless form of heaven and earth (which he also calls the
deep) has begun to stir and move, as it is still moving; for the water
never stands still, but stirs and moves upward. But much more do I allow
that we understand the Holy Spirit. For the wind is a creature that did
not exist before, when heaven and earth were mixed together.

\(17\) The Christian Church here also strongly agrees that in this
description a mystery of the Holy Trinity is indicated.

**[12 L. I, 1t-1S. Interpretation of Genesis 1, 2. W. 1. 13-15.
13]{.underline}**

is. The Father creates heaven and earth out of nothing through the Son,
whom Moses calls a Word; the Holy Spirit sets Himself over this work.
For as a hen sitteth over eggs, and warmed them, and by the warmth
quickened them, and brought forth little chicks therefrom: so saith the
scripture, that the Holy Ghost sat down as it were over the waters, and
was set to quicken the things which were to be quickened and adorned.
For the office of the Holy Spirit is to make alive. So much, I think, is
sufficient for the understanding of these words, that we leave aside
other unruly thoughts, and take it for granted that God created heaven
and earth out of nothing; but as a rough and unformed work, so that the
unformed heaven has settled like a mist around the unformed earth.

18 Now we must also say a little about the words, and soon some have
been found here who have disputed with strange subtlety about the word:
\"In the beginning\". For they have interpreted it: In the beginning,
that is, in the Son, because of the saying Joh. 8, 25. when Christ
answered the Jews who asked Him who He was: Principium, quod et loquor
vobis (the beginning, of which I tell you). Item Ps. 110, 3. where the
ancients read thus: Tecum principium in die virtutis tuae; which saying
they almost all interpret thus: With you is your son in divine power.
Now those who have an understanding of the Greek language know that in
John this word την *άρχην is* to be understood adverbially, and that
this way of speaking is very common among the Greeks everywhere:
Therefore others may pretend here what they desire; I like what is
spoken plainly and can be understood by the silly and the plain.
Therefore I think that Moses wanted to indicate a beginning of time, and
that \"in the beginning\" is just as much as if he said: \"At that time,
when there was no time, or when the world began, the beginning was such
that the heavens and the earth were first created by God from nothing,
in a crude unbuilt form, not equipped as they are now. However, they did
not remain so unformed for long, but were soon clothed with light on the
first day.

19\. the Arians have imagined that

that the angels and the Son of God were created before the beginning.
But let us leave such blasphemies alone; let us also not be troubled
with this question: what did God do before the world began, whether he
rested or not? To which question, as Augustine writes in the Confession,
one answered at one time that God had built hell for those who inquired
into and pretended to foolish things. With this answer, as Augustine
says, he wanted to keep people from such unnecessary and unseemly
questions.

20 For this reason, St. Augustine\'s modesty pleases me very much,
especially that he sincerely confesses that he uses his ingenuity in
such matters and sticks to himself. For even if we speculate and argue
about such high things without measure and end, they still remain
incomprehensible. And since we cannot fully or thoroughly understand the
things we ourselves see and do, how much less will we be able to
comprehend such high divine things? For what will you put or say that
was outside of time and before time? Or, what do you want to think, what
God made before time? Therefore, one should be satisfied with such
questions and thoughts, and take it for granted that God was
incomprehensible in His essential rest before the creation of the world;
but now, after the creation, He is in, apart from and above all
creatures, that is, He is incomprehensible. In another way one cannot
speak of it; because our understanding cannot extend to this, which has
been outside of time.

Therefore, God does not reveal Himself in any other way than in His word
and works, for these can be understood to some extent. But the other,
which actually belongs to the Godhead, can neither be comprehended nor
understood; as there is what was outside of time and before the world
2c. Perhaps God only appeared to Adam; but after the fall he appeared to
him in a sound, in which he had, as it were, disguised and wrapped
himself. Just as afterwards he wrapped himself in the tabernacle and the
mercy seat, and in the desert in cloud and fire. Therefore, Genesis 3:8,
such things are called all things of God.

**[14 L. 1, 16-18. Interpretation of Genesis 1, 2. W. 1, 1S-18.
15]{.underline}**

Faces, by which God revealed Himself. And Cain called the place where he
had sacrificed before God\'s face in Genesis 4:16. For our nature is so
deceived, even mad and corrupt, by sin that it cannot recognize God or
understand what He is. That is why we must keep to the outward things in
which God wraps and clothes Himself.

\(22\) It is just as great a foolishness and nonsense to speak much of
God outside of and before time, for that is to merely want to grasp the
divinity or divine essence. But because this is impossible, God wraps
Himself in understandable works and a certain form; just as He wraps
Himself daily in baptism, Absolution 2c. If you were to depart from such
things, you would end up outside of the goal, measure, place and time,
and into a purely trivial thing, of which nothing can be known, as the
philosophers say. Therefore we let this question go and are content with
the simple and simple understanding of these words: \"In the
beginning\".

II\.

23\. but this is much more to be noticed and considered, that Moses does
not say: In the beginning Adonai created heaven and earth, but uses the
several number, and says in the plural Elohim; which name is given in
Moses and elsewhere more also to the angels and authorities, as Ps. 82,
6.: \"I have said, you are gods.\" But here this name certainly means
the one and true God, from whom all things were created. Why then does
he speak in the plural? The Jews cavil and master Moses manifoldly. But
we have clear testimonies that Moses wanted to indicate the Trinity or
the three persons in one divine nature and being. For since he speaks of
the work of creation, it clearly follows that he excludes the angels.
Therefore, this contradiction remains, that there is one God, and yet
this same unity is truly divided into three persons. For why else would
Moses have said in the plural: \"In the beginning Elohim created\"?

24Therefore, the Jews should be given their evil

and useless sophistry, that they say that Moses spoke thus for the sake
of honor and reverence. For what would reverence be here, since it is
not common in all languages to address a person in the plural, as the
German language does? Secondly, although they say a lot that the name
Elohim is also given to angels and men, it is here in the plural and
cannot be understood otherwise than by the one true God, because Moses
deals with the creation. Otherwise he would have had many words in the
singular, which he could have used, where he would not have wanted to
indicate with special advice and concern, spiritually and secretly, that
outside the creature in the divine nature there were three persons. He
does not say in explicit and clear words that One is God, Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, for he had to reserve this clear distinction for the
holy Gospel; but let it suffice him that he can interpret and explain
such a plurality of persons with one word in the plural, which will also
be given to men hereafter.

\(25\) Neither shall we be offended that such a name is hereafter given
to creatures. For why should God not communicate his name to men, since
he communicates his office and power to them? For remitting and keeping
sins, making alive, etc., are works of the one divine majesty; and yet
they are communicated to men and are done through the word that men
teach; as Paul says Rom. 11:13, 14: \"I will magnify my ministry, if I
may provoke them that are my flesh to jealousy, and save some of them.
Item 1 Cor. 9:22: \"I became all things to all men, that I might save
them all.\" Therefore, just as such works are truly God\'s works alone,
even though they are given to men and are done through them, so also
God\'s name truly means God alone, even though it is given to men.

26 Arius could not deny that Christ was before the world was created,
for Christ Himself also says John 8:58: \"Before Abraham was, I am.\"
And in

**16 W. 1, 1\"-2V. Interpretation of Genesis 1, 2. W. I, I8-LI. 17**

Proverbs of Solomon, Cap. 8, 22, it is written: \"Before the heavens
were, I am. Therefore he turned to another side, and said that Christ,
or the Word, was created before all other creatures, and that the same
Word had then created all other things, and was the most perfect
creature, even if it had not always been. But this nonsensical and
ungodly delusion is to be countered with the fact that Moses recently
said, \"In the beginning, and put nothing else before the beginning, but
God alone, of whom he speaks in the plural and calls him Elohim.

\(27\) Men\'s hearts fall into such ill-advised thoughts when they
presume to speculate about such excellent and high things without God\'s
word. We ourselves do not know who we are; as Lucretius says, \"It is
not yet known whose kind and nature the soul is. We find in ourselves
that we can judge, recognize, measure, count, and distinguish the height
and size of every thing, even the spiritual creatures, evil and good,
right and wrong; and yet we cannot yet say what the soul is; how much
less will we understand what the divine nature is? Do we not know what
our will is for a movement, because it is neither motus qualitatis
(movement of quality) nor quantitatis (quantity), and yet it is a motus
(movement): what then would we know and understand in divine matters?

Therefore, it is foolish nonsense to speak of God and His divine nature
outside of and without the Word and the things in which God has wrapped
Himself; as all heretics do who speak of God with certain thoughts, as
of a sow or a cow. Therefore they received the just reward of their
presumption, that they fell into such dangerous errors. For whoever
wants to be safe and without danger in such great things, let him remain
simple-mindedly with the form, signs and works in which the divine high
majesty has made itself known, namely with the word and works; for in
these God has shown and revealed himself to us. Whoever reaches and
touches them, the

By this touching, just like the woman who had the issue of blood, she
becomes healthy and clean, Matth. 9, 22.

But those who want to come to God in another way, without word and
works, try to climb to heaven without a ladder (that is, without God\'s
word); therefore, they also fall and bump against the high majesty,
which they thus only want to reach and grasp. As happened to Arius, who
devised a means between the Creator and the creature, and pretended that
from the same means all things were created. He had to fall into such an
error because, contrary to the Scriptures, he did not want to believe
that there was more than one person in the divine being. But because he
argued about it without and apart from the word of God and trusted his
thoughts, he had to err horribly and run aground.

\(30\) So also a monk: because he does not follow the word, he
speculates that there is such a God up in heaven who wants to make
blessed one who wears a cap and observes a certain way of life. This one
also wants to climb into heaven outside of the word through which God
has revealed Himself. And in the same way the Jews had their idols and
forests. All of these do the same thing, and they are repelled by the
fact that they leave the word, and each one follows his own thoughts.

\(31\) Therefore, if we want to walk safely, let us keep to what God\'s
word models for us, and God Himself wants us to know. But everything
else that is not indicated in the word, we should leave aside. For what
is that to me, or how can I understand what God did before he created
the world? These are mere thoughts of the Godhead; just as they are, so
that the Jews are led away from this text, that they do not believe the
three persons, when Moses spoke of God in the plural.

The pope\'s decree condemned the anthropomorphites for speaking of God
as a man who had eyes, ears, and arms. Now this was an unreasonable
condemnation. For how can men speak differently of God to men? And if it
is unjust and heresy

**[18 2.:. 20-sL. Interpretation of Genesis 1:2, 3-5. W.i, si-ss.
19]{.underline}**

then it will truly be miserable and uncertain with the children\'s
bliss, who think and speak of God in such a childish way. But let the
children remain, and show me the most learned doctor who can teach and
speak of God in any other way than this. For this reason, injustice and
violence have been done to these same good people, that because they
believed in God as an almighty Lord and Savior, they have nevertheless
been condemned, because they have said that God has eyes, so that he
sees the poor, and ears, so that he hears those who call upon him 2c.
For how can our depraved nature understand the spiritual nature of the
Godhead? Thus, the Scriptures themselves use this way of speaking of God
everywhere.

For this reason they are unreasonably condemned, and rather this virtue
of theirs should have been praised, that they took care to speak of God
in a simple and comprehensible manner, which is a necessary diligence
and virtue in doctrine. For if God wants to reveal Himself, He must do
it through such a comprehensible means or implication, and say: Behold,
under this implicated form you will find and seize Me. And if we now
take the same form, call there, sacrifice 2c., then we have called upon
God rightly and sacrificed rightly. So there is no doubt that our first
parents will have called upon God early in the morning, when the sun
rose, and wondered at the Creator in His works and creatures; or, to put
it more clearly, the same noble creature will have reminded them to call
upon Him. And this way the descendants have kept afterwards, but without
right understanding. Therefore, this habit has become idolatry, which is
not caused by the sun, which is a noble creature of God, but by the fact
that the right teaching, which Satan cannot stand, has died out in time.
For Eve, having allowed Satan to deviate from the Word and seduce her,
fell into sin.

34 Because of that I come back to the anthropomorphs, I think that they
should not have been condemned, because also the prophets paint God as
sitting on a chair. Now when the simple hear such things, they soon
think that it is

They must be a golden and beautifully adorned chair or throne, although
they know that there is none of such material in heaven as gold, silver,
etc. Thus Isaiah Cap. 6, 1. writes that he had seen the Lord in \'a very
broad garment. For God can neither be painted nor seen in the form that
He is in Himself. Therefore, such images and figures are pleasing to the
Holy Spirit, and in them God\'s works are presented to us so that we can
grasp them. Such works are that he created heaven and earth, that he
sent his Son and speaks through him, that he baptizes, that he forgives
sin through the word, and so on. Whoever does not want to adhere to
these works will never take hold of God. But I will leave it at that
with this doctrine, because I have often discussed it abundantly and
extensively; but I have had to touch on it again for the sake of Mosiah,
whom the Jews act miserably and wickedly in this place, from which we
prove that there is more than One Person in the Godhead. Now let us look
at the text further.

**III.**

V. 3-5. **And God said, Let there be light. And there was light.**

\(35\) I have said above that by the word heaven and earth were created
in a rough and unadorned form (which Moses also calls water and depth),
and that it was a work of the first day; although Moses only begins to
speak like this here: God said: Let there be light, and so on. Now this
is truly a strange way of speaking, and unknown to those who write of
all other languages, that God makes something by speaking that was
nothing before; and so Moses here first uses the means or instrument
that God the Father used in his works, namely the word.

\(36\) Notice carefully the difference between the Hebrew words amar and
dabar. We interpret both words by speaking or talking; but the Hebrews
keep this distinction: smar means alone and actually a spoken

**20L . l, SL-S4. interpretation of Genesis 1:3-5. W. i, ss-ss. 21**

Word; but dabar also means an essential thing. So when the prophets say:
this is the word of the Lord, they use the word dabar, and not amar. The
new Arians, however, make a blue haze to those who do not understand the
Hebrew language, and pretend that word means a created thing; and thus
Christ is also called a word. Against this ungodly and at the same time
inconsistent falsification we say that Moses uses the word amar, which
actually means: a spoken word; so that the word is something different
from the one who speaks; as there is a difference between the one who
speaks and the one who is spoken. As we have just proved from the text
the three persons in the divine being: so here a clear and bright
difference of the same persons is shown. For Moses says, God is (that I
speak so) the speaker, who creates, and yet uses no matter, but only the
word, which he speaks, and thereby creates heaven and earth from
nothing.

Now compare St. John\'s Gospel Cap. 1, 1: \"In the beginning was the
Word\" (for it agrees finely with Moses), and John says that before the
creation of the world there was no creature, without which alone God had
a Word. But what is now, or what makes such a word? Listen to Moses
here, who says: the light was not yet, but the darkness was disguised
and transformed from its nothingness into this noble and precious
creature, which is light. But by what means? Through the Word. Therefore
the Word is in the beginning and before all creatures, and is thus a
powerful and mighty Word that creates everything from nothing. From this
it follows irrefutably that John clearly says that this Word is God, and
yet is a distinct person from God the Father; as different things are
the Word and the one who speaks it. And yet, because of this difference,
the unity of the divine essence remains the same.

These are great things, and it is not safe to go further and higher in
them than the Holy Spirit leads us. Therefore, we should stand by this
and be still,

that after heaven and earth in their first rough and coarse form, in
which they were still covered with darkness and gloom, were made from
nothing, also the light was made from nothing, that is, from darkness.
And St. Paul refers to this first work of the Creator as a particularly
great work, 2 Cor. 4, 6: \"God, who caused light to shine out of
darkness\" 2c. The command, he says, brought forth this light.
Therefore, for the strengthening and assurance of our faith, we have
enough that Christ was truly God, and was with the Father from eternity
before the world was created; and that through him, who is the wisdom
and the word of the Father, the Father made all things. But in this
saying of St. Paul, it should also be noted that he makes a new work of
creation out of the conversion of the ungodly, which also happens
through the Word.

\(39\) Here reason does much foolish work with clumsy and foolish
questions. If the Word, it says, has always been, then why did God not
create heaven and earth earlier by the same Word? Item, because only
when God began to speak did heaven and earth come into being, so it can
be seen as if the Word also only began at that time, when the creature
began 2c. But we should refrain from such ungodly thoughts, for we can
neither conclude nor think anything about these things, because apart
from the beginning of the creature there is nothing but a mere divine
being and a mere God. But since this is incomprehensible, that which
existed before the world is also incomprehensible, because it is nothing
but God alone. In our thoughts it seems that he begins to speak, because
we cannot get beyond the beginning of time: but because John and Moses
say that the Word was in the beginning and before all creatures, it
necessarily follows that it was always in the Creator and the mere
divine being. Therefore it is true God, but in such a way that the
Father begets and the Son is begotten. For Moses makes this distinction,
because he calls God who spoke and the word that was spoken. And Moses
has enough of this

**22 \". i, S4-ss. Interpretation of Genesis 1:3-5. W. i, ss-ss. 23**

done. For a clearer understanding and explanation has belonged to the
New Testament, and to the Son, who is in the bosom of the Father. There
we also hear certain names of the persons, that God is Father, Son and
Holy Spirit; as this is also indicated in several Psalms and Prophets,
but quite hidden.

. 40 Augustine interprets these words: God spoke, a little differently.
For this is his interpretation: God spoke, that is, it was determined
from eternity in the word of the Father and was decided by God; for the
Son is the reason, image and wisdom of God. But for this one should keep
the simple and right understanding, namely, God said: that is, by the
Word He creates and makes all things; as the apostle Paul testifies
Hebr. 1, 2.: \"By whom also He made the world.\" And Col. 1, 16.: \"By
Him and in Him all things were created.\"

\(41\) One should let the thoughts of creation go so far, but let them
enter here and not come any further. For where this happens, we are sure
to fall into terrible darkness and error. Therefore, we should be
satisfied with what is said about the world and its creation, namely,
that the world, as far as matter is concerned, was made of nothing;
item, that light was made of such a thing that was not light before. In
sum, that heaven and earth were created out of nothing; as Paul says
Rom. 4:17: \"God calls that which is nothing to be.\"

The instrument or means that God used for this is His almighty Word,
which was with God from the beginning and, as St. Paul says in Eph. 1,
4, before the foundation of the world was laid. The fact that Paul, Col.
1, 16, says that through him, the Lord Christ, all things were created
(for he uses the preposition \"in\" in the manner of the Hebrews,
instead of \"through\", for the Hebrews use the letter beth), is taken,
like other similar words, from these words of Moses, who says of a
spoken word, by which something is commanded. This word is God, and is
an almighty word, spoken in the divine essence, which no one has heard
speak,

for God Himself, that is, God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.
And while it was spoken, the light was not produced from the matter of
the word, nor from the nature of the speaker, but from the mere
darkness; so that the Father spoke in it, and out of it, from the
beginning, the light became and existed. In the same way the other
creatures were created. This, I say, may be enough for us of the manner
of creation.

IV\.

\(43\) But here arises a perceptible question: What kind of light was
this, by which the heavens and the earth, as they were first created in
an unadorned and coarse form, became light; since at that time neither
the sun nor the stars were created, and the text nevertheless reports
that it was a true and essential light? This question has given some
cause that they have sought a secret interpretation from it and have
interpreted these words thus: Let there be light, that is, an angelic
creature. Item, he separated the light from the darkness, that is, he
separated the good angels from the evil ones. This, however, is called
making short work of untimely allegories (for Moses writes a history and
reports things that have happened), and not interpreting the Scriptures.
For this purpose Moses wrote to the simple and unintelligent, so that
they would have clear testimonies of the creation. Therefore, one should
not pretend such inconsistent things here.

44 Secondly, it is also asked whether the same light has also moved
around, or, as they call it, motu circulari? Now I gladly confess that I
cannot really and thoroughly know; however, if someone desires to know
what seems to me to be the closest and most similar to the truth, I
consider it to be the case that this light was mobile, so that it made a
natural day, from the beginning to the end. But what kind of light it
was, although it is difficult to say, I do not like that one wanted to
leave grammar without cause and draw the words by force to other things;
because Moses clearly says that it was a light.

**24 A-1, ss-si. Interpretation of Genesis 1:3-5. W. i, ss-si. 25**

and reckons here the first day of creation.

\(45\) Therefore I consider that it was a righteous light, which had its
movement and went around like the sun; although it was not such a bright
and shining light as it became afterwards, when it was increased,
adorned and improved with the light of the sun. As the Holy Scriptures
also testify, that on the last day God will make the light of the sun,
as we see it now, a dark imperfect light compared to the future clarity,
seemingly more glorious and brighter. As therefore the light, which we
see and have now, is to be reckoned as a thick and coarse light against
the future clarity: so also the same first light, if one wanted to hold
it against the present, was coarse and imperfect. And so this is my
opinion of the two questions. Now Moses speaks further:

**B. 5. Then the evening and the morning were the first day.**

46 Here it must be known that the Jews reckon the day differently than
we do. For they saw it from the evening and from the setting of the sun
until the evening of the next day. But we reckon the day from the rising
of the sun. And I like that they take the word aeraef, which is evening,
from araf, which means to mix together; just as they take this word
arof, which we call a mixed-up vermin, because in the evening all things
are mixed together, and their shapes cannot really be distinguished
after the light is gone.

**V.**

47 And this much Moses has taught us from the first day. Now let us see
that he holds this way of speaking also in the other creatures\'
creation, when God said: Let there be a best 2c. This repetition should
be most agreeable to us, because, as also said above, it gives a strong
and excellent testimony to our faith, namely, that the Son is true in
the divine essence.

The word that is spoken is not the same as the person of the one who
speaks. In this way David also speaks in the 33rd Psalm, v. 6: \"The
heavens are made by the word of the Lord.\" And Solomon also indicates
this strange way of speaking, when he writes Proverbs 8:22, 27, that the
divine wisdom was like a servant and helper in the creation.\'\' \"I
am\", he says, \"appointed from eternity, before he created anything 2c.
When he prepared the heavens, I was there; when he composed the depths
with his purpose\" 2c. Hereby Solomon shows that he understood this
doctrine of our religion, shown and proved by Moses, but so that the
unintelligent people heard and read it, but did not understand it. For
if Solomon had not understood this mystery, he could not have spoken of
it in this way. Therefore he took it all from Moses, as also this
Proverbs 30, v. 4: \"Who has put all the ends of the earth? What is his
name, and what is the name of his son? Do you know?\"

48 I also believe that there were similar writings of other holy men,
such as Enoch, Elijah 2c., in which many such testimonies were
contained. But as they are today, although they are clearly revealed and
presented in the New Testament, they remain hidden and are not accepted
by the majority, but are contested: so it was rather among the Jewish
people, since the holy fathers presented such obscure and not clearly
presented testimonies, subtly, also to the scholars. But this is a great
comfort to us, that we know, as it is shown from the beginning, that in
the divine essence there are more persons, and yet one unity of the
divine nature and essence. But if anyone does not want to believe this,
or even to fight against it, it is not our business. Abraham, Gen. 18,
2. 3., sees three men, and yet worships only one. Item there in 19 Cap.
V. 24, the Holy Spirit says: \"The Lord rained down fire from heaven
from the Lord.\" Whether such words are not understood by the foolish
and senseless spirits, or whether they are not understood

**[26 L. l, ss-so. Interpretation of I Genesis 1:5, 6-8. W. I. S1-S6.
27]{.underline}**

Although we do not notice it, we know that it is not the words of a
drunken man, but the words of God.

49 And there are many such testimonies everywhere, which the fine man
Hilarius has diligently gathered together. But if they seem obscure and
not certain enough, they seem so to the ungodly and unbelieving: the
faithful and godly are certain and clear enough about what is presented
and indicated in divine Scripture. For they believe and know that there
is another person of God who speaks, and something else (not in nature,
but in person) is the Word, by which all things were created, and are
still today and always being preserved; as the Master of the Epistle to
the Hebrews Cap. 1, 3. says: \"He bears all things with His powerful
Word.\"

50 But it must also be remembered here that these words, Let there be
light, are God\'s words and not Moses\', that is, essential things. For
God calls things that are not to be, Rom. 4:17, and speaks not
grammatical words, but true and essential things. As, which with us men
reads as a word, that is with GOD as an essential thing. Thus sun, moon,
heaven and earth, Peter, Paul, I and you 2c. are bad words of God,
indeed hardly a syllable or letter, to be counted against the whole
creature. We also speak, but only grammatical words, that is, we only
give names to things that are already created. But God has another
grammar, namely, that when He says: Sun, you shall shine, the sun is
soon there and shines. Thus, the words of God are not mere words or
vocabularies, but essential things.

Here they have made a difference between the uncreated and the created
word. The created word is made by the uncreated. For what is the whole
creature but a word of God, spoken and pronounced by God? The uncreated
word, however, is a divine thought and inner meaning that abides in God
and is one thing with God, yet a distinct person. In this way God
reveals himself to us, that he is the speaker who is with himself.

has an uncreated word, by which he created the world and everything with
an easy work, namely only with speaking; so that God does not find it
more difficult to create than to call. In such thoughts the pious
fathers Augustine and Hilarius also had their pleasure.

**Second part.**

**Of the other day\'s work of God.**

**I.**

**V. 8. And God said, Let there be a best between the waters, and let
there be a difference between the waters.**

Here it seems as if Moses had forgotten himself, because he neither
reports nor deals with two great and important things, namely the
creation and fall of the angels; but only continues in the description
of the physical things, although there is no doubt that the angels were
also created. But of their creation, item of their struggle and fall,
the scripture reports nothing everywhere, without Christ saying Joh. 8,
44, that the devil did not exist in truth; and Moses tells afterwards in
the 3rd Cap. V. 1 ff. Moses tells a pitiful story about the serpent.
Therefore, one might be surprised that Moses is so silent about such
excellent things.

\(53\) Hence it came to pass, when men had no certainty of this, that
they devised the nine choirs of angels, and that there were so many of
them that their fall was nine days. So they also invented a great fight
and quarrel, which the good angels had against the bad ones. But this, I
think, is taken from the struggle of the church, that they dreamed: as
in the church the pious teachers must always fight against the evil and
enthusiastic ones, so also the good angels should have been in a
struggle with the evil ones, who wanted to arrogate to themselves the
divinity. But this is the way it is: where there is no public and
certain testimony of the Scriptures, presumptuous and presumptuous
people usually think that they have the power to write poetry and to
think up whatever they want.

**28L . i, 30-82. Interpretation of I Moses I , 6-8. W. i,\"\"-ss. 29**

From this they also take the thoughts of the danger and fear of the
angels from the 14th chapter. Isaiah v. 13, where Lucifer says: \"I will
ascend into heaven, and will exalt my throne above the stars of God.
Although the prophet there prophesies of the pride of the king of the
Babylonians. And Bernard has these thoughts: that Lucifer saw in God
that man should be exalted above the nature of angels, therefore the
arrogant spirit begrudged such blessedness to man and thus fell. But
such thoughts remain in their value. I would not like to force one to
agree with such opinions. But nevertheless it is certain that the angels
have fallen and the devil has become an angel of darkness from an angel
of light. Perhaps there might have been a fight and a quarrel between
the good and the bad angels.

\(55\) But Moses, because he wrote to an unintelligent and new people,
he also wanted to write what was useful and necessary to know, and kept
silent about other things that were not necessary to know, such as the
nature of angels and the like. Therefore, we should not expect anything
further in all such things, especially because the New Testament also
deals little with this matter, for it reports no more than that they are
damned and will be kept in prison and bound until the day of judgment, 2
Peter 2:4. Therefore, we have enough from this that we know that there
are good and evil angels, but that God created them all good at the same
time. From this it necessarily follows that the evil angels have fallen
and have not remained in the truth. How such a case occurred cannot be
known, but it can be seen that they fell out of pride, after they
despised the Word or the Son of God and wanted to prefer themselves to
him. That is all we can know about it. Now we return to the text.

II\.

\(56\) We have heard that the work of the first day was the heaven and
the earth, created in a crude and unskillful form, and also with a thick
and coarse light.

has been illuminated. Now follow the work of the next day, how God built
up and brought forth from the same thick and coarse mist, which Moses
called heaven, a beautiful and lovely heaven, as it is now, when you put
the stars and great lights of it. And the Hebrews have a convenient
derivation of the word heaven, shamajim, from majim, which means water.
For the letter shin is often used in compound words for a relativum, so
that shamayim means watery or watery nature. As such also appears from
the color of the sky, and experience gives that the air is moist by
nature. And the philosophers say that the air would be nothing else but
an eitele constant humidity, if the sun were not. It is indeed moist and
warm at the same time, but the moisture is of its nature, because the
sky is made of water. Therefore the sky rains and gives from itself
wholesome and fruitful moisture. But because light has been added to the
sun, the humid nature of the sky is tempered and mixed so that the air
is also warm.

\(57\) This thick and coarse lump of mist, created from nothing on the
first day, God takes by the word and calls it to spread out round and
round. For the word rakia means among the Hebrews something that is
stretched out and spread out, and comes from the word raka, which means:
to spread out and wind out. For the heavens were made in such a way that
the rough and unformed mass was stretched out, just as a pig\'s bladder
(that I may give a rough simile from which it may be understood) spreads
out round and rises when it is blown.

\(58\) Now that Job chap. 37:18 says that the heavens were made of iron,
he is not referring to matter but to the Word, which can make even the
softest thing by nature the strongest and most solid. For what is softer
than water, and thinner and finer than air? And yet these finest and
softest things keep their form and movement in the most perfect and firm
way, because they are thus created by the Word. And if now

**30L . I, S2-S4.Interpretation of Genesis 1:6-8. W. 1:39-41. 31**

Even if the sky were made of diamonds or other extremely hard materials,
it would still break and melt through the swift, long and constant
movement that the sky has. In the same way, if the sun were made of the
hardest matter, it would break and melt in a day due to its rapid
movement. For the movement is extremely hot; as Aristotle says that the
lead on an arrow can melt because of the swift movement.

\(59\) Therefore, these are the miraculous works of God, wherein the
omnipotence of the Word is seen, that the heavens, being softer and
finer than water, and being tossed about with swift motion, have not
been corrupted or weakened in any place in so many thousands of years.
This is what Job says Cap. 37:18, that the heavens are solid and cast
like brass, yet they are by nature of the softest substance. For we know
how thin and fine the air is in which we live, for it cannot be touched
or grasped, nor can it be seen. Now the sky is by nature even finer and
thinner than the air. For the fact that it appears blue is not a sign
that it is so thick, but that it is so far from us and thin. And if you
hold the clouds against it, they seem like a ranch of lighted wet wood.
Job points to this fineness and yet, enduring permanence. For the
philosophers also have a fine saying: What is moist and wet cannot keep
itself in bounds.

Therefore heaven exists in God\'s word, because it (being of watery
nature) cannot hold itself in its goal or terminus; as we hear: Let
there be a best. From this, some philosophers, who were more diligent
before others, have made a not unimportant conclusion; namely, that in
nature nothing is accidental, but all things are governed and happen by
divine providence, because the movements of the heavens and the things
that are above us are so fixed and regulated. For who would say that
such things happen by chance and are only natural things; because other
bodily things, which are made by the skill of men, are not accidental
and without

are dangerous, but are produced from certain counsel and art, as round,
triangular or hexagonal columns?

61 Therefore, these are really wonderful works of divine majesty, that
the sun has such an exact and certain course, that it does not step or
exit from the line under which it runs, not even a finger\'s breadth
away, at any place in the sky. It has such a course in the thinnest air,
is not supported by solid bodies, but floats like a leaf in the air;
although this likeness is not at all real and convenient. For a leaf
floats and is driven around in the air, uncertainly; but the sun\'s
movement is the most certain, and happens in much thinner air than this,
in which we walk and live.

This wonderful spreading of the thick fog is called by Moses a best or
firmament, in which the sun with the other planets has its course and
movement around the earth, in such very subtle matter. But who is this
master who makes such a soft and uncertain substance so firm, certain
and solid? It is certainly not nature, which cannot accomplish such
things in much lesser things; so it must be the work of him who speaks
to heaven and this slippery substance: You shall be the firmament; and
makes all things firm with the word, sustains them also according to his
omnipotence. This word also makes the very finest and thinnest air
harder and stronger than a diamond. Item, that it has its goal and own
terminus. Again, that a diamond is softer than water. That we may learn
from such works what kind of God we have, namely, who is almighty, and
has made this wonderful and beautiful heaven out of a rough and coarse
heaven, and has wrought all things according to his counsel and will.

63 Furthermore, I have said that this word best, or firmament, has the
name of spreading out among the Hebrews. As on this word rhymes the
simile of skins or tents, so Ps. 104, 2: \"Thou spreadest out the
heavens like a carpet. For like a wrapped up tapestry

**32L . 1, 34-s\". Interpretation of Genesis 1:6-8. W. 1:41-14. 33**

He says that you spread out and wind up, as it were, the unformed heaven
by your word, in which you sit invisibly in the whole creature, as in a
circle, in and out of everything.

This is very strange, that Moses with clear words makes three parts, and
puts the firmament in the middle of the waters. And I would like to have
this thought and speculation, that the firmament is the highest and
highest above all things, but the waters, which do not hang and hover
above but below the heavens, are the clouds that we see; so that by the
waters separated from the waters are understood the clouds that are
separated from our waters on earth. But Moses says with dry and clear
words that the waters are above and below the firmament. That is why I
have to take my thoughts captive here and follow the word, even if I do
not understand it.

65: But here it is asked: what kind of waters are these, and how the
upper bodies are distinguished? How the philosophers divide and
distinguish them is well known. For they set four elements and
distinguish them according to their properties and qualities. They give
the lower place to earth, the next to water, the third to air, and the
last and highest to fire. Some add the ether as the fifth element. Then
follow the spheres or circles of the seven planets, and the eighth
sphere of the fixed stars. And in this they are almost all one, that
four spheres are the things, which easily come into being and pass away
again. After that there are eight other spheres of things that neither
multiply nor decay.

Aristotle argues that the nature of the heavens is not made of the
elements, but has its own particular nature. For if heaven were made of
the elements, it would be corruptible, because the elements, mixed
together, act on each other and suffer one from the other and thus wear
each other out. Therefore he deprives the heavens and all heavenly
bodies above us of primas qualitates, that is, of the elemental
property, and says that they are

pure creatures, which have in themselves a light that is the same as
theirs, and a special quality and property that is created at the same
time as theirs.

67 Although these things are not certain, yet, because they are derived
from causes not inconsistent with truth, and have in them a beginning
and origin of beautiful and glorious arts, they are useful to teach, and
it would be a grossness for anyone to neglect or despise them,
especially because they agree to some extent with experience. For this
we learn, that it is true that fire by nature is self-propelled, as it
appears by lightning and other fiery signs in pleasure. By these
principles, known from experience, they were moved and caused to place
fire in the uppermost place, and below it, next, the air, after that the
water, and below that the earth, which in gravity surpasses all the
others.

These things are valid and have their place and use as prima principia,
or instructions, although they are not necessarily true and come true.
But they are generally true and serve to teach the same arts correctly
and to act accordingly. For even though fire is made from firewood, it
cannot be denied that there is also fire in the air above. That is why
theology gives such arts this rule, of which philosophers do not know
much: that although God has ordered and created all such things by his
word, he is not bound by such rules, so that he cannot change them
according to his will. For we see that neither grammar, nor other arts,
are so certainly set down in rules that they do not have exceptions. So
the secular law and laws draw in and temper equity 2c. How much more can
this happen in divine things, that although we learn that the four
elements are thus ordered and disposed by God, God, contrary to this
order, can also have and receive fire in the middle of the sea; as we
see that it is locked in a vessel.

So the mathematicians have decided a certain number of spheres, not that

**34L .I, \"S-M. Interpretation of Genesis I, 6-8. \" 1, 44-47. 35**

It is not necessary that it be so, but that one cannot teach anything
special about such things where one does not divide the spheres in this
way for the sake of the diversity of the movements, of which one cannot
teach anything without such imagination that I call it so. For so say
the teachers and masters of this art themselves: We give examples, not
because they are completely true, but because such things cannot be
taught in any other way. Therefore it would be a great folly to despise
and ridicule such things, as some do, because it is not so certain that
it could not be otherwise; for it serves that one may teach good arts,
which is enough.

This is what the philosophers generally teach. In addition to these
eight spheres, the new theologians add two more, namely the crystal
heaven and the fire heaven. But the Greeks discussed these things much
more finely and intelligently than ours. For Ambrose and Augustine have
rather childish thoughts: therefore I praise Jerome that he is silent
about it. Now some think that the crystal sky is watery because they
think that it is this water, of which Moses speaks here, and that it is
therefore made part of the firmament or the eighth sphere, so that it is
not burned up by the swift and constant movement. But these are childish
thoughts, and I would much rather confess that I do not understand Moses
in this place, than that I wanted to accede to such clumsy thoughts. The
tenth heaven, the heaven of fire, they call thus, not that it is fiery
and burning, but that it is light and apparent. They make it the
dwelling place of God and the blessed, which was made full of angels
soon after creation, and Lucifer fell from this heaven. This is almost
all that the theologians have done to the thoughts of the philosophers.
But those of us who have been more learned and have occupied themselves
with astronomy have made more spheres, namely twelve, and have devised
three kinds of movements of the eighth sphere; as, motum raptum, motum
proprium, and motum trepidationis (a caused, a proper, and a fluctuating
movement). For from

Such things cannot be spoken otherwise, if one does not give to each
movement its special sphere.

Averrois has had other more inconsistent thoughts, which are too much
for reason; for he pretends that each sphere is an intelligible nature.
And this foolish thought has this cause, that he has seen the certain
and quite orderly movement of the heavenly bodies: therefore he has
thought that the spheres were intelligible natures, each of which moved
in a constant and certain way. But from this follows the highest
ignorance of God; therefore we also reject Averroi\'s thoughts, and give
the others, which we have narrated, so far right that they are useful to
teach. For this knowledge of heaven and of the things that are above us
is worthy of all praise, however little it may be had.

Moses took the simple and plain road and put three parts, namely the
waters below and above, and the firmament in the middle, and by the word
heaven he understood the whole corpus and building, which the
philosophers distinguished into eight spheres, fire and air. For on the
third day he first of all remembers the flowing waters. So it is also
clear and certain that this pleasure, in which we live, is called heaven
in the holy scriptures. For thus Ps. 8:9 calls it the birds of the air.
It says in 1 Kings 8:35 that the heavens are closed unless it rains. It
says, Zech. 8, 12, that the sky rains: but all this happens in the air,
and not in the spheres of the moon or the other planets. Therefore this
dividing of the heavens into spheres is not at all from Moses, nor from
the holy Scriptures, but is devised by learned men for teaching. Which
we should recognize as a great good deed.

I still doubt whether it is right to say that the elements are
corruptible things, for I see that they remain. And although a part of
them is changed at times, it does not follow that they are changed at
all; but the change of the elements takes place only in parts. For so
the air remains, in which the birds live and fly; so the earth remains,
on which the trees and the plants grow.

**[36 \" i. ss-ta. Interpretation of Genesis 1:6-8. W.i. 47-is.
37]{.underline}**

of things grow, although quite a few pieces of the same are changed.

74 Aristotle says that the cause of all these things is primum motorem,
that is, the first mover; but Averrois says that the causes of the
movements are formae adsistentes a foris, that is, intelligible natures
that move from outside: that, we say with Moses, all things happen and
are badly governed by God\'s word. He spoke, then it came to pass. He
did not command the angels to govern these bodies: just as we ourselves
are not governed by the angels, though we are protected and guarded by
them.

75\' Thus, that the planet\'s course is retrograde is also a work of
God, created by God\'s word. Which work belongs to God alone, and is
much higher and greater than that it could be assigned to an angel; but
it is God who has thus distinguished, governs and sustains it. And the
same God who called the sun to run and the firmament to stand still,
also said to the planets or stars: you shall go this way and that way
2c. For the word is able and does all these things, that the most
uncertain course is the most certain, although the same heavenly bodies
do not walk and float in one place or under one visible line. For as a
fish is in the midst of the sea, and a bird under the open sky, so the
stars move in their appointed place, but with a very certain and
wonderful course. This is also the reason why the Elbe has its steady
course here before Wittenberg and in this region and does not have to
tire. All such works are works of the word, which Moses here praises and
extols: He said 2c.

For this reason, we Christians should speak and be of a different mind
about the causes of these things than the philosophers, even though some
of them are beyond our reason (like this piece about the waters above
the sky) and are rather to be believed with a confession of our
ignorance than either to be denied out of ungodly opinion or to be
interpreted presumptuously according to our understanding. For we must
keep the way of speaking, as it has the holy scripture, and remain with
the words of the Bible.

The Holy Spirit was pleased to divide the creatures in this way, so that
the firmament would be spread out from the unformed heaven and earth in
the midst of and through the Word, and that then above and below the
firmament would be the waters, also taken from the rough and coarse lump
of heaven and earth. All this together the Holy Spirit calls heaven,
with the seven spheres and the air, in which meteors and fire signs
occur and birds have their dwelling.

Therefore we do not dispute these common principles, nor do we deny that
they say that everything that is heavy by nature sinks below itself, and
that which is light goes up or above itself (although we see that thick
and heavy vapors also float above themselves, but from the effect and
movement of heat). This alone we say, then, that these things are all
thus created and preserved by the Word, can also be changed by the power
of the same Word even today; as then this whole nature will finally come
to change; just as it is also contrary to the rule now indicated that
there are still waters above the sky or the firmament: and yet the text
reports and testifies to this.

Now that we come back to the question we asked, it is true that if you
ask about the nature of these waters, you cannot deny that the waters,
as Moses says, are above the sky. But what kind of waters they are, I
freely confess that I do not know; for even the Scriptures do not
mention them in any other place than here, and in the song of the three
men in the fire, Dan. 3:61. 3, 61. So also of all such things we can say
nothing certain, as also of heaven nothing, in which the angels and God
dwell with the blessed; also of the other nothing, which shall be
revealed at the last day, when we shall be clothed with another flesh;
but now we can say nothing certain of it.

But for the sake of those who do not yet understand, I must also say
that in the Scriptures the horizon is also understood by the word
heaven. And of it also

**[38 L 1, 40-42. Interpretation of Genesis I, 6-8. W. 1. 4S-SL.
39]{.underline}**

The whole firmament of all heavens is called heaven, so that all
people\'s heavens, that is, horizons, come together in it. And in this
way we have a different heaven than those who live in France or Italy.
But this name does nothing to explain this text here; therefore, several
theologians have interpreted these waters (as also indicated above) as
coelum glaciale, that is, the cold sky, which is therefore placed in
this place, so that it should moisten and, as it were, refresh the lower
spheres in such great and swift movement and circulation, so that they
are not consumed by the great heat. But whether they conclude correctly
in this, I leave unsaid.

I will gladly confess that I do not understand what these waters are.
Just as the old teachers did not care much about them; as we see that
Augustine despises the whole of astrology. But even though it has many
superstitious things, one should not despise it at all, because it deals
with the contemplation and observation of the divine works, which
diligence is very much due to a human being. Therefore we see that many
excellent people have practiced it and taken pleasure in it. Enough has
been said of this text, namely, that the heavens of the next day are so
distinguished and ordered that they stand in the midst of the waters.

III\.

\(81\) But here there is another question, namely, because in the other
works of the other days Moses says, \"And God saw what He had made, and
behold, it was very good; why was this not also done, since the greatest
and most beautiful part of the whole creature was created? To this
question one can answer: that this decision was only made at the end of
the creation of all things on the sixth day, when the Scripture says:
\"And God looked at all that He had made, and behold, it was all very
good. Because there also the sky is understood with.

82\) Lyra accepts the opinion of Rabbi Solomon, who says that this

Words: And God saw that it was very good to be set twice on the third
day, therefore the one time belongs to the work of the other day, which
is only accomplished on the third day, since the waters under heaven are
more precisely distinguished. The others are clever here and give other
reasons, do not know how, that the second number means something
unfortunate and evil, because it is the first number, which divides and
separates from unity; but God is hostile to this ceding and separating
and is pleased with unity, therefore he did not say this clause or
resolution on the other day. But Lyra calls this right a deceitful and
seductive gloss. For in this way all numbers move away from unity.

It is also safest not to inquire and question too much in such matters,
for they are set far too high above our reason. For how can we
understand this order, which God Himself has ordered and allows Himself?
Yes, reason must be put to shame: for what is an orderly thing before
God seems disorderly and uncertain before us. So it seems to us that the
stars are mixed together without any order, because the bright ones are
mixed with the dark ones, the small ones with the large ones. For who
would consider such an order, since it is the highest order, established
by God\'s counsel and highest wisdom? And we judge other things in the
same way. It seems to us to be a great disorder and confusion that the
Elbe, indeed all waters, drift in such an uneven course to their mouth.
Such disorder also seems to us to be among the trees, even between man
and woman, since everything seems to be going on disorderly. But all
this shows and proves that God has a different order, and also judges
all such things differently than we do.

Therefore, we do not want to worry about why Moses first let these words
follow the creation and work of the third day: God saw 2c., but in the
next day he left them outside. They also do not want to judge whether
the work of the second day was first accomplished on the third or not.
That now the philosophers the sky

**40 L.i, tü-14. interpretation of Genesis l, 6\--8. 9. W. i, ss-5\".
41**

They distinguished into eight spheres or circles for the instruction of
good arts: but we have a simpler and more certain way, that we teach
that without all means God is the Creator of all things by His word:
DIXIT, He said.

**Third part.**

**Of the third day\'s work of God.**

I.

**V. 9. And God said, Let the waters under heaven be gathered together
unto special places, that dry things may be seen.**

I said above that we do not understand the order of God\'s works;
therefore, if he had consulted us here, we would have advised him to set
this order for another day. But he wants to remain the master of this
order and judge of the world himself and alone: therefore we should not
be too careful here. The text clearly says that God commanded the waters
to gather under heaven; does not say under the best or firmament, as he
said above (v. 6, 7): the waters separate from the waters above and
below the best. Now heaven, according to the Scriptures, is called the
whole great building above the earth, with all the air and all the
spheres, and has a Hebrew name of matter, that is, of the distinct
waters, from which it was made when they were separated and multiplied.
For the first and unformed water was not so broad and large, but was
spread out and enlarged by the word; as Christ in the gospel by his
blessing multiplies little loaves so that they are enough for a great
multitude. What in philosophy is called air with all its spheres, Moses
calls heaven.

86 But he calls these our waters, as, the sea and the flowing waters,
which have become from the first unformed water and have remained like a
basic soup on the earth, since the sky was formed from it by

the word has been mentioned. But I believe that the waters above are
much stronger than our waters, which, on the other hand, are like
yeasts, and may be called collected waters not only because of the place
but also because of the substance. For they are much thicker than the
waters in the air; for in the air we breathe, but in the water we cannot
breathe. That the Latin text says: in locum unum collective, in one
place, is rather to be understood from many places into which the water
is to divide. As if you meant to say: in various places in particular;
that is, that not all the power of the water is gathered into the sea in
one place, but that there are many seas and rivers, one above, the other
below; one larger, the other smaller 2c.

**That one sees the dry.**

These words are to be noted here because he said above (v. 2) that the
earth was tohu and bohu, that is, unfinished, coarse and undecorated,
and was poured around and mixed with the waters everywhere. Therefore he
also indicates here that the earth lay over a lump in the water, and was
surrounded with it everywhere. For why else would he say: that one sees
the dry, where it would not have been surrounded with the depths and
would not have been completely covered with the same first, thick and
nebulous waters? For here again is confirmed and proved what I have said
above several times, that the world at first, when it was created, was
nothing else but a coarse, shapeless lump of earth and water, from which
only on the third day the earth is brought forth and separated so that
it can be seen. As the waters were adorned with light before, so also
here the earth is given its ornament and adornment by the light. For if
it was to be possible to live on it, both were necessary, namely that it
was dry and that it lay in the light or was illuminated.

II\.

But he calls the earth dry because of the separated waters. Thus we see
that the sea roars wonderfully, as if it wanted to swallow up the whole
earth. For

**42L . i, tt-4\". Interpretation of Genesis 1:9-II. W. i, \"7-s\". 43**

The sea is much higher than the earth. But it cannot come above its goal
and limit. For this text, from the first creation, gives the earth its
dimensions and a certain place, but the sea a very strong bar; as Job
38:10 and Psalm 104:9 are written. That although the sea is higher, and
cannot hold of itself, nor be its goal, yet it cannot step out farther
than it is due and permitted. For since the earth is the middle or
center of the world, it should be shut up and lowered into the sea: but
God, by the word, casteth out the sea, and causeth to go forth upon the
face of the waters a level place, as much as is necessary for habitation
and life.

Therefore, it is by divine power that the waters do not overflow us, and
God still demonstrates this miracle to us today until the end of the
world, which He showed to the people of Israel in the Red Sea in Exodus
14:21, 22. For this reason he revealed his power with a public miracle
at the same time, so that he would be honored all the more diligently by
his small people. For what is our whole life on this earth but a passage
through the Red Sea, on both sides of which the water stood like two
high walls? For it is quite certain that the sea lies much higher than
the earth. That is why God still calls the waters to stand today, as if
they were suspended, and stops them by the Word, so that they do not
break out over us, as they overtook and covered the earth in the Flood.
But at times our Lord God causes signs to be performed and whole islands
to be submerged by the waters, so that He may prove that the sea is in
His hand and power, that He can also withstand it, and that He can also
let it pass over the ungrateful and the wicked.

The philosophers also talk about the center of the world and the water
that flows around it. And it is indeed a miracle that they have come so
far that they have set the earth as the means and center of the whole
creation. For from this it is to be assumed that the earth cannot fall,
because it is inwardly held by the other spheres everywhere. So the sky
and the other spheres also hold on to the center, that they are

can be permanent. This is worth learning and knowing. But of this the
philosophers know nothing, that heaven and earth had their state, and
neither fall nor are moved, by the power of divine word. Therefore the
water cannot go out of its boundary and cover the earth, even though it
is higher than the earth; but we live and float on it, like the children
of Israel in the midst of the Red Sea.

**V. 10. And God saw that it was good.**

Here follows this acknowledgement that God has had pleasure and delight
in His works, yet nothing has been made without the waters being
separated and the earth being drawn forth from them. But above, when he
describes the most beautiful part of God\'s works, he does not remember
these words. This may have been because God wanted to show how He was
much more careful about our dwelling place than about His own, so that
we would be all the more provoked to give thanks. For our life should
not be in the air or in heaven, but on the earth, where we have food and
drink and can sustain our life.

\(92\) Therefore, having adorned and lightened the roof of this dwelling
place, that is, the heavens, he now also prepares a floor and brings
forth an earth that is suitable and comfortable for the dwelling and
service of men. He says twice that he is pleased with this work for our
sake, who are so dear to him and for whom he cares. He also assures us
and makes us certain that he will take great care of this work, which he
has built so carefully, and that he will be there to defend us against
the enemy that threatens us with death, namely the water. Therefore he
lifts up this house finely from the foundation and roof. Now let us see
how he decorates and paints it.

III\.

**V. 11. And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, and herb
yielding seed, and fruitful trees 2c.**

He has now built the first and most noble buildings of this house. The
roof is the magnificent fine sky, although it is still

**44 \" i, 40-48. Interpretation of Genesis I, 11-13. W.i, so-ss. 45**

The ground is the earth; the walls are the seas on every side. Now he
also provides food for us and gives the earth to bear grass and herbs
and all kinds of trees. Here you see why he called the earth tohu and
bohu (v. 2), namely, that it was not only dark and full of water, but
also barren and without any plants. But we see here what food he creates
for us, namely herbs and plants of the trees. Therefore I believe that
our bodies would have been much healthier and stronger if this use of
all kinds of food, but especially the eating of meat, had not arisen
after the Flood. For although the earth was cursed after the fall of
Adam, and afterwards very much corrupted by the Flood, yet the food and
nourishment of herbs would be much purer and more subtle than of flesh.
And it can be seen that in the beginning of the world herbs were man\'s
food and were created to be man\'s food.

\(94\) That the earth should bring forth grain, and trees, and herbs of
all kinds, is the work of this day. Now all things grow from the seed of
their kind. The first creation, however, happened without seed, and only
by the power of the Word. But that seed now grows is also a work of
creation, of which there is much to marvel. For this is a peculiar
power, that a grain which falls into the ground sprouts in its time and
bears fruit after its kind. Therefore it is a certain sign that this
creation, by which every plant of its kind is produced according to a
constant order, does not happen by chance or accident, but is the
noblest work of divine providence. Thus from wheat grows nothing but
wheat; from barley nothing but barley; from rye, rye 2c. and for and for
each species retains its constant manner, order and quality.

But what the cause is, philosophy neither understands nor knows, but
ascribes it to nature. But we know that nature was created by the Word
in such a way that the seeds and species of all things are preserved.
And so it is not only

The first seed of all things has also multiplied, and maintains its kind
with all diligence.

Here the question is asked: At what time of the year was the world
created, whether it was created in spring or in autumn? And one part
wants it to be created in spring, the other in autumn. Both have their
special thoughts on this. For those who say that it was created in
autumn prove it by the fact that the trees bore fruit, for Adam and Eve
ate the fruit of the trees. For further proof, they also use that which
follows in Cap. 2, 1. follows: God\'s works are perfect, or finished.
Others prefer to put the time of spring, because at this time the year
is most beautiful and, as it were, the first age of the world or youth.
Hence it is that the poets put the spring at the beginning of the world.

97 But no part of it has sufficient proof and cause for its pretense:
for from the text both these things are to be proved, namely, that the
earth sprouted and was planted, which indeed does not first happen in
the fall, but in the spring; and that fruits were present. Therefore we
say that this was a miracle of the first world, that all this happened
suddenly, and the earth was planted, the trees blossomed, and as soon as
the fruits followed. The same miracle then ceased: for all manner of
things, as they were then created, were afterwards further planted and
raised by the seed. Therefore they conclude and argue very badly from
the natural effect to the supernatural one. For this is to be ascribed
to the Creator and the first work of creation, that, as far as the trees
and fruits are concerned, this time, spring and autumn, have followed
each other nimbly.

98 And this was also the cause that moved Hilarius and others to believe
that the world had suddenly been completed, and that God had not used
the six natural days for the work of creation. For the text compels us
to confess that the trees with the fruit stood there on the day in which
Adam was created. And whether this is true sooner than it is now used to
be?

**46Explanation of Genesis 1:11-13. W. i, ss-es. 47**

(For now and almost half a year belongs to it): so the text says not
only of the bearing of fruit, but also of the coming up of the grass and
herbage.

\(99\) As for the previous question, it is very plausible that the time
in which the world began was the time of the spring: just as the Jews
begin their year and reckon the first moon in the spring, when the earth
opens and everything grows green.

100 Further it is also asked: When the barren trees and herbs were
created? Of this I will also state my opinion (although I can neither
discuss nor conclude anything certain). And hold it that at the
beginning all trees were good and fruitful, and the animals on earth had
the same food and food, and as it were a common table with Adam, and ate
grain, wheat and other noble fruits; so also all creatures were created
abundant and with great quantity and heaps.

After Adam sinned, it was first said to the earth that it should bear
thorns and thistles. Therefore there is no doubt that this is also a
punishment of sins, that we have so many trees and herbs that are of no
use for food and nourishment. And this is why some have called the whole
earth a paradise, because of the rich blessings of the first creation.
But the expulsion from paradise, they say, was that Adam was cast out of
the kingdom of the blessed earth among the thorns, because often much
and great labor is not worth the effort. But more will be said about
this later. But as far as this question is concerned, I like to think
that in the beginning all trees were created and were fruitful.

102 Some people are disconcerting, careful, and forward, who have also
disputed and asked here: why did God adorn the earth with fruit on the
third day before he adorned the heavens with stars? for this rather
belongs to the work of the sixth day, and rhymes better, that just as
the heavens began to be spread out before the earth was brought forth,
so it would be adorned before the earth.

But the ornament of the earth belongs more to the sixth day. And Lyra
makes a subtle difference, namely that this is not the ornament of the
earth, but a thing that belongs to its form. But whether this question
is thereby sufficiently solved, I am uncertain. But it seems to me, as I
also said before, to be much better and more correct that we do not look
at the order of such things as we understand them. For this purpose the
heavens were adorned with light, which was created on the first day and
is truly the most beautiful adornment of the whole creature.

\(103\) Therefore, it pleases me that in such a text we consider God\'s
kindness and care for us, that He prepares such a beautiful house for
man before he is created; so that afterward, when he is created, he
finds a prepared and prepared dwelling place, where he is led by God,
and is allowed and commanded to enjoy all the rich goods of such a great
and glorious house. On the third day, the kitchen and cellar are
prepared and stocked. On the fourth day the sun and the moon are given
to man for his use and service. On the fifth he is given dominion over
the fish and the birds. On the sixth, he is commanded and given dominion
over all animals, so that he may enjoy all such goods and use them
according to his need, all for nothing, solely so that he may recognize
God\'s goodness from this mild and abundant providence and live in the
fear of God. This care of God for us before we are created is considered
right and useful in this text, but the rest is useless and uncertain.

God also shows us such kindness and beneficence in spiritual gifts. For
before we are converted to faith, our Savior, Christ, is already up in
the Father\'s house, preparing a dwelling place for us; so that when we
come, we may find a heaven prepared with all kinds of joy and delight.
Therefore Adam, since he was not yet created, could think much less than
we of his future goods, since he was not yet; but we have certain
promises of them in God\'s Word. Therefore, we should regard the
occasion of the first world as a preliminary

**[48 L 1, 50-LL. Interpretation of Genesis 1, 11-13. 14. W. I, \"5-7V.
49]{.underline}**

image and figure of the world to come, and learn to recognize God\'s
goodness, that He blesses us and provides for us abundantly sooner than
we can think of or provide for ourselves. Such care, diligence,
gentleness and kindness of God we shall consider in this life as well as
in the next, and marvel at them; which are much better thoughts than
these, so that one may be troubled: why God did not begin to adorn the
earth until the third day. And so let this be enough of the work of the
third day, in which man\'s house is prepared and made ready. Now the
other days follow, in which we are also set up as masters of the whole
creature.

**Fourth Part.**

**Of the fourth day\'s work of God.**

I.

**V. 14. And God said, There shall be lights in the best part of heaven,
dividing day from night 2c.**

This is the work of the fourth day, in which these most beautiful
creatures, namely, the sun and the moon with the other stars, were not
only created by the Word into glorious and beautiful essential
creatures, but were also blessed by God with glorious power and effect.

106\. but you have heard above that on the first day the light was
created, which light has been until the fourth day instead of the sun,
moon and the other stars, until the fourth day the right founders and
lords of the day and night are created.

Therefore it is asked here about the same first light: Whether it
disappeared so soon after the sun and the moon were created, or whether
it remained with the sun? About this question many strange opinions and
thoughts have been found. But I simply hold that all the works of God
were made in the same way; and as on the first day a rough and unformed
heaven and a rough and unformed earth were created, and after that they
were built up and adorned, so

that the heavens would be spread out and adorned with light, but the
earth would be brought forth out of the water and adorned with trees and
plants: so I believe that the light, which began on the first day and
was created crudely and imperfectly, will be accomplished on the fourth
day, since new creatures, such as the sun, moon and stars, have been
created for it. Others say that this first light still exists and
remains, but is obscured by the clarity of the sun, as the moon and
stars are not seen during the day before the bright shine of the sun.
This can both be true, that the same first light remained, and yet was
the same as a seed and beginning of the sun and moon.

But Moses makes a difference and calls the sun and the moon the great
lights. Now it does not matter here that the astronomers argue about the
size of these lights. But this is important, that we notice how the
Scriptures call such bodies not by the size of their substance or
essence, but by the size and clarity of their light. For if the sun were
to be compared with the other stars, and the stars were all to be
counted as one light or body, it would indeed be a much larger body than
the sun is, but it would not be at all equal to the clarity and light of
the sun. Again, even if the sun were divided into small pieces, they
would still far surpass the stars in clarity: for these heavenly bodies
are created with a difference; as Paul says in 1 Cor. 15:41 that the sun
has a different clarity, the moon a different clarity, and the stars a
different clarity among themselves 2c. But this difference is not due to
these bodies or creatures, but to the creation, so that one should
marvel at this work all the more. As it is indeed to be wondered at,
that the rays of the sun should spread out so far and wide, with so
great a rapidity of their course, item, with so great a power to warm
and resound all the other bodies that are subject to it.

The astronomers also say that the stars are lit by the sun, that they
shine. So they also say that the moon

**[50 L-1, ss-64. Interpretation of Genesis 1:14-19. W. i, 70-72.
51]{.underline}**

I have its light and shine from the sun. And this will be proved during
the eclipses of the moon, when the earth comes between the sun and the
moon, and does not let the light of the sun reach the moon. All this I
do not deny, nor do I reject it: but I hold that this is a divine power,
that the sun is created with such an excellent clarity that it also
illuminates and lights the moon and the stars with its light; item, that
the moon and the stars are created in such a way that they can grasp and
comprehend the light given to them by the sun.

In the beginning of the 12th Psalm, Augustine tells two thoughts about
the moon and wants to force a secret interpretation on the church from
it, although he does not conclude anything certain. But I leave it at
that. For with the astronomers, as with masters of this art, one finds
best of all what is to be discussed about these things. I am content
with the fact that we recognize God\'s goodness and power from such
marvelous creatures, which are useful for our life, that he created such
things through the Word and still maintains and governs them daily for
our service and benefit. This belongs to our profession and is a
theological thing, and also has its power to comfort and reassure the
heart.

\(111\) Whatever else is said about the nature and properties of these
creatures, even though it is not inappropriate to the truth for the most
part, and is learned with benefit, I still see that reason is much too
weak to recognize such things thoroughly and completely. Therefore, high
and understanding people, for whom the excellence of such things was too
much and too high, could not conclude otherwise than that they were
eternal creatures and, as it were, gods.

Now that the philosophers define a star as a dense point within its
circumference, we can much more truly and surely define a star as a
light, created by God through the Word. And it is more similar to the
truth that the bodies of the stars are round like the sun, and are
attached to the firmament like spheres, that each one should shine at
night according to its gift and creation.

**And be to signs, times, days and years 2c.**

\(113\) Moses\' addition of the words \"and separate the day from the
night\" indicates the difference, which is also common among
astronomers, between natural and artificial, that is, between the day as
it is naturally reckoned of four and twenty hours, or of day and night
at the same time, and the day alone without the night. For when he says
above (v. 5): Let evening and morning become one day, he is speaking of
the natural day, which has four and twenty hours, in which the first
moving light runs around from going out to going down. But here, when he
says: that they separate day and night, he speaks of the day, as we
commonly count it, without the night, as long as the sun is to be seen
above the earth.

II\.

\(114\) Therefore this is the first office of the sun and moon, that
they should be as lords and stewards of the day and the night, and the
stars do nothing for this work; but when the sun rises, it brings the
day without the help of the other stars that rise with it. Thus the moon
is a steward of the night and brings the night: for to this end it was
created by God\'s counsel and wisdom. But that the night and the day
change and change is for the sake of men and animals, that they may have
their rest and be refreshed thereby. For the sun shines and is luminous,
that men may work and labor; but the moon is darker in light, and
therefore more convenient for sleep and rest, than for labor.

115 But what is this that he saith, They are for signs? Lyra interprets
that they are signs of rain and thunderstorms. I do not particularly
object to this, although I am in doubt as to whether rain and
thunderstorms can so certainly be noticed and indicated beforehand, as
Virgilius and others write. The Gospel uses Matth. 16, 2. Luc. 12, 54.
as a sign of rain, when the sky is red and cloudy in the evening; but
again the bright evening as a sign of beautiful weather. That they
therefore say that the exit of the seven-pointed star means rain and the
like, I do not particularly object to, but I want it to be true.

**52L .i, \"4-\". Interpretation of I Genesis 1:14-19. W.i. is-rs. 53**

I do not believe it to be certain and true, because I see that it is not
so certain everywhere.

But this, I think, is the simple mind of this text, that it does not
speak of such small signs, but of other signs, which are great and
perceptible, such as the eclipses and great conjunctions (unions of
several stars); that a sign is so much as a miraculous sign or miracle,
by which God reveals and indicates either his wrath or misfortune to the
world. Now, if anyone thinks this interpretation too coarse and simple,
let him remember that Moses was a teacher for an incomprehensible and
coarse people.

\(117\) Here belong all kinds of fire signs and strange things that
happen in the air: as when one sees stars falling, or that a court
gathers around the moon or sun, rainbows are seen, and the like. For
Moses calls heaven the whole watery corpus or building in which the
heavenly bodies and planets have their course, also the upper part of
the air. For the speech of the spheres or circles was invented
afterwards to make the matter clearer. For the Scriptures know nothing
of this, and say that among these creatures, the sun, moon, and stars,
not each has its own particular sphere, but is attached and set in the
firmament (under and above which are the waters of the heavens), that
they are signs of things to come; as experience teaches of the eclipses,
great conjunctions, and some other signs of the air.

\(118\) But the word times (lemoadim) is to be respected. For moed means
an immovable and certain time. Therefore this is the common name for the
tabernacle in the Bible, that there, at a certain place and time,
certain celebrations and ceremonies were held. Thus, says Moses, the sun
and the moon were arranged in times. But not only because the times are
noticeably governed and changed by the sun; as we see that the things
here below on earth have changes after the sun has come near to them or
far from them (for the air at every time of the year, as winter, summer,
autumn, and spring, is differently arranged and shaped, according to
which then also the sun and the moon have a different time).

(We do not feel changes in our bodies), but that we also use other
differences and characteristics of the times in this life, which are
taken from the movements and the course of these heavenly creatures.
Thus, at certain times of the year, houses are rented, servants are
hired, interest and income are collected 2c. All these are services
rendered to us by the sun and the moon, so that we can divide and
distinguish the times according to work and other opportunities and
conveniences. Thus we count weeks, moons, quarters or soft fasts, as
they are called, and the like.

119\. that follows: \"and days\" means the natural day when the sun has
once gone around the earth. Therefore, that we count days and years is
God\'s benevolence and gracious order. Therefore also the time, which
the philosophers call numerationem motus, that is, a counting of the
course of heaven. For such a number and calculation could not be had if
the upper heavenly bodies did not move in a certain way and order, but
stood still. But where there is no number, there is no time; as one who
has fallen asleep, when he awakes, does not know how long he has slept,
because counting has ceased.

Thus we can remember our childhood to some extent, but we do not know
that we sucked our mother\'s breasts, since we already had life at that
time: the cause is that there was a lack of counting. And from this also
comes that the unreasonable animals know nothing of time, as also the
small children do not. Therefore number indicates that man is a special
creature of God; as we see that Augustine gladly praises and extols this
gift or endowment of nature, and proves from it that the soul is
immortal. For man alone reckons and understands time.

Here one asks about the life to come: Whether also such services of the
heavenly bodies will cease? But this is an unnecessary question; for
that life will be without time, the pious will have an eternal day, the
wicked an eternal night and darkness 2c.

**54 D. i, 56-56. Interpretation of Genesis 1:14-19. W. i, 75-78. 55**

So the sun creates the day not only with its light and clarity, but also
with its movement, by which it runs from going out to going down, until
it rises again after 24 hours, and thus makes another day. Therefore the
astronomers also tell three useful effects of the sun, namely an
influence, movement and light.

\(123\) Of influence I will not make much subtle disputation here; for I
am content that I know that these heavenly bodies are created for our
use and good, that they are signs to us either of the wrath or of the
grace of God; and at times, that we notice in them certain differences
of the times (2c). Such things, because they are grounded in Scripture,
are certain; but the others, though they stand on experience, yet
because at times the same is also deceptive, are not so certain.

But here one is used to ask about the astrological prophecies, which
some want to confirm and prove from this text. If someone did not defend
them so stiffly and firmly, I would not want to fight against them. For
one must let learned minds have their pleasure and amusement at times.
Therefore, if one leaves the abuses and superstitions of it, it should
not particularly annoy me if someone, for the sake of pleasure, wanted
to practice such fortune-telling.

Nevertheless, as far as trade is concerned, I will never be persuaded
that astrology should be counted among the sciences, for the reason that
it has no apparent proof. For the fact that they draw on experience is
of no concern to me; for all astrological experiences are mere
individual perceptions; and those who have been experienced in the art
have observed and written down only those which have not failed; but the
others, in which they have failed and the effect has not followed, of
which they have said that it should certainly follow, they have not
recorded. But just as Aristotle says that a swallow alone does not make
summer, so, I think, one can make a complete and correct art from such
individual perceptions. And as the hunter\'s saying is, one can hunt
every day, but the hunt turns out

not every day: so one would like to say also just that of the
astrologers and their prophecies; because they are missing to the
frequent.

But since they contain something certain, what foolishness is it that
one is so anxious and worried about future things? For if one could know
future things through astrological prophecies, would it not be better in
many ways, if they are evil, that one should not know them at all than
that one should know them? For this it is far better that one should
always keep in the fear of God and pray, than that one should fear and
be troubled with the fear of things to come. But of that another time.

I now consider that the astrological prophecies cannot so certainly be
based on this text, for they are signs which reason observes and brings
together. But the next and actual reason is this, that we understand,
Moses speaks of the signs, which God instructs and shows, that the
people are either admonished or frightened by it in general. And this
shall be enough of the fourth day.

But here the immortality of the soul is shown and demonstrated, since no
creature but man can understand the course of heaven, or measure and
comprehend the heavenly bodies. A sow, cow or dog cannot judge or
measure the water they drink, but a man judges and measures heaven and
all heavenly bodies.

Therefore, there is a glimmer of eternal life here, that man by nature
must practice contemplation and knowledge of such things. And this
concern indicates that people are not created to live in the lowest
place of the world all the time, but that they should finally possess
heaven, which they look upon with wonder in this life and practice and
study in the contemplation and concern of heavenly things.

130\. and if this were not the case, what would it have served, or what
would it have been necessary, that God would have let man know such
things so abundantly, to which of his

**[56 2. 1, ss-so. Interpretation of Genesis 1, 14-19. W. 1, 7S-S1.
57]{.underline}**

How does the form and proportion of his own body testify that he belongs
to the heavenly things, although his arrival is very weak, poor and
miserable? For the first man was made from an earthen vessel, after
which the human race began to be begotten and multiplied from the seed
of man and woman. Therefore, the embryo is gradually formed in the womb
according to all limbs, and grows until it is brought to the day and to
this light of heaven through birth. Only then does it begin to feel, act
and move.

131\. But when after all this the body has come to its power and
strength, and in a healthy body reason and wit go in their exercise,
then only the intelligent life appears, which is not in other earthly
creatures; Thus, through the help of the mathematical arts, of which no
one can speak except that God has revealed and ordained them, man rises
from the earth with his mind and thoughts to the heights, subdues
earthly things, and investigates and contemplates heavenly ones. This is
not done by cows, sows or other animals, but by man alone. That is why
man is a creature, created to finally leave the earth and live in heaven
in an eternal being. For that is where he comes from, not only to speak
and judge (which concerns dialectics and rhetoric), but also to learn
the whole doctrine of the course of the heavens, the movement of the
stars, and what more human reason can comprehend of the high and secret
things.

For this reason, from this third day on, our glory is revealed, that God
now intends and intends to create such a creature that can recognize and
understand the movement of these heavenly bodies, which will also be
created on the fourth day, and that delights in such knowledge, as its
nature is especially inclined to, and it is its duty to know. But all
these things shall provoke and awaken us to thanksgiving, that we belong
as citizens to this fatherland, which we now look upon and understand
with wonder, but as strangers and exiles; for after the

In the next life, we will look at such things more closely and fully
understand them.

So far we have heard of creatures that neither live nor feel, although
some philosophers have spoken of the stars and heavenly bodies as living
and understanding creatures. But I think that this was done because of
their proper and certain movement, which is not the case in the other
creatures. For this reason they said that they were created with a body
and an understanding, and yet their body or being had nothing
elementary. In this way Plato disputes in the Timaeus.

But such opinions and thoughts are to be rejected altogether, and our
understanding is to be applied and directed to God\'s Word and the Holy
Scriptures, which clearly teach that God created all these things for
the purpose of preparing them as a gift and shelter for the future man,
and that all these things are governed and upheld by the power of the
Word by which they were created. For this reason, now that everything
that belongs to this building and Hanseatic League has been created, man
will finally be led into it and placed in it as his possession. That we
may learn that divine providence is much greater for us than all our
care and effort. This understanding is given to you by the holy
Scriptures, therefore everything else that is put forward without
Scripture is to be rejected and despised.

Here, however, I must repeat the teaching that I have thought of several
times above, namely, that one must be accustomed to speak in the manner
and form that the Holy Spirit leads; just as no one can study other arts
fruitfully unless he has learned their language and manner of speaking
correctly. Thus the lawyers have their terms and peculiar ways, of which
a physician and philosopher know nothing. Again, they also have their
own language, which is unknown to other arts and professions. Now one
art shall not hinder the other, but each shall keep (thus to speak) its
course and need its own expressions.

136 Therefore, we see that in this way the Holy Spirit also has His
language and His power.

**[58 \" i.\" \"i. Interpretation of Genesis 1:14-19. 20. W. i, si-w.
59]{.underline}**

The Holy Spirit has a special way of speaking, namely, that God created
everything and worked through the Word, and that all His works are words
of God, created through His uncreated Word. Now, just as a philosopher
uses his special expressions, so also the Holy Spirit has his special
expressions. And that an astronomer has his so-called spheres, eyes,
epicycles 2c., in this he does right, is also granted to do in his art,
so that he can teach all the more correctly and comfortably. Again, the
Holy Spirit and the Holy Scriptures know nothing of such designations or
words, but call the whole heavenly edifice that is above us heaven,
which an astronomer should neither master nor reprove, but should have
his own expressions, and let the Scriptures speak after their kind.

137 The word time should be understood in this way, for a Hebrew has a
different time than a philosopher, and the word time also means a
different thing to him than to a philosopher. A Hebrew calls theological
time orderly and definite festivals; item, the days as they follow one
another and close a year. So that this word time is almost everywhere
given by the word feast or celebration, without it being said of the
tabernacle or tabernacles. This is what I wanted to say before we
continue, and I do not consider it a useless doctrine and rule that each
art should use its own words and way of speaking, and that none should
therefore reject or ridicule the other, but rather that one should help
and serve the other. As the master craftsmen do, so that a whole
community or city may be preserved, which must not (as Aristotle says)
have all physicians, but physicians and agriculturists, that is, various
crafts.

**Fifth part.**

**Of the fifth day\'s work of God.**

I.

**V. 20. And God said, Let the waters be filled with beasts of the air,
and with living creatures, and with fowl 2c.**

We see that Moses keeps his way of speaking firm and constant in the
word \"speak\". So far he has described the upper creatures, as the
heavens with the whole host of planets and other stars, which God
brought forth from the water by the Word and gave light to; as we see
that this air is bright and clear by a natural light. Now Moses goes on
to say about a new creature, also made and brought forth out of water,
namely the birds and fishes.

139\. but he puts these two kinds (birds and fish) together so that they
are not unlike each other in nature and quality. For as a fish swims in
the water, so a bird flies in the air. And although both kinds do not
have the same flesh and substance, they nevertheless have the same
origin; as the text clearly reports that the birds were first drawn out
of the water and created, and then rose and moved into the pleasure in
which they live. Moses, however, sticks to his way of speaking and calls
heaven everything that is above.

First of all, it is to be wondered at that, although birds and fish are
made of the same matter, a bird cannot live in water, just as a fish
cannot remain or last in pleasure. And physicians rightly argue that the
flesh of birds is healthier than that of fish (although birds are also
of a watery nature), because birds live in thinner air, of which the
waters in which fish are born and live are, as it were, thicker yeasts.
But the philosophers do not believe this. But we should give more
credence to the holy scripture, which says that both creatures, birds
and fish, have the same origin.

Therefore this first book of Moses is to be praised as a mighty and
excellent book, because it shows us God\'s power and authority in so
many ways, so that he created all things, far above all human reason and
understanding. For who would think that such a creature would be created
from water, so that water could not suffer at all? Now God speaks only
one word and immediately birds come out of the water.

**60L . i, \"i-ss. Interpretation of Genesis I, 2V. W. i, ss-87. 61**

before. Therefore, when the word is given, everything that is
unbelievable to reason becomes possible, so that water becomes either
fish or birds. And so every bird, every fish is nothing else than a word
or name in God\'s grammar; by which grammar what seems and is impossible
becomes very easy, and what is contrary to each other becomes equal and
united among themselves; and so in the opposite.

But such things are described and should be diligently learned and
known, so that we may learn to marvel at the power of the divine majesty
and build and strengthen our faith from such miraculous works. Even if
someone could raise the dead, it would be nothing compared to this
miraculous work, that a bird is made of water. For this reason, however,
we marvel little at such works, because they are so common and have lost
their wonder through daily use. But whoever believes them and looks at
them a little more diligently must be amazed at them, and this amazement
gradually strengthens faith. For since God can build and bring forth the
heavens and stars from water, each of which is equal to or greater than
the earth in size; item, since He can create the sun and the moon from a
drop of water, should He not be able to either protect my body against
the enemies and the devil or, if it is buried in the earth, revive it to
a new life? Therefore we should learn from this to recognize God\'s
almighty power and authority, and not at all doubt what God has promised
in His Word. For here is established a full confirmation of all divine
promises, namely that nothing is either so difficult or impossible that
God cannot accomplish with His word; as this is testified and proven by
heaven, earth, sea and all that is in them.

But here I must also recently indicate that the holy fathers, and
especially Augustine, have noticed that Moses especially uses the three
words: God spoke, created, saw; as if he wanted to indicate the three
persons of the divine majesty.

By the word \"spoke\" the Father is meant: he begets a word in eternity,
and in time he founds and creates this world by this word. Therefore
they pointed to the person of the Son and drew the word \"created\". For
the Son has in himself an image not only of the divine majesty, but also
of all other creatures. Therefore he gives the things their nature. And
just as the creatures are named by the Father, so they are and exist
through the Son and this Word of the Father. In addition, there is the
third person, the Holy Spirit, who \"sees\" all created things and makes
them pleasing to him.

144 These things are finely said and conveniently applied to the
persons, so that the article of the Holy Trinity may be more clearly
understood. For the holy fathers had this certain cause, that they
devised such things with devotion, so that the article, which is
incomprehensible in itself, might be understood to some extent.
Therefore I do not reprove nor reject such thoughts, because they are
according to the faith, also convenient and useful to strengthen and
teach the faith from it.

In this way, Hilarius makes a distinction with other attributes. In the
Father, he says, is eternity, but the form is in the image, and the use
in the gift. He says that the Holy Spirit is a gift in use, because he
gives the creatures their use, so that they do not perish; also governs
and sustains them. So also they say, The Father is the mind, the Son the
understanding, the Holy Spirit the will; not that the Father is without
the understanding, or the Son without the will, but that such words are
distinct, and are not of one kind, but of several persons; not that the
Father is without wisdom and understanding, but that we prefigure such
things, to preserve and declare the article of the Trinity.

Therefore, when the text says: \"And God saw that it was all very
good,\" it means the preservation of all creatures. For the creature
could not stand nor remain, if the Holy Spirit did not love it and this
good pleasure of God in it.

**62 k. i,\"\"-\" Interpretation of Genesis 1:20. 21. W. i, 87-s.\" 63**

He would not receive them by his work. For God did not create the
creatures in such a way that he would abandon them after creation, but
he loves them and makes them pleasing to him; therefore he is with them,
moves, agitates and sustains each one according to his own way. I have
recently touched on this, because such holy thoughts of those who have
just gone before us in the work we are now engaged in are well worth
knowing.

The Jerome interprets: Reptile animae viventis, weaving and living
animals, is called naephaesch in Hebrew, and means a soul or something
living. But with it Moses means the fish. Because that the birds live at
the same time from the earth and in the air, one knows.

**II.**

**V. 21. And God created great whale fishes.**

Here someone might be concerned and ask: Why does Moses only name the
whale fishes? as the scripture almost only remembers the big fishes, as
it is written about Leviathan and dragon in the book of Job (Cap. 40.
and 41.) and other places of the scripture. But it is certain that Moses
calls all kinds of large and coarse fish in the sea, as Balaenas, among
which some have wings, as the [dolphin, which is]{.underline} like a
king in the sea; not that it surpasses the others in size, for even the
eagle, which is a king among the birds, and the lion, a king of the
four-footed animals, are not the largest. But I believe that the reason
why the largest animals are mentioned in the Scriptures is that we
should know that such large animals are the work of God, and not be
afraid of them or think that they are ghosts.

And therefore it is easy to assume that because God created such large
fish, that even the smaller ones, such as sea ravens, trout, pike and
others, were created by Him. Whoever wants to, should read the 41st
chapter of Job, in which it can be seen sufficiently how the Holy
Spirit, through the same poet, praised the wonderful monster, the
Leviathan, which is so strong and defiant that it even despises the
arrows. Such description

These trials open our eyes and build our faith, so that we may believe
God all the more easily, that He can sustain us even though we are much
smaller and lesser creatures.

Here it is also asked: Where do the mice and rats come from, and how are
they produced? because we have from experience that even the ships,
which are always in the water, are not safe from mice; so also no house
can be cleaned and purified in such a way, that mice do not hedge in it.
So one can also ask: from where the flies grow; item, where the birds
come in the fall 2c.

151 But of mice Aristotle disputes thus: that some animals are begotten
by their own kind, but some by others, like the mice, which are not only
bred by mice, but also grow from the rottenness, which consumes itself
and becomes a mouse. If you now ask from what force such breeding
occurs, Aristotle answers that the same rotten moisture is warmed by the
sun, and thus comes out a living animal: as we see that horse beetles
grow from horse dung 2c. But whether this cause is sufficient, I still
doubt. For although the sun warms, it could not beget anything if God
did not say by divine power that a mouse should grow from the rot.

Therefore, the mouse is also a creature of God and, as I consider it, of
a watery nature and, as it were, an earthly bird; otherwise it would
have an enormous shape and the species would not be preserved. According
to its kind it has a beautiful shape, the feet so fine and the hairs so
smooth that it seems that it must have been actually created by God\'s
word. Therefore, we are also astonished about this creature and work of
God. One would like to say the same about the flies.

But I do not know much about the birds, where they go in winter. For it
is not credible that they migrate to the warm countries after noon,
since this miracle of the swallows is known from experience, that they
lie in the water during the winter, as if they were dead, and come to
life again in spring. This is a great proof of our resurrection. Dar-

**64 L. i, se-\". Interpretation of Genesis 1:21-23. sv. i, so-v3. 65**

so I consider that they are preserved either in trees or in waters. For
these are quite wonderful works of divine majesty, which we also do not
understand, since we already see them. I also believe that, although at
times a species perishes (which I do not believe), God creates and
restores it.

The creation and work of the fifth day includes all kinds of animals,
creeping, crawling, flying, and what otherwise moves in the air or in
the water.

III\.

**And God saw that it was good and blessed them.**

How is it that God does not use the word \"bless\" for the other
creatures that do not have life? For there he says that he considers
them good, but does not bless them. But since he comes to the creation
of the living things, he raises a new way to increase them. Therefore
the sun and the stars, as we see, do not of themselves beget things like
them; but the herbs and trees have this blessing, that they grow,
multiply, and bring forth fruit. Yet this is not at all like the
blessing that God pronounces on living animals.

Therefore, by this word \"bless,\" Moses separates the creatures and
things created above from the living bodies created on the fifth day,
and says here of a new way of begetting and multiplying. For from one
living body spring other such living bodies; which indeed does not
happen in trees or herbs. For where these are not set or planted again,
they bear no fruit; nor does one seed grow badly from another, but from
the herb. But here there is a cultivation and breeding from living
creatures to others of the same kind, which also live? Therefore this is
a new work, that a living body grows and is multiplied from itself. That
which a pear tree beareth is not another pear tree, but a pear; but that
which a bird beareth is a bird, and that which a fish beareth is a fish.
And there is indeed a marvelous abundant increase and un

The fertility of both species, but especially of animals in the sea and
water.

157 How does this miraculous breeding and multiplication take place? A
hen lays an egg, which she warms until it becomes a living creature,
which she then hatches. The philosophers give this cause, and say that
it happens through the effect of the sun and the body of the hen, I
admit that. But the theologians speak of it more truly, and say that it
happens through the effect of the word that is spoken here: God blessed
them and said: Grow and multiply. This word works through the hen\'s
body and through all animals: so also the heat of the hen, so that she
warms the eggs, is from God\'s word, which would be a useless and
ineffective heat if it were without God\'s word.

Therefore, for the sake of this wonderful creature, God also adds the
blessing that they be fruitful creatures. And here we can see what
blessing actually means, namely an increase. When we bless, we do
nothing more than desire good, but we cannot give what we desire; but
God\'s blessing sounds a multiplication, and is immediately powerful,
just as His curse is a reduction and is also immediately powerful.

But here we must pay attention to the way Moses speaks. For he calls
blessing that which the philosophers call fruitfulness, namely, when
whole, perfect, and living bodies are begotten of whole and living
bodies: the like of which is not found in trees. For a tree begets not
another tree like it, but the seed it begets 2c. This is a great
miracle, but like all the others, because it is seen and experienced
daily, it is held in low esteem.

160 Here the question continues about the harmful worms and animals, as
there are toads, flies, flying yellow and white cutworms, and the like,
in which there is a wonderful fertility; and it almost goes like this,
that the more harmful any species is, the more fertile it is. But this
question shall be saved until the third chapter. For I believe that at
that time such pernicious and harmful creatures did not yet exist, but
were found afterwards.

**[66 s. i, ss-7o. Interpretation of Genesis 1:23-25. W. i, \"s-ioo.
67]{.underline}**

from the cursed earth, as a punishment for sin, that they should afflict
us and drive us to invoke God. But of this in another place.

161 Thus we have what living bodies were created on the fifth day. But
we see that the word spoken on that day is still going strong all the
days. Fish are badly begotten of water: for ponds and lakes give birth
to fish; as we often see that pikes are found in ponds where there were
none before. For I am not persuaded, nor is it credible, that some
fantasize, that the fish, when caught by birds and led into the air, let
seed from the heights into the ponds and lakes, which then grows
together in the water; but this alone is the true cause, that here the
water is commanded to bear fish. This word is still powerful, works and
creates such things.

**Sixth part.**

**Of the sixth day\'s work of God.**

I.

**V. 24. And God said, Let the earth bring forth living creatures, every
one after his kind 2c.**

We have now the sky with all its host, sun, moon, stars, 2c., item, the
sea with the fishes and birds. For as the fish swim in the water, so the
birds float and soar in the air. So also the earth has received its
adornment, as fruits, trees, herbs 2c. But now, before man is introduced
and placed in this great building, all kinds of animals, cattle and
worms are first created into it; after them man is also created. He was
not created to fly with the birds or to swim with the fish, but to live
according to the common nature of the earth, like other animals. For the
use of navigation is not natural, but invented by man\'s art and
agility, so that man may want to imitate fish and birds. For a ship does
both of these things; it flies in

of desire, and swims in the water. But we are talking about natural
things here, not artificial things.

The Hebrews make a distinction among these names of the animals; they
call the cattle, item, the small animals in the woods, as there are
deer, roe deer, hares, and what other animals have the food in common
with us, and eat herbs and fruits of trees. But Chajetho aeraez (which
is properly translated: animals of the earth), they say, are called wild
animals that eat meat, as there are wolves, lions, bears 2c. But whether
this distinction is held to be true, I do not know, nor do I think so.
But it is certain that Moses here wanted to summarize all animals on
earth, they eat the same meat or herbs. This mother of all, he says, is
the earth, which she brought out of herself by the word, as the sea
brings out the fish.

We have just heard (v. 20) that God said to the waters: Let the waters
be stirred up, 2c. so that by this stirring up the sea would be full of
fish, and the pleasure would be full of birds, and only after this (v.
22) did the blessing come that they should multiply and breed. But here,
speaking of the animals of the earth, he uses another word: \"Let the
earth bring forth. He does not say, \"Beget,\" for the earth is a
resting body. Therefore he also says on the fourth day: \"Let the earth
bring forth grass and herbs\"; because he wants it to bring forth
animals and herbs from itself, without rain or movement.

Although the Scripture does not discuss, nor does it actually state,
whether these animals, like man, were created from an earthen lump, or
suddenly came out of the earth, yet, because Moses praises and describes
the creation of man with special counsel and concern, I believe that the
animals of the land were there immediately at the word of God, just as
the fish suddenly became in the sea. But that he does not add the
blessing here is clear, because afterwards he understands it under the
blessing, which God gave to men. So also here it has been enough to say
this much: \"God saw it, and it was very good.\" Now let us continue

**68 \" i. Tv-72. interpretation of I Genesis 1:24-26. W. i. ivo-io\".
69**

and come to the last and most beautiful work of God, namely the creation
of man.

II\.

**V. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness.**

Here Moses again uses a new way of speaking, and does not say: the sea
is stirring up; or: the earth is bringing forth 2c., but: let us make.
Therefore, he clearly includes a counsel and concern, the like of which
he did not do in the previous creatures. For there he said without
counsel and hesitation: the sea stirred up; the earth brought forth 2c.
Here, however, God consults Himself and, as it were, gives counsel,
since He wants to create man.

Therefore, first of all, a special difference is shown here, which man
has before all other creatures. Animals have many things in common with
humans. They live around and with us, are raised by us, eat the same
food as we do, sleep and rest with us. If you now look at their company,
food and food, then there is a great resemblance.

But Moses makes and shows a special difference between these animals and
man, since he says that man was created with the special counsel and
providence of God. He therefore indicates that man is such a creature
that far surpasses all other animals that have a natural life,
especially since nature was still uncorrupted. Epicurus holds that man
was created solely for eating and drinking, which does not mean to
separate and separate man from other animals, which also have their lust
and pursue it. But the text here sets man apart greatly, because it says
that God took special thought to create man, and not only that, but also
to make him in his own image. Which image is a far different thing than
the belly care, eating and drinking, which the unreasonable animals also
understand and seek.

For this reason Moses wanted to indicate in a spiritual way that we
should go to a higher and more spiritual place.

The teachers here say that if Adam had not fallen through sin, then God
would have taken people from this temporal and bodily life to a
spiritual and eternal life, even if the nature had remained uncorrupted
and perfect. And the teachers here say rightly: if Adam had not fallen
through sin, then God would have transferred the people, when a certain
number of the saints had been completed, from this bodily life into a
spiritual and eternal one. For Adam was not to live without eating,
drinking, and begetting children; but these bodily things would have
ceased at a certain time, after the number of saints had been fulfilled,
and Adam would have been taken up with his descendants into an eternal
and spiritual life. But these works of bodily life, as eating, drinking,
begetting children 2c., would have been a service so pleasing to God;
which service we would also have rendered Him without the sinful lust
that is now in us after sin, without all sin and fear of death. Such
would truly have been a lovely and joyful life: of which we have indeed
something in our thoughts, but cannot come to it in this life. But we
have this, that we believe such a spiritual life, for which we were
created in the first place and which was intended for us in paradise and
decreed by God, after this life, we certainly comfort ourselves and
expect it in hope, for the sake of the merit of Christ.

For this reason, this text, in which the Holy Spirit so magnificently
adorns human nature and sets it apart from all other creatures, should
be well remembered. The bodily life would have been the same as the life
of animals, for just as they need food, drink and rest for the
refreshment of their bodies, so Adam in his innocence would also have
needed them. But the fact that it is said that man was created for a
bodily life, and yet was made in the image and likeness of God, means a
different and better life than the bodily.

So Adam had two kinds of life, a bodily and an immortal, but not yet
discovered and revealed, but in hope. However, he would have eaten,
drunk, worked, begotten children 2c. This I wanted to briefly indicate
the difference that God makes through His counsel,

**70 L. 1. 72-74. Interpretation of Genesis 1:26. W.r, 102-405. 71**

so that he would separate us from other animals with whom he would let
us live. After this, we will repeat this in greater detail.

The second is the word: \"Let us, in confirmation of the mystery of our
faith, believe and confess one God from eternity, and three distinct
persons in one divine being, namely God the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit. The Jews try in many ways to escape from this text, but they do
not make a good case against it: for this text troubles them and
troubles them to the death, as Occam says, who says this about all
unfunny and disastrous dealings that he cannot resolve.

The Jews say here that God speaks in this way with the angels, with the
earth and with other creatures. But against this I ask, first, why he
did not do this before? Secondly, what business is it of the angels how
men are created? Thirdly, he does not call any angels, but says badly:
we; therefore he speaks of the makers and creators, which truly cannot
be said of the angels. Fourthly, it is also certain that we can by no
means be said to be created in the image of angels. Fifth, both words
are put here, in both numerals: Let us make, and: God created. Therefore
Moses shows us clearly and powerfully that in the one divine being,
which created everything, there is nevertheless an inseparable and
eternal majority of persons. Even the gates of hell shall not take this
away from us.

What the Jews then say about the earth, that God speaks with it, is also
worthless. For the earth is not our creator. Or, rather, why should he
not speak to the sun in this way? As Aristotle says, that through the
action of man and the sun another man is begotten. But this does not
rhyme here either, since we are not created in the image of the earth,
but in the image of the creators, who say: Let us make. These Creators
are three distinct Persons in One Divine Being, and in the image of
these three Persons are we; as we shall hereafter hear.

This is especially ridiculous that the Jews pretend that God keeps the
habit of great lords and princes, who speak of themselves in the plural
for the sake of honor and reverence. The Holy Spirit does not follow
such a chancery politeness (that I call it so); so also the holy
scripture does not recognize this way of speaking.

Therefore, the Holy Trinity is certainly indicated here, that in One
Divine Being there are three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, so
that God cannot be actively (that is, as far as the essential works,
which are in charge of the whole Godhead at the same time, are
concerned) separated or divided from each other. For all three persons
come together here and say: Let us make. Thus the Father does not make
another man than the Son, nor the Son another than the Holy Spirit; but
the same one God, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, is a creator and maker of
this very work.

In this way, God cannot be separated objectively (that is, as far as the
revelation to the human race is concerned): for the Father is not known
otherwise than in the Son and through the Holy Spirit. Therefore, it is
One God, active and objective, who is nevertheless essential in himself,
God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, three distinct Persons in
One Divine Being.

Such testimonies shall be dear and pleasant to us. And whether both we,
Jews and Turks, laugh and mock that we believe that there is one God and
three persons, they will nevertheless, from the testimony of this text
and others that we have mentioned above, have to follow our opinion and
faith, unless they want to brazenly deny the testimony and authority of
the whole Scripture. They may mockingly reject this, as the Jews
masterfully do, but nevertheless this sting remains in their hearts, why
God says: Let us make; item, why Moses speaks in the plural: Elohim.
They cannot let such thoughts out of their hearts, even though they can
try many things. But if it would be wisdom to hold such testimonies in
derision, we could also

**72 L. i, 74-78. Interpretation of I Genesis 1, 26. -rs. i, ios-ios.
73**

be so skillful and do such things. But we think much more highly of the
Scriptures, and let them be much more important to us, especially
because the New Testament clearly reports this, and the Son, who is in
the bosom of the Father, teaches us this very thing more clearly and
distinctly; and whoever does not believe this blasphemes God and
deserves eternal death. Therefore, let these blinded falsifiers of the
Holy Scriptures be put away until their final judgment and sentence.

But here one would say that these testimonies are too obscure to prove
such a great article. Answer: At that time, such great and important
things had to be presented and said so obscurely, at least for the
reason that all these things were referred to the future Lord, which
future was reserved for the restoration of all things, as well as all
knowledge and revelation. For this reason, what had previously been
obscure, difficult, and, as it were, mysterious, Christ discovered all
this and preached it clearly. Nevertheless, the holy fathers had this
knowledge through the Holy Spirit, though not as clearly as now, when we
hear that in the New Testament God is clearly called Father, Son and
Holy Spirit. For when Christ came, such seals had to be opened and
clearly preached, what before had been given in dark words, just for the
sake of the honor and reverence of the future Master. And where the Holy
Spirit would not have brought this clear knowledge to the New Testament,
the Arians would have been found far before the birth of Christ. Only at
the last time of the world did the Holy Spirit want to place this bright
sun and clarity of the knowledge of God in front of the devil\'s nose,
so that his eyes would be blinded and he would be tormented and plagued
all the more out of envy of such clear knowledge revealed to men by God.

Thirdly, questions arise here with great abundance: What is the image of
God, according to which man, as Moses writes, was created? And in
explaining this place, Augustine makes a lot of words, especially in the
book of the Holy Trinity. The other teachers follow almost Augu

stin\'s opinion, which maintains Aristotle\'s division, namely, that
God\'s image are the powers of the soul, memory, sense or understanding,
and the will. In these three powers, they say, consists the image of
God, which is in all men. For as in the divine being, they say, the Word
is begotten of the Father\'s being, and the Holy Spirit is the Father\'s
good pleasure: so in man the Word of the heart, which is the sense or
understanding, proceeds from the memory, and after this proceeds the
will, which beholds the sense of the heart and takes delight and
pleasure in it.

But the equality, they say, is in the gift of grace. For as likeness is
a perfection of the image, so, they say, nature is made perfect by
grace. And let this be the likeness of God, that memory is adorned with
hope, sensuality or understanding with faith, and the will with love. In
this way, they say, man is made in God\'s image, that is, man has sense,
memory and will. Likewise: Man is created in the likeness of God; that
is, the mind is enlightened by faith; the memory is assured and
strengthened by hope and constancy; but the will is adorned by love.

Fourth, they also make other divisions: the memory, they say, is an
image of God\'s power; the mind or understanding, an image of divine
wisdom; and the will, an image of justice 2c. Thus Augustine in
particular, and others after him, endeavored to conceive of various
trinities in man. For in this way, they thought, one could see the image
of God all the more easily. But as such not-so-ineffable speculations
indicate sharp and idle minds, they serve and do least of all to enable
one to understand and portray the image of God correctly.

183 Therefore, although I do not reject or reproach this diligence and
thought, by which everything that is in man is directed and drawn to the
Trinity, I do not know whether they are of much use, especially because
they are of little use.

**[74 L i, 7\"-\^s. Interpretation of Genesis 1:26. W. i, ias-m.
75]{.underline}**

will be continued after this. For here is also brought the disputation
of free will, which has its beginning and origin from this image. For
thus they say: God is free, whereupon it follows that man, because he is
created in the image of God, also has these things, memory,
understanding and will, freely. Thus, such words often slip a person\'s
mind, which are either not actually and uncomfortably said or are
interpreted to a godless mind. This is how this dangerous opinion came
about, that they publicly said that God governs people in such a way
that he nevertheless leaves them to themselves, that they may do and
leave of themselves what their mind and will drives them to do. This has
given rise to many uncomfortable opinions, such as the one that they
cite: God, who created you without you, will not make you blessed
without you. Therefore they concluded that free will is the prior and
active cause of salvation. Dionysius\' saying, which is more dangerous
than the previous ones, is similar to this, in that he says that
although the devils and man have fallen, the natural powers, such as
understanding, memory, will, etc., have remained completely uncorrupted.
But if this were true, it would follow that man could by natural powers
effect his salvation.

184 Such dangerous sayings of the fathers have been spoken and practiced
in all churches and schools, and I truly do not see what the fathers
intended to accomplish with them. Therefore, my advice is that they be
read with misgivings and advice. They often speak from affectations and
their own discretion, which we do not have nor can have, because we do
not have the same opportunity as they have had. Therefore, unlearned and
thoughtless minds understand everything thoughtlessly, according to
their own opinion and understanding, not according to that which the
fathers had. But I leave it that way, and come back to the trade (of the
image of God).

But I worry that because we have lost this image through sin and fall,
we will not be able to understand it sufficiently. We do have a memory,
will and understanding, but they are very corrupt and limited to the

Weakened to the highest degree, yes, that I say it more clearly, indeed
leprous and unclean. For if these powers were to be in the image of God,
it would follow that the devil, who truly has such natural powers far
stronger than we, would also be created in the image of God; just as his
memory and intellect are very high and nimble, but his will is most
obdurate.

Therefore, the image of God is much different, that is, it is a special
work of God. But if someone wants to dispute that the powers of the soul
are God\'s image, he may also confess that they are leprous and unclean;
just as we call a leprous man a man, even though everything in the flesh
of the leper is almost dead and dead, without him being violently
tempted to fornication.

Therefore, the image of God, after which Adam was created, was the most
glorious and noble thing, since there was no leprosy of sin either in
his reason or in his will, but both the internal and external senses
were all most pure. The mind was quite pure, the memory quite good and
fresh, and the will quite sincere and true, in a very beautiful, pure
and sure conscience, without all care and fear of death. To this inward
perfection thereafter also came the most beautiful and excellent power
and glory of the body and all its members, so that it surpassed all
other living creatures. For I fully believe that Adam\'s eyes were so
sharp and bright before the fall, that his face was above lions and
eagles; so he, being much stronger, dealt with lions and bears, whose
strength is very great, as we do with little dogs. In the same way, the
fruits that he used for food were much sweeter and stronger than they
are now.

But after the fall, death, like leprosy, crept into all the senses; so
that we cannot grasp such an image as we had at first, even with
thought. Adam would not have recognized his Eve in any other way than in
a completely quiet and peaceful mind and willing obedience to God,
without

**76L . 1, 78-80.Interpretation of I Moses 1, 26. W. 1, 111113. 77**

But now, after the fall, we all know and wallow what fury is in our
flesh, which not only lusts and desires fiercely and ruthlessly, but is
also disgusted when it is overcome by what it lusted for. Therefore we
see in ourselves nothing pure and perfect, neither reason nor will, but
feel in us more than animal lusts and lust. But is this not a severe and
harmful leprosy, which Adam did not have before the fall, because he had
greater strength and sharper senses than the other animals? How far do
the wild pigs surpass man in hearing, the eagles in sight, a lion in
strength 2c.! Therefore, no man can know by thought how far nature was
better before the fall than it is now.

Therefore, I understand God\'s image to mean that Adam had it
essentially in him, and that he not only knew God and believed that he
was good, but that he also led a godly life; that is, that he was
without fear of death and all danger, and was content with God\'s grace;
as can be seen in Eve, that she speaks to the serpent without any fear,
as we do to a lamb or a dog. That is why God also laid this punishment
before them in Genesis 2:17, if they transgressed His commandment: \"In
the day that you eat of this tree you shall surely die. As if he wanted
to say: Adam and Eve, you now live safely and without all fear and
danger, you neither feel nor see death. This is my image, in which you
live as God lives; but if you sin, you will lose this image and die.

Therefore, we now see what danger, death and all kinds of causes of
death this wretched nature must bear and try, through the shameful lust
pestilence and other grim sins and disorderly excitements in all men\'s
hearts. We can never surely rely on God, but terror and fear plague us,
even in our sleep. But such and such plagues and afflictions are the
devil\'s image, which he has put on us and expressed. Before the

But in the case of Adam, he lived in the greatest pleasure and security,
fearing neither fire nor water, nor any other calamity to challenge this
life, of which we are too afraid.

191 Now the original sin may be small and slight, whoever wishes, it
truly appears from the sins and the punishments that it is the greatest
and most grievous sin. But look at fornication and lust, is it not very
great and terrible, both with lust and disgust? But what shall we say of
hatred and enmity against God and blasphemy? For these are the right
gross sins, which truly indicate that the image of God is lost in us.

Therefore, when we speak of this image, we speak of an unknown thing,
which we have not only never tried nor experienced, but we also
experience the contradiction without ceasing, and hear nothing of it but
mere words. For in Adam, reason was enlightened with true knowledge of
God; in addition, a right and obedient will to love God and neighbor, as
he loved Eve and knew her as soon as his flesh. In addition, there were
other lesser gifts, which, when compared with our weakness, are also
very great: as, a perfect knowledge of the nature of all animals, herbs,
fruits, trees and other creatures.

193\. Do you think, then, when you add it all up and put it together,
that there should not be such a man in whom you could see and feel a
reflection of the image of God? Yes, indeed, especially if you add to
this the power and dominion over the creatures, so that, just as Adam
and Eve recognized the Lord, they then ruled over other creatures in the
air, in the water and on the earth. Who could sufficiently express such
majesty and majesty in words? For I believe that Adam could have
commanded a lion with a word, as we command a dog. So also he was free
to build the land, that it might bear what he would. For that thorns and
thistles were not there at that time will be proven later; just as I
also respect that so shy a land was not there.

**[\
78 \"1, so-\"! Interpretation of Genesis I, 26 . W. i, 113-ns.
79]{.underline}**

and harmful animals, as they are now, had not been in the past.

194 But this is the fault of original sin, from which comes the
corruption of all other creatures; so that I believe that before the
fall the sun was much brighter, the water much purer and clearer, the
trees much more fertile, and the land much richer and fuller of all
plants. But because of sin and the terrible fall, not only was the flesh
covered with the leprosy of sins, but all things that are used in this
life were corrupted and weakened, as we will show more clearly below.

195 But this is how the gospel deals with it, that it restores and
brings back such an image. Although intellect and will have remained in
man, both have become very corrupt and weakened. Therefore the gospel
has to do primarily with the fact that we are created again to this and
a better image. For by faith we are born again to eternal life, or
rather to the hope of eternal life, that we may live in God and with
God, and be one with Him, as Christ says. But we are not only born again
to life, but also to righteousness: for faith takes hold of the merit of
Christ, believes and holds it that we are redeemed through the death of
Christ. From this then comes another righteousness, namely, a new image,
in which, having been instructed in the Word, we, by the help of the
Holy Spirit, endeavor to be obedient to God. But this righteousness only
arises in this life and cannot be perfect in this sinful flesh. But God
allows it to please him, not as if it were perfect or a payment for sin,
but that it comes from the heart that comforts itself in faith and
relies on the mercy of God through Christ. Then this also happens
through the gospel, that we are given the Holy Spirit, who resists the
unbelief in us, envy and other vices, so that we earnestly desire and
wish to honor the name of God and His word.

196\. In this way, in this life, the restitution of this image of the
new one takes off.

The salvation of the creature through the gospel is not accomplished in
this life. But when it is accomplished in the kingdom of God, then the
will will be righteously free and good, the mind righteously
enlightened, and the memory strong and constant. Then it will also
happen that all creatures will submit to us and be more obedient than
they were to Adam in Paradise.

But before this is accomplished and fulfilled in us, we cannot really
know what the image of God, lost through sin in Paradise, was. But that
we now say of it is taught us by faith and the Word, which show and
point out to us, as if from afar, the glory of the divine image. For
just as the heavens and the earth were crude and coarse before the light
came, so Christians also have this image in them, crude and imperfect:
But God will make it perfect at the last day in those who have believed
the word.

For this reason, the image of God was an excellent thing, in which
eternal life, eternal security and all goods were locked. But through
sin it is so darkened and weakened that we cannot grasp it even with our
thoughts. For we may have and speak the mere words; but who is there
that can understand what it is, to live in gentle rest and safety,
without all fear and danger, to be wise and understanding, sincere,
pious, and free from all spiritual and bodily misfortune and misery? Nor
was this much greater, that he was also capable of eternal life. For
Adam was created in such a way that he, as long as he was in this
temporal life, could have built the earth, which would not have been a
tedious work for him, which made the body tired, but the highest
pleasure; not that he could have passed the time with it, but that he
would have been obedient to God and kept to his will.

199\. this physical or temporal life would have been followed by a
spiritual life, in which he would not have been allowed to use any
physical food, nor to do other things so that life might pass away, but
would have had an angelic life.

**80 L i, W-84. interpretation of Genesis 1:26. W.i, ns-no. 81**

and spiritual life. For the eternal life to come is thus pictured for us
in the Scriptures, that in it we shall neither eat nor drink, nor do any
other bodily works. Therefore St. Paul says 1 Cor. 15, 45: \"The first
man Adam was made in the natural life, that is, he must live in the
natural way, must eat, drink, sleep, 2c., but the other man will be
renewed into the spiritual life, that is, will be a spiritual man when
he comes again into the image of God. For he will be like God in life,
in righteousness, holiness, wisdom 2c. Now follow:

**Those who rule Over the fish in the sea 2c.**

Here, the most beautiful and glorious creature that God recognizes, an
image of God, and similar and equal to divine nature, with enlightened
reason, justice and wisdom, is given a kingdom and regiment, and Adam
and Eve become lords and rulers over the earth, sea and air. And this
rule is granted to them not only by counsel, but also by an expressed
command. In particular, however, it should be diligently observed here
that no animal is said to rule; rather, all animals, indeed the entire
earth, with all that grows on it, are subjected to Adam alone, whom God
sets as king over the entire living creature by a verbal and expressed
command. For these words Adam and Eve heard with their ears, that God
said, \"Reign. Therefore man, still naked, without weapons and walls,
even without any clothing, only in his bare flesh, ruled over all birds,
animals and fish.

We have also lost this piece of the divine image, so much so that we
cannot understand, even with our thoughts, the perfect joy and pleasure
that Adam had from looking at the whole living creature; but now
everything in us is leprous, even rigid and even dead. For who can
understand this part of the divine nature, that Adam and Eve understood
and knew about all senses, kind, strength, powers, and

Opportunity of all animals, consider? Otherwise, what kind of kingdom
would it have been if they had not known this? In the saints, God\'s
knowledge, which they have from the Word and the Holy Spirit, is felt
and seen to some extent in this life; but it is impossible to come to
the knowledge of nature again in this life, so that we can know the
nature and properties of all trees and herbs, and the nature of all
animals. If we now want to praise a great and excellent philosopher, we
would like to praise our first parents, since they were still pure from
sins. For they had the most perfect knowledge of God. And how could they
not have known Him whose image they bore and felt? They also had certain
knowledge of the stars and all astronomy.

And this was in Eve as well as in Adam; as one can notice from her
speech, when she answered the serpent from the tree in the middle of
paradise. There it seems clear enough that she knew and understood what
she was primarily created for. She also points to the Master, through
whom she knows this, and says: \"The Lord has said it. Therefore, she
did not hear it from Adam alone, but her nature was so pure and full of
God\'s knowledge that she was able to know and understand God\'s word
about herself.

Nothing of this knowledge has been inherited by us, but a weak and, as
it were, dead little spark. The other animals, however, have nothing of
this; for they know nothing of their Creator, where they came from, how
and for what purpose they were created: therefore they have nothing at
all of the image of God. Therefore the Psalm admonishes: \"Do not become
like a horse and a mule\", Ps. 32, 9.

\(204\) Even though this image of God is lost in us, there is still a
great difference between man and other animals. But there was a much
greater and more apparent difference before the Fall, when Adam and Eve
knew God and all creatures, and were, as it were, swallowed up by the
goodness and righteousness of God.

**[82 s i, s4-v\". Interpretation of Genesis 1:26, 27. w. i, ns-122.
83]{.underline}**

have been. Therefore, they were so closely connected with each other
that they were of one mind and will, and certainly before Adam\'s eyes
in the whole world no creature or species seemed more beautiful, more
charming and more lovely than his Eve. Now a woman must be called (as
the pagans said) an evil and misfortune, which one cannot do without.
And it is clear to see why they call a woman an evil or a plague, but
they do not know the cause of this evil, which is the devil, who has
thus adulterated, maddened and corrupted this nature.

205\. but what we do in this life to the form in which we remained after
the fall is not by or from the dominion which Adam had, but by art and
diligence; as we see that birds and fish must be seen with cunning and
deceit, even the wild animals are tamed by art 2c. For even the animals
which are brought up in houses with man, as geese, fowls 2c., are by
their nature very wild. Therefore, this leprous body, by God\'s grace
and beneficence, has only a semblance of dominion over the other
creatures. But it is a very small dominion, and not at all according to
the first, since no art, no cunning was necessary, but the whole nature
obediently submitted to the divine voice, since Adam and Eve were
commanded to rule over them. Therefore we retain the mere name and title
of dominion, but in the work we have lost it almost entirely. And yet it
is good that these things be known and remembered, that we may sigh and
long for that future day, in which all that we lost through sin in
paradise shall be restored and restored to us. For we wait for such a
life, for which Adam also would have waited; and we marvel greatly at
it, and thank God that we, who are so deformed, broken, and made so
coarse and, as it were, dead by sin, nevertheless, through the grace and
beneficence of Christ, have to wait for this very honor and glory of
spiritual life, for which Adam, if he had remained in his bodily life,
which was in God\'s image, would have waited.

**V. 27. And God created man in His image, in the image of God He
created him.**

Here he does not use the word: \"an image that is like us,\" but says
only of the image. But perhaps he wanted to speak thus and repeat the
word image twice, so that the words would be certain, clear and not
doubtful. Otherwise, I do not find any reason for this repetition: we
wanted to understand it emphatically, that is, that Moses wanted to
indicate that God had great joy and pleasure in this most beautiful work
of his and had triumphed over it, as it were, and had not been so joyful
and happy over the other creatures as over man, whom he had created in
his image. The other animals are called God\'s footsteps (because God\'s
work and omnipotence can be felt in them), but man alone is called
God\'s image; as is written in the magistro sententiarum (in the
sentences of Thomas). For in the other creatures God is recognized as
through a footprint; but in man, and especially in Adam, he is truly
recognized. For in man there is such great wisdom, righteousness, and
knowledge of all things, that one might justly call him a small world
(that is, a creature in which God would have formed the whole world);
for he understands heaven, earth, and the whole creature; therefore God
takes pleasure and joy in having created such a beautiful creature.

But this is undoubtedly also true, that just as God was then pleased and
delighted in this His counsel and work of created man, so He is also
pleased and loves to bring this work of His back to lost perfection and
to restore it through His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. And this is useful
and comforting to consider, namely that God remembers the very best of
us, and takes pleasure in this thought and counsel of his to bring back
to spiritual life through the resurrection of the dead all who have
believed in Christ.

**He created them a male and a female.**

208\. lest anyone should think that woman is excluded from all mastery.

**84L . i, M-ss. Interpretation of Genesis 1:27.W. i, iW-is\". 85**

Moses combines the man and the woman, because the woman seems to be
different from the man, as she also has different limbs and a weaker
sense and intellect. And even though Eve was an excellent creature and
like Adam in terms of the image of God, that is, righteousness, wisdom
and blessedness, she was still a woman. For as the sun is a more
glorious and noble creature than the moon (though the moon is also very
excellent and glorious), so woman was not equal to man in honor and
dignity, though she was a very beautiful work of God.

For this reason Moses puts both, man and woman, together and says that
God created them a male and a female, so that he wants to indicate that
Eve was also created by God and was partaker of the divine image and
equality, also of the dominion over everything. Thus, still today the
woman is partaker of the life to come; as St. Peter 1 Epist. 3, 7 says
that they are joint heirs of grace. And in the household the woman is
partaker of the government, and sitteth in common possession of the
children and goods, and yet there is a great difference in the sex. The
man is like the sun in the sky, the woman like the moon, so the animals
are like the stars, over which the sun and moon rule. Therefore, from
this saying we should first note that it is written that woman should
not be excluded from any honor of human nature, even though she is a
weaker vessel than the marin. Of the marriage state we will say
hereafter.

Secondly, here is an argument against Hilarius and others who have
concluded that God created everything at once. Because here our opinion
is founded and proved that these six days of the creation were actually
six natural days, because here the text says that Adam and Eve were
created on the sixth day. One cannot find fault with this text. In the
following chapter, however, he will say after what order man was
created: namely, that Eve was made a little after Adam, not from an
earthen lump, like Adam, but from his ribbe, which God made for Adam in
his sleep.

has taken from the side. These are all temporal works, that is, works
that take time and do not happen at the same time; like this, that God
brings all kinds of animals to Adam, and none is found like him 2c.
These are all temporal works, and happened on the sixth day, which Moses
touches on here only recently, but after that he will further delete
them.

\(211\) Many teachers are of this opinion, that Adam sinned on the sixth
day, and boast of the same day in two ways, and for two works, that as
Adam sinned on the sixth day, so Christ suffered on the sixth day.
Whether this is true, let them see. But Moses clearly says that man was
created on the sixth day and that a woman was given to him. But it seems
to me to be more in accordance with the truth and more believable, as I
also want to say afterwards that Adam sinned on the seventh day, that
is, on the Sabbath; as the devil is still hostile to the Sabbath in the
church, if one teaches God\'s word. But this cannot be clearly proved
from Moses. Therefore, in both parts there are reasons against reasons,
as Emperor Maximilian used to say, that is, disputed reasons and
uncertain reasons. We also leave it in doubt and thus remain according
to each one\'s discretion.

Lyra also tells a Jewish fable, which is also thought of in Plato, for
example, that man was initially created in both sexes (so that man and
woman were in one body with each other), but that they were subsequently
divided and cut from each other by divine power, as the back seems to
testify. Others have multiplied this with sour antics. But the second
chapter overturns and refutes all such lies. For if this were true, how
could it be written here that God took one of Adam\'s ribs and made a
wife out of it? Such lies are found in the Talmud, and have been
touched, that we may see from them the wickedness of the devil, who puts
such inconsistent things into people\'s heads.

213 With this fable rhymes that Aristotle calls the woman virum
occasionatum, a mutilated man; and others call

**86 k. I, ss-oo. Interpretation of Genesis 1:27-29. W. 1:124-127. 87**

it monstrum, a monster. But let monsters and the children of monsters
remain, who thus blaspheme and ridicule such a creature of God, in which
he himself had pleasure and delight, as in the most noble work; item,
which we see that it was created with special deliberate counsel of God.
But such pagan, clumsy things show how reason cannot conclude anything
certain about God and His works, but only invents rationes contra
rationes, one cause over and against the other, and is unable to teach
anything complete or thorough.

**V. 28. And God blessed them and said to them:**

214 He did not say this about the other animals above, which is why he
includes them here in the blessing at the same time:

**Be fruitful.**

This is the commandment of God, which He spoke over the creature. But,
dear God, what have we lost here through sin! For what a blessed state
of man was this, when childbearing was done with the highest reverence
and wisdom, item with God\'s knowledge! But now the flesh is so
overwhelmed and burdened with the leprosy of fornication that in the
conjugal work of childbearing the body becomes quite unreasonable, and
in God\'s knowledge cannot procreate or give birth.

For this reason, fertility, or childbearing and childbearing, has
remained in human nature, but it has been very weakened, indeed, it has
been completely taken over and burdened with the leprosy and filth of
the unchaste fire, so that it is a little more honest than among the
unreasonable animals. In addition, there is the care and danger of
bearing and giving birth to children, the toil and labor of feeding
them, and other innumerable mischiefs, unpleasantnesses and misfortunes.
All this reminds us and teaches us the greatness of original sin, that
even the blessing that still remains in nature is, as it were, a cursed
and humiliated blessing, if you would hold it against this first
blessing: and yet God created it and also sustains it. Therefore, we
should also keep this weakened and debased

We are to recognize with thanksgiving the blessings we have received,
and to consider the inherited and unavoidable leprosy of the flesh,
which is vain disobedience and filth, sweated and attached to body and
soul, as a punishment of sins; but we are to wait in hope for the death
of this flesh, by which we shall be delivered from filth and restored to
full creation, even above Adam\'s first glory and perfection.

**Rule over fish in the sea.**

We are so blinded and know little of God and the creatures that we
cannot really conclude or know what we would have used cattle, fish and
other animals for in the first creation, if our nature had remained
uncorrupted and whole. But now we see that we eat flesh and vegetables
2c. And where such things were not in daily use and profit, we could not
know for what purpose they were created: for we see or have no other use
of these creatures. But Adam, after the nourishment which he also had
from other and far nobler fruits, would not have had such a use of the
creatures as we have now. For he, when all things were given to him and
subject to him, would not have needed clothing, money, or anything else;
nor would there have been avarice in his descendants, but after food
they would have needed creatures only for the wonder of God and a holy
pleasure that is unconscious and unknown to us in this depraved nature;
whereas now and at all times almost all creatures are too few for man\'s
help and nourishment. Therefore we cannot even think what kind of
dominion this will have been.

**V. 29. And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb that grows.
2c.**

Here you see with what great care God takes care of the created man.
First, he created the earth as a house for him to live in. After that,
he ordered other things for him, which he considered necessary for life.
Finally, he gave him the gift of fertility and childbearing. Now he
gives him

**88 . L. I, W-S2. Interpretation of I Genesis 1, 29-31. W. 1, 127-131.
89**

also food, so that he could lack nothing for a gentle and easy life. But
I believe that if Adam had remained in his first innocence, the children
would have run along soon after birth and would have been able to pursue
and enjoy all the pleasures that were in the first creature. But we tell
in vain such things, which we cannot attain even with thoughts, nor can
we attain again in this life.

**And all kinds of fruitful trees.**

\(218\) Moses may be seen to make a distinction between the grain and
the herb that sows seed, and the herb that grows green: perhaps because
the latter, that is, the herb, is for the use of animals, and the latter
is for the use of man. For I have no doubt that the grain or seed, which
we now use for food, was much more excellent than it is now. Moreover, I
also think that Adam would not have eaten the flesh, as an unpleasant
and unlovely food, which is now our greatest pleasure and glory, before
the sweetness of other fruits that would have grown from the earth, and
that the use and enjoyment of such fruits would not have resulted in a
leprous and superfluous fruitfulness, but in the beauty of the body, in
the pure and healthy circulation of the blood.

219 Now we are not satisfied with meat, fruit, or grain, and our health
is often endangered by disorderly and inconvenient food, not to mention
the great and more than animal sins in the rest and intemperate eating
and drinking, which are becoming more and more prevalent every day, and
the longer the worse. Therefore it is a public curse, which followed
after the fall; because it is also believable that only then the cursed
and harmful little animals came out of the earth, which was cursed
because of sin. But here a question arises: how it rhymes that Adam is
allowed to eat from all fruitful trees of the earth and yet afterwards a
special place of the earth is given to him,

which Moses calls Paradise, is granted to inhabit and build? One asks
also: whether the paradise means and is called the whole earth? But we
will save such a report until the second chapter.

III\.

V. 31. **And God looked at all that he had made, and behold, it was very
good. Then the evening and the morning became the sixth day.**

220\. After God has completed all his works, he speaks here as a man
would speak after a long time of work, and wants to say this much:
\"Behold, now I have prepared everything for the best: The heavens I
have prepared as a roof, the ground of which is the earth; the
possessions and goods are the animals with all the armor and tillage of
the earth, the sea and the air; the food is grain, wheat and herbs; but
the master of all this, man, was also created to have the knowledge of
God and to use the creatures of his pleasure with the highest
tranquility, safety, justice and wisdom. Therefore, nothing is lacking;
everything that is most necessary for this bodily and temporal life has
been created: I will therefore keep the Sabbath 2c.

221\) Such goods are all lost in part through sin, and we are now like a
dead corpse of the same first man, retaining hardly a shadow of the same
first kingdom and dominion. For how could we not say that we have lost
everything, who have become mortal from immortal men, sinners from
righteous, unpleasant from pleasant and pleasing, even rejected and
condemned by God? For now men are mortal and sinners. Therefore, if
these things do not encourage or awaken us to the hope and maintenance
of the future day and future eternal life, I know of nothing that could
awaken us. And this shall be enough for the interpretation of the first
chapter. In the following chapter Moses will continue to act and teach
about the work of the sixth day, how man was created.

**90 \" i, \"-\"i. Interpretation of Genesis 2:1. 2. ss.i, 1W-134. 91**

**The second chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of the rest of God, sanctification of the Sabbath, and Adam\'s
creation.**

I.

**V. 1. So the heavens and the earth were finished with all their
host.**

1 Our Latin text has: \"With all their adornment\"; but in the Hebrew
is: \"with their army\", zebaam. And the prophets also kept this way of
speaking, that they called the stars and planets the host of heaven; as
Jeremiah 19:13 is written, that the Jews worshipped the whole host of
heaven, that is, the sun, the moon, and other stars. And Zephaniah 1:5:
\"I will purge out them that worship the host of heaven upon the
housetops.\" Item, Ap. Hist. 7, 42. Stephen says: \"God turned and gave
them to serve the host of heaven.\"

2 The prophets have this way of speaking from Moses, who calls the stars
and lights in the sky \"an army. But he calls men, animals and trees the
army of the earth, perhaps for the sake of what was to follow
\"hereafter\". For God calls Himself afterwards a God of hosts or
knighthood; that is, not only of the angels or spirits, but of the whole
creature that lies in the field and serves Him. For after the devil was
rejected by him because of sin, he fell into such great enmity with God
and man and became so full of it that, if it were in his power, he would
in a moment rob and deprive the sea of fish, the air of birds, the earth
of all kinds of fruits and destroy everything. But God created all such
creatures to be in the field for us and to stand in armor and battle
against the devil and evil men, as long as they serve us and are useful.

V. 2. **And so on the seventh day God finished all His works that He had
done, and on the seventh day He rested from all His works that He had
done.**

3 Here a question arises. Moses says that the Lord rested on the seventh
day from all the works that he had done, that is, he ceased to work on
the seventh day. Again Christ says Joh. 5, 17: \"My Father works until
now, and I also work\". And serve for this that the epistle to the
Hebrews Cap. 3, 18. and Cap. 4, 3. disputes of the rest: \"For I sware
in mine anger, that they should not enter (not into the land of promise,
but) into my rest.\" To such a question we answer thus par excellence,
that the text itself brings the solution with it, by saying that heaven
and earth are finished. For the Sabbath or the rest on the Sabbath means
that God rested in it in such a way that He did not create another
heaven or another earth, and does not mean that God ceased to maintain
and govern the heaven and earth that He had created.

For in what way and by what means God created the heavens and the earth,
Moses clearly taught in the previous chapter, namely, that God created
everything by the Word; as he then said: \"The sea is filled with fish;
the earth brings forth leaves and grass, as well as animals\" 2c. Item:
\"Grow and fill the earth, the sea\" 2c. Such words still remain today
and are strong: therefore we see that the increase goes on and on and
happens without end. And even if the world should stand for countless
years, the power of these words would not pass away, but would be an
eternal increase, from the power and might of this word, or, that I call
it so, of this first foundation.

5 Therefore, this question is easy to resolve: \"God rested from His
works,\" that is, He was content with the heavens and the earth that He
created at that time by the Word.

**92 \"-1, S4-V6. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 2. W. i, 134-137. 93**

He did not create a new heaven or a new earth, or new stars and new
trees; and yet God still works, because he has not abandoned the
creature he once created, but governs and sustains it by the power of
his word. Thus he has now rested from the creation and not from the
preservation and government. In Adam the human race began; on the earth
all living creatures began by the word; in the sea fish and birds began.
But in Adam and the same first animals they have not ceased; but this
word, which God spoke over the human race, \"Grow and multiply,\" abides
and continues all the days. So also this remains and continues: \"Let
the sea bring forth fish and fowl of the air.\" Therefore the power of
the Word is almighty, sustaining and governing the whole creature.

\(6\) Moses therefore concludes that the Word was in the beginning. But
since all things still grow, increase, are preserved and governed in the
same way as in the beginning of the world, it obviously follows that the
Word still exists and is not dead. Therefore, when Moses says that God
rested from His works, this is not to be applied to the course and order
of things as they are preserved and governed, but to the beginning in
general, that God ceased to create angels, men and animals, item, new
species and creatures after the beginning.

I am something new, if you want to look at my person, because sixty
years ago I was nothing. And so the world judges. But God\'s judgment is
far different. For before God I was begotten and multiplied soon in the
beginning of the world, and this word: \"God said, let us make man,\"
also created me. For everything that God wanted to create, He created at
that time when He spoke, although it does not all suddenly appear before
our eyes. For just as an arrow or bullet shot from a gun (for this flies
more swiftly) hits the target in an instant, and yet is shot through a
certain space in between, so God runs through His Word from the
beginning of the world to the end. For with him is not before or

after, sooner or slower, but all present and in view, and is GOD, in
summa, beyond all bounds of time.

Therefore these words, \"God said, \'Let it be, grow, multiply,\'\"
order and create the creatures in the form they are now and will be
until the end of the world. But God has ceased to make new ones, for He
has not made a new earth or a new heaven, but as He willed that the sun
and moon should walk, so they still linger. And as in the beginning he
filled the sea with fishes, the heavens with birds, the earth with
beasts, so they are yet perfected, abide, and are yet preserved; as
Christ saith John 5:17, \"My Father worketh yet, and I work.\" For the
word which He spoke in the beginning is still going forth; as the 33rd
Psalm v. 9. says: \"He spoke, and it came to pass.\"

\(9\) But against this it is said: How is it true that God created
nothing new, when it is certain that the rainbow was created in the time
of Noah? After the Fall, God threatened that the earth would bear
thistles and thorns, which it would not have borne if Adam had not
sinned. Item, of the serpent it is said that it should crawl on the
earth, which without doubt (as it was created in the beginning) has just
gone along, as now deer and peacocks go along? This is truly a new
creation, made by a new word. Item, if Adam had not fallen into sin,
then one would know nothing of the wolves, lions, bears 2c. If Adam had
not fallen into sin, nothing would be known of the cruelty of wolves,
lions, bears, and nothing at all of the whole creature would have been
harmful to man. For the text clearly says that everything created by God
was good. But now behold what evil things there are in nature. How many
and great miseries is the body subjected to for the sake of disease
alone? I do not say anything about other pernicious creatures such as
fleas, flies, spiders, 2c. And how many great dangers do we have to
worry about from the other cruel and poisonous animals?

\(10\) But if it be not a thing, this is indeed a mighty and new work,
that a virgin should bear the Son of God. Therefore, it follows that on
the seventh day of the year

**94 L. i, s\"-s8. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 2. W. i, 137-140. 95**

He has not ceased nor rested since the beginning of time, but is always
at work, not only to preserve the creature, but also to change and
change it. And so it will not be true that we have stated above that God
has refrained from creating new states and things. Answer: Moses is
speaking here of the uncorrupted nature. For if man had existed in the
innocence in which he was created, there would have been no thorns, nor
thistles, nor diseases, nor any violence or harm of animals, as can be
sufficiently seen from the fact that Eve speaks to the serpent without
fear, no differently than we do to a gentle little bird or a friendly
little dog. And I do not doubt, the snake will have been the most
beautiful creature and with this gift especially adorned, that it had
the most distinguished praise of cunning before other animals; as before
other animals of cunning are praised the foxes and weasels 2c.

\(11\) While Adam was still holy and innocent, all animals dwelt with
him with the greatest pleasure and were willing and ready for all kinds
of services. If he had remained so, nothing would have been feared or
worried about the Flood, and consequently there would have been no
rainbow. But sin has been a cause why God has done many things
differently, and at the last day there will be much greater change and
renewal of the creature, which now, as Paul says in Romans 8:20, is
subject to vanity because of sin.

\(12\) Moses\' saying that the Lord rested is speaking of the original
nature of the world. Neither was anything new created, nor were there
thistles, nor thorns, nor serpents, nor toads in it; but if they were,
they were without poison and covetousness to harm. Therefore Moses
speaks thus of the creation of the world in its perfection. For in the
beginning it was pure and innocent, because in it man was pure and
innocent and without sin. But when man changed and fell into
disobedience, it also changed because of sin; that is, the fall of man
was followed by the corruption and cursing of the earth. \"Cursed be the
earth,\" God says to Adam in Genesis 3:17,

\"for thy sake, thorns and thistles shall it bear.\" So also the earth
is cursed for the sin of a man Cain, that it does not give up its
possessions, even though it is built and maintained, Gen. 4:12. Then the
cursing of the whole world is followed by the Flood, in which the whole
world is drowned and destroyed except for a few pious people who are
preserved, so that the promise of Christ might be fulfilled. But just as
we now see that the earth was disfigured and changed because of sin, so
I also believe that the light of the sun, because it was created before
sin, was much brighter and more beautiful.

In the schools of theologians, a common and customary saying has been:
Keep difference of time, and you will be able to rhyme the Scriptures
together. Therefore we must speak of the world much differently after
the miserable corruption that followed through sin than we could have
spoken before, when it was first created and was still pure and perfect.
But let us look at an example that is before us: Those who have seen the
promised land at these lines say that there is nothing in it that would
be in accordance with the praise it has in the holy Scriptures.
Therefore, when at one time a Count of Stolberg had traversed and
inspected it with particular diligence, he is said to have said that he
would rather take his land in Germany for it. For because of the sins,
ungodly life and wickedness of the people, the land was made barren, as
the 107th Psalm v. 34. says. Thus Sodoma, before it was destroyed by
fire from heaven, was like a paradise, Gen. 13:10. Thus in general, sin
is followed by the curse, but the curse changes things so that what was
best becomes worst. Therefore Moses speaks of the perfection of the
creatures as they were before sin. For if man had not sinned, all
animals would have remained in obedience until God took man from
paradise or from the earth and transferred him to another life; but
after sin all things have been changed to the worst.

14\. so now it still remains with the solution,

**96 L. I, S8-roo. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 2. 3. W. 1, 140-143.
97**

which is set above, namely, that God completed his work in six days,
that is, that he ceased to create new states and creatures, and at that
time made everything that he wanted to make. He did not speak of new
things: Let there be a new earth, a new sea 2c. But that the virgin Mary
gave birth to the Son of God is also the cause of our sorrow and misery,
into which we had fallen through sin, as is clear and evident. But God
did this wonderful and great work in such a way that He first indicated
through His Word that He would do it and accomplish it, just as He also
indicated other future works beforehand through the Word. So this is the
first question, that God has finished heaven and earth and has not made
anything new. Now we must also learn what the Sabbath or God\'s rest is,
item, how God has sanctified the Sabbath, as the text says.

II\.

**V. 3. And blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because he had
rested in it from all his works which God created and made.**

15 Marci 2, 27. Christ says that the Sabbath was made for the sake of
man, and not man for the sake of the Sabbath. Moses, however, is silent
about man and does not say that the Sabbath was commanded for man, but
that God blessed the Sabbath and sanctified it. He has not done this to
any other creature. He did not sanctify heaven and earth or any other
creature, but he sanctified the seventh day. This is especially so that
we may understand from it that the seventh day is to be given and set
apart primarily for the service of God. For sanctify means to set apart
from all other creatures and to dedicate to God, and sanctify means to
choose and set apart for sacred use or worship; as Moses often uses this
way of speaking, as when he speaks of sacred vessels.

16 Therefore, it follows from this text that even if Adam is innocent,
he is not innocent.

he would have kept the seventh day holy, that is, he would have taught
his descendants about God\'s will and God\'s service, would have praised
God, thought about God, sacrificed God 2c. The other days he would have
cultivated the land, maintained the cattle 2c. Yes, he also kept this
seventh day holy after the fall, that is, he taught his children on the
same day, as witnessed by the sacrifice of his sons, Cain and Abel.
Therefore the Sabbath was ordained for worship from the beginning of the
world. And so human nature, if it had remained in its innocence, would
have praised God\'s glory and good deeds, and on the Sabbath men would
have spoken to each other of the unspeakable goodness of God, their
Creator, would have sacrificed, prayed 2c. For all this means and
includes in itself the word \"sanctify\".

17 Further, in this word \"rest\" is also signified and indicated the
immortality of the human race; as the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 3, v.
18. finely masterfully disputes the rest of God from the 95th Psalm, v.
11: \"They shall not enter into my rest.\" For God\'s rest is eternal.
And if Adam had lived in paradise for a certain time according to God\'s
will, then he would have been taken up to the rest of God, which God not
only wanted to show to mankind through the sanctification of the
Sabbath, but also to praise and glorify. So both would have happened:
this temporal or natural life would have been blessed and holy, as well
as spiritual and eternal. Now, however, we poor people also have both of
these: we have lost the blessedness and welfare of the natural life for
the sake of sin, and as long as we live, we are in the midst of death.
And yet, because the commandment of the Sabbath is left to the church,
it is indicated that spiritual and eternal life shall be restored and
given to us through Christ. As the prophets diligently considered such
sayings, in which Moses secretly and covertly points to the resurrection
of the flesh and eternal life.

\(18\) Then it is shown here that man was created primarily for the
knowledge and service of God. For the

**[98 L. 1. 100-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 2, 3. W. 1, 14S-145.
99]{.underline}**

The Sabbath was not ordained for the sake of sheep and cows, but for the
sake of man, that in it the knowledge and acceptance of God might be
exercised. And even though man has lost the knowledge of God through
sin, God has left the commandment to keep the Sabbath holy, and has
willed that on the seventh day one should practice his word and worship
God as He has ordained, so that only men might first consider what is
primarily our calling and status, namely, that our nature was created
for the purpose of knowing and praising God.

19\. secondly, that we might keep in our hearts a certain hope of the
life to come and of eternal life. For all the things that God has willed
to be done on the Sabbath are certain and clear signs and testimonies of
another life after this one. And what need would there be for God to
speak to us through His word if we did not belong to a future and
eternal life? For if a future life is not to be hoped for, why do we not
live as those to whom God does not speak and who do not know God? But
since the divine majesty speaks to man alone and he alone recognizes and
grasps God, it necessarily follows that after this life there is
another, which we must have God\'s word and knowledge to attain. For
this temporal and present life is a natural life, which all unreasonable
animals also have, who do not know the Word and God.

\(20\) All this is the Sabbath, or God\'s rest, in which God speaks to
us through His word, and we in turn speak to Him through prayer and
faith. Unreasonable animals, such as dogs, horses, sheep, oxen, etc.,
also learn to know and understand the voice of man, and are also
educated and preserved by man; but our state is far better, who hear
God, know His will, and are called to a certain hope of an immortal
eternal life. How then the bright and clear promises of eternal life,
which God has revealed to us through His Word after these dark
interpretations (as this is of the rest of God and sanctification of the
Sabbath), testify: even though these

The interpretation of the Sabbath is clear enough. For if there is no
other life after this one, does it not follow that we have no need of
God or His word? For that which we need or do in this life we can have
even without the word; just as unreasoning animals feed, live and fatten
themselves, even though they neither have nor hear God\'s word\'. For
what need is there of the word for eating and drinking, if all things
have been created beforehand?

\(21\) That therefore God gives His word and commands that it be taught,
practiced and practiced; item, that He commands that the Sabbath be kept
holy and is called to be served, all these things indicate that after
this life there is another, and that man was not created only for a
temporal and natural life, like other unreasonable animals, but for
another, which is eternal; as God, who commands and ordains these
things, is eternal.

\(22\) But here another question arises, which we have also considered
above, concerning the fall of Adam, namely, when did he fall, on the
seventh day or on some other day? And even though nothing thorough nor
certain can be brought forward about this, I still like to have these
thoughts, that he fell on the seventh day. For on the sixth day he was
created, so was Eve created about the evening of the same day, while
Adam slept. On the seventh day, which was sanctified by the Lord, God
spoke to Adam early, gave him his service, and forbade him to eat of the
tree of the knowledge of evil and good. For this is the Sabbath\'s own
work and office, that in it God\'s word is preached and heard. And
therefore it has remained both in Scripture and custom to appoint the
morning time for prayer and preaching, as the 5th Psalm, v. 4, says:
\"Early will I send me unto thee, and take heed.\"

Therefore it can be seen that Adam heard the Lord on the morning of the
seventh day, and he commanded him to take care of the house and to
govern the world, and forbade the tree of knowledge. 2c. Since the
devil - out of impatience with this most beautiful creature and order,
also out of bitter hatred and envy, that man both on the earth

**100 L I, Interpretation of Genesis 2, 3-7. W. 1, 145-148. 101**

Satan, who had lost the hope of eternal life after such a happy temporal
life, immediately comes to him and talks to Eve, perhaps at noon, after
God had previously talked to Adam. As he is still wont to do: where
God\'s word goes, he spares no pains and effort to create lies and to
awaken sects. For it grieves him that we, like Adam in paradise, become
heirs and citizens of the kingdom of heaven through the word. That is
why he encourages Eve to sin, brings her to it and overcomes her. And
the text clearly says that the Lord came to Adam when the heat had
abated and the day had become cool, and condemned Adam to death with all
his descendants. I am easily persuaded of all this, and believe that it
happened on the Sabbath, which was a few days, and yet not the whole
day, that Adam was in paradise, and had his breath of the fruits
thereof.

\(24\) Thus, through sin, man has lost all his glory, pleasure and joy.
Since he remained in innocence, he would not have been idle in paradise,
but on the Sabbath he would have taught his children, praised God
publicly, and in contemplation and consideration of the works of God he
would have awakened himself and others to thanksgiving; the other days,
however, he would have worked, either by farming or hunting, but in a
far different way than is done now. For we find work a burden, but to
Adam it would have been the highest pleasure, much more pleasant and
preferable than rest and idleness. And just as other misery and hardship
in this life remind us of the sin and wrath of God, so also the work and
heavy food should remind us of it and provoke us to repentance.

\(25\) Now Moses continues to describe man more clearly, by first
repeating what he has just said about him in the first chapter (v. 26.
f.). Although it would seem that such a repetition would be unnecessary
and too much; however, because he wants to write the history finely one
after the other and completely, no word is unnecessary or in vain.

**V. 4. 5. Thus the heavens and the earth were made when they were
created, at the time when God the Lord made the earth and the heavens;
and every tree of the field, which had never been before upon the earth;
and every herb of the field, which had never grown before.**

\(26\) That he says, \"At that time,\" is to be understood of a time
that still lasted and was unfinished. As if to say, \"At that time, all
things were well, and it was the most beautiful creature in the world;
but now I have something else to say. Let no one be troubled or
inquisitively ponder and inquire why Moses might have used the baelic
way of speaking of shrubs and herbs, for he is here to diligently
describe all the nature of man.

**V. 5. 6. God the LORD had not yet caused it to rain on the earth, and
there was no man to build the land. But a mist came up from the earth
and wetted all the land.**

\(27\) There was, saith he, no rain yet to moisten the land, but a moist
mist arose like dew, and went up from the earth, and moistened the
earth, that it might thereafter be the more fruitful. All this belongs
to the works of the third day.

III\.

N. 7. **And God the Lord made man out of a lump of earth, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life. And so man became a living soul.**

Here Moses returns to the work of the sixth day and shows from where the
man, who was to possess and build the earth, came, namely, that God made
him out of a lump of earth, as a potter makes a pot out of clay with his
hand. Therefore he did not say above, as of other creatures, \"Let the
earth bring forth a man,\" but he said, \"Let us make man,\" so that he
might show the glory of man, and the special counsel of God, which he
has given in the

**[102 I, 104-10\". Interpretation of I Genesis 2, 7. ss. i, 14s-isi.
103]{.underline}**

The most obvious one is the one used in the creation of man. Although
man afterwards grows and increases in the same way as the other animals;
for the fruit in the womb is formed in the same way (has its beginning,
its time, lives, grows, increases 2c.), so that in this case there is no
inequality between a pregnant animal and a pregnant woman. But in the
first creation Moses shows a great inequality. For human nature was
created out of special counsel and wisdom, and was prepared and formed
with the finger of God. And this inequality, which is in the creation
and coming of man and cattle, also indicates the immortality of the
soul, of which I said shortly before. For although all the other works
of God are full of wonder and very glorious, this shows that man is the
most glorious creature, that God keeps counsel with Himself and uses a
new way when He creates him; does not let him form the earth and bring
it out of himself, like the animals and trees, but forms him Himself in
His image, as the one who should be partaker of God and enjoy His rest.
That is why Adam, before he is formed by the Lord, is a dead lying lump
of earth: God takes it and makes the most beautiful creature out of it,
which is partaker of immortality.

If Aristotle heard this, he would laugh very much at it and consider it
the most foolish fable, although it is not at all unpleasant to hear
that man, according to his first coming, was a cloister of the earth,
but thus created by God\'s wisdom, that he could be immortal. For
although some of the philosophers, such as Socrates and others, have
agreed and taught that the soul is immortal, they have been ridiculed by
others and have been utterly rejected and condemned. But is this not
great foolishness on the part of reason, that it allows itself to be so
vexed, when it still sees that the procreation of man is a work full of
wonder? For who would not consider it foolish and inconsistent that a
man, who is to live forever, is begotten by a drop of blood from his
father\'s loins? After all, it seems much

more inconsistent and unusual than that Moses says that man was made
from a lump of earth by the finger of God. Therefore, here reason shows
that it knows nothing of God, who only with a thought creates from a
lump of earth not a drop of blood or seed of man, but man himself and,
as Moses says afterwards, he makes a woman out of the rib of man. This
is the beginning and origin of man.

\(30\) After man and woman have been created by God, a human being is
conceived and born from their blood by divine blessing. And although in
this way also the unreasonable animals are begotten, nothing is taken
away from the honor of our origin, by which we are God\'s vessels, made
by God Himself; and, thus to be reckoned, God is our potter, but we are
His clay, as Isaiah speaks of Cap. 64, 8. And this not only concerns our
origin, but we remain the earth or clay of God throughout life, even to
death and the grave.

\(31\) This is also so that we may learn from it the power of free will,
of which our adversaries boast so much and say so much. We do have free
will to some extent, but only in the things that are among us. For by
God\'s commandment we are made masters over the fish of the sea, the
birds of the air, and the beasts of the earth. These we may kill if we
desire, we may also use the food they give. But in the things that
belong to God and are above us, man has no free will, but is certainly
like a clay in the hand of the potter, in which alone is worked, but he
himself works nothing. For there we choose nothing, do nothing, but are
prepared, are made ready, are born again, take 2c., as Isaiah Cap. 64,
8. says: \"You are the potter and our father, we are your clay.\"

But here a new question arises. As Moses above (v. 7), speaking of man,
introduces a new way of speaking and says: \"God made man out of man.

**[404 \" I. u\>e-1OS. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 7. W. 1, 151-154.
105]{.underline}**

Dust from the earth\"; but of the other animals he did not speak in this
way: thus he also says something new and special about man, that God has
blown a living breath into his face, which he did not say about other
animals, since all animals, as well as man, have breath. For this reason
it is asked: Why did Moses want to speak in this way? Secondly, it is
also asked (although it all refers to one question): since all animals
are called living souls throughout the Scriptures, why then is it said
of man alone in this place: \"Man became a living soul\"? Above he said:
\"The earth brings forth living animals, each according to its kind\",
but here he changes it much, and says: \"Man became a living soul. This
undoubtedly moved and caused the patriarchs, holy fathers and prophets
to diligently ponder such sayings, and found that this peculiar way of
speaking indicates that Moses also wanted to indicate something brave
and special.

\(33\) For if you look at the natural life, of which Moses speaks here,
there will be no difference between a man and an ass, because the
natural life must have food and drink, sleep and rest. So also the
bodies are fattened by food and drink, and increase; but if they eat
not, they decrease, and fall away: for the stomach receiveth the food,
and when it is digested, it sendeth it to the liver, wherein it becometh
blood, whereupon all the members are strengthened and renewed. If we
consider this alone, there is no difference between man and an animal,
and yet Moses adorns man\'s life in such a way that he says of him alone
that he has become a living soul, that is, not alive as such, like other
animals, but alive in a higher degree, because man was created in God\'s
image. Which image will undoubtedly have been seen apparently and
excellently on the face of Adam and Eve, since they both still stood in
innocence. As also after the fall from

the skill and stature of the body, that man alone walks erect and lifts
up his eyes to heaven, yet the Gentiles have concluded that man is the
most excellent and glorious creature among all other creatures.

34 And to this Paul referred, since he also refers to 1 Cor. 15, 45:
\"The first man Adam was made into the natural life, and the last Adam
into the spiritual life.\" The natural life he calls eating, drinking,
begetting children, growing, 2c., all of which is also in the
unreasonable animals. But he contrasts this and says that the last Adam
was made into the spiritual life, that is, into such a life that does
not need these works and characteristics of the natural life. Paul also
teaches that even if Adam had not sinned, he would still have lived
naturally and needed to eat, drink and rest 2c., would have gained
weight and begotten children 2c., until such time as he had been raised
by God into a spiritual life, in which he would have lived without the
natural being (that I thus say), namely, of God alone, and not
externally of herbs and fruits; and that thus, that a man nevertheless
has flesh and bones, and is not purely a spirit, as the angels are.

35 Therefore I answer this question thus: That God wanted to indicate
through the mouth of Moses also with this text that a future and eternal
life was to be hoped for, which Adam, if he remained in innocence, would
have had after this natural life. As if Moses wanted to say: Man was
made for a living soul, not only as the animals live, but which God
would have made alive afterwards, even without the natural life. We also
have this hope of immortality through Christ, even though we have been
put under death and all misery because of sin. Adam would have had it
better in his innocence. Here on earth he would have lived in full
pleasure and loveliness, but afterwards he would have been taken up and
transferred from the natural life into the spiritual one without any
pain or difficulty. But we will be saved from

**[106 L. i, los-uv. Interpretation of Genesis 2:7, 8. \". r, isi-iü8.
107]{.underline}**

The only way to transfer man from the natural to eternal life is through
death, the cross, and countless dangers, fears, and hardships. So we
should learn to look diligently at Moses and the holy prophets, and pay
attention to why he speaks differently of man with special counsel and
concern than he spoke of the other animals, namely, that he thereby
awakened and strengthened in us the faith and hope of immortality, that
although man, according to natural life, is like other, unreasonable
animals, he nevertheless has the hope of living forever, which the other
animals do not have; so he has in himself the image of God and is like
God, which is not at all in the other animals.

Moreover, Moses also wanted to indicate by a beautiful secret
interpretation (although it is obscure) that God should become man. For
man, created in the image of God, has no difference in natural life from
unreasonable cattle, which is a thing wholly contrary to one another,
or, as it is called in the schools, an oppositum in adjecto. But because
he is nevertheless created in the image of the invisible God, it is
secretly implied, as we shall hear, that God would reveal Himself to the
world in the man Christ. Such hints, short and dark interpretations of
great and important things, the prophets diligently searched and
memorized in Moses.

**Second part.**

**From the paradise.**

I.

V. 8. **And God the Lord planted a garden in Eden toward the east, and
put therein the man whom He had made.**

Here is a whole heap of questions about paradise. And first of all, the
word paradise, whether it is Hebrew, Chaldean, or Persian (for I do not
consider it to be Greek, although Suidas wants to indicate where it was
named by the Greeks), means a garden. This garden, says Moses, God has
planted in Eden, which word is a

The name of the place and not the generic name is, as the old Latin
translation has paradisum voluptatis (pleasure garden). Eden means
pleasure, and undoubtedly the Greek word comes from it. But because the
preposition stands with it, it is clearly indicated that it is a proper
name of a place, as also the description of the location of the place
does, that it was situated towards the morning. For the fact that the
Latin translation has: a principio, from the beginning, is also badly
given; for in Hebrew there is mikkedem, which actually does not mean a
principio, but ab ante, from the beginning, that is, as we say, after or
toward the morning; for it is an adverbium loci, which indicates the
place of paradise, not the time.

\(38\) Now here it is disputed where the paradise must be, and the
interpreters try and quarrel about it in a strange way. Some say that it
is under the equator, between the two tropics; others, however, pretend
that for such a fertile place the air must be much more temperate than
it is under the equator in the tropics. And what do words need? There is
no number of speculations here. I answer it recently thus: It is an idle
and unnecessary question, as of the thing which is nowhere more present.
For Moses writes a history of the things that were before the Fall and
the Flood, but we must speak of things according to their form, as they
remained after the Fall and the Flood. Therefore I believe that this
place was called Eden either by Adam himself or in his time, because of
the fertility and great pleasure that Adam saw in it, and has remained
the name of the lost thing until the descendants; as one still has the
names Rome, Athens, Carthage 2c., but of such regiments and cities one
hardly sees some footprints. For time and God\'s curse, which we earn
with sins, consume everything.

39 Therefore, since the world was destroyed by the flood with men and
cattle, this noble place of pleasure was also destroyed and lost. And
Origen and others have vainly disputed many unrhymed things about it. To
this also the text says: The-

**[108L 1, 11O-11L Interpretation of Genesis 2, 8. W. 1. 158-1S1.
109]{.underline}**

This place was guarded by an angel so that no one could enter it.
Therefore, even if one wanted to say that this garden was not lost by
the following curse and punishment of God, nevertheless, the way to come
to it is completely blocked and closed to man, that is, one cannot find
its place where it was. One could also answer such a question, although
I like the first opinion better.

40 But what do we say to the saying in the New Testament Luc. 23, 43:
\"Today you shall be with me in paradise\"; and 2 Cor. 12, 4: \"He was
raptured into paradise\"? I wanted to confess and say without doubt that
Christ did not come to a bodily place with the thief. For from Paul the
matter is already clear, since he says that he does not know whether he
was in the body or out of the body. Therefore, it is my opinion that
paradise in both places means the being in which Adam was before the
fall, full of all peace, rest, security, and all the grace and gifts
that are there where there is no sin. As if Christ wanted to say: you
will be with me in paradise, that is, you will be free and safe from sin
and death. Without only having to wait for the last day, when all this
will be revealed; just as Adam was free and safe from sin, death and all
malice in paradise, and yet lived in hope of a future, eternal and
spiritual life. So that it is, as it were, an allegorical paradise, just
as the Scriptures allegorically call the bosom of Abraham, not
Abraham\'s mantle, but the life that is in those who have fallen asleep
in faith. For they have peace, rest and wait in the same rest of the
life and glory to come.

41 Therefore this is my answer, that Moses writes a history, and says
that there was a kind of morning, in which there was a very merry
garden. For, as I have said above, the little word mikkedem actually
means a place, and cannot be understood of any time; as yet our text
has. Therefore it is common among the Hebrews that they call the wind of
the morning kadim, a dry and cold wind, by which the land is dorrt and
scorched. At

The same place of the world has been the paradise or garden, in which
not lime trees, oaks or such unfruitful trees, but all kinds of noble
fruits have been; as we count now for the most glorious and noble, which
bear there cinnamon bark, cloves 2c. Although in other places the earth
has been cultivated and beautiful, for there have not yet been thistles
or thorns, yet this place has had its special cultivation and adornment,
so that Eden has been a chosen garden above all the beauty and adornment
of the whole earth, which, if you want to hold it against the present
misery on earth, has also been a paradise.

In this garden, which God the Lord Himself had specially built and
planted, He placed man. All this, I say, is a history. Therefore one
asks in vain: where or what was paradise? The waters, of which Moses
will say, indicate that it was Syria, Mesopotamia, Damascus and Egypt,
in the midst of which Jerusalem lies. For since it was ordained for man
and all his descendants, it is vain to think that it was a garden only
several miles wide. It was the noblest and best part of the earth. And I
believe that this garden remained until the Flood: but before the Flood
it was kept by God, as Moses says, by the guard of angels. So that the
place was well known to Adam\'s descendants, but they did not come to it
until it was torn apart and destroyed by the Flood. This is my opinion,
and this is how I would answer all the questions that impertinent people
have about the thing that is nowhere after the Fall and the Flood.

Origen is annoyed by the fact that the waters that Moses thinks of are
far away from each other, and perhaps he thinks of a garden like the one
we have. Therefore he turns to the secret interpretation and says that
the sky is paradise, the trees are angels and the water is wisdom. But
such foolish work does not befit a theologian; it might not befit a
cheeky poet so badly. -That is why Origen did not see Moses writing a
history,

**[110 L. 1, 112-11\". Interpretation of I Moses 2, 8. 9. W. 1, 1M-I64.
111]{.underline}**

and the same of such things as have long since passed and passed away.

\(44\) It is in this way that our adversaries still argue today that the
image and likeness of God remain even in a godless man; whereas, as I
think, it is much more reasonable and true for them to say that the
image of God is lost after sin, just as the first initial form of the
world and paradise are lost. For man was righteous and pious from the
beginning: so the world was the most beautiful building from the
beginning, but Eden was a garden of all delight and loveliness. After
sin all this became unformed, so that all creatures, even the sun and
the moon, shine as if they had put on sackcloth; and which before were
good, afterwards, after the fall, became evil and harmful. After this,
however, a still greater destruction followed through the Flood, which
took away paradise and the entire human race. For if now a water,
overflowing like this, can do great harm to men, cattle and fields, what
should not a flood do to the whole world? Therefore, if we want to speak
of paradise now, after the Flood, let us speak of it as a historical
paradise, which has been and is no more; just as we must also speak of
man\'s innocence. We may well remember it with sighing and sadness
because it is lost; but we are not able to return to it in this life.

\(45\) Just as Moses distinguished man (who originated from the earth as
well as the non-rational animals) from them in many ways, so he also
distinguishes him here with a special place and dwelling, which God the
Lord planted and built for man with more splendor, diligence and
adornment than the rest of the earth. For Moses was very concerned that
it should be clearly understood how man was a nobler and better creature
than all the others. The unreasonable animals had the earth on which to
nourish themselves, but God Himself prepared for man a much more
glorious dwelling in which to build,

He should also have his food and be separated from the animals, which he
should have under his rule and dominion on the whole earth.

This is why Origen, Jerome and other allegorists are very foolish.
Because they do not find the paradise further on the earth, they think
that one must look for another understanding and interpretation; since
it is much different, if one says: the paradise has been, than if I say:
the paradise is. For Moses, as he is wont to do when he speaks
historically of a thing, tells this alone, that paradise has been. So
also was the dominion over all animals, that Adam could call a lion and
command him what he wanted: but it is now no more. For such things are
all gone, and are told by Moses only that it may be known that they
were.

47\) Furthermore, this question has also been discussed: In which place
of the earth did God create man? And there have been those who have
defended with all seriousness that he was created in the Damascene land,
because they heard that the Damascene earth should be red and fertile.
But I leave aside such questions, which in truth are useless and futile:
for it is enough for us to know that man was created from the earth on
the sixth day, after the other animals, and was placed in the Garden of
Eden. But what do we need to know, where he was created? He was created
outside of paradise. For thus the text says that he was placed in
paradise before Eve was created; of whom Moses here says that she was
created in paradise. This is enough to know. Now let us proceed to the
following.

V. 9: **And God the Lord caused to grow up out of the earth all kinds of
trees, good to look at and good to eat.**

These words actually belong to the description of paradise. For although
the whole earth was created and prepared in such a way that it brought
forth trees with fruit, herbs and seeds, yet this place Eden had its
special cultivation.

[**112** n i, interpretation of Genesis 2:9. w. i, uu-isv.
**113**]{.underline}

How we can take a likeness of our things: The wood and the land bear
trees; but if we choose a place and build it specially, that which is
begotten and built in the garden is always better than that which grows
of itself in the wood. Thus paradise was also created with special
cultivation and adorned before the other earth with trees so lovely to
see and enjoy. Therefore, he said above in the first chapter v. 29: God
said, I have given you all kinds of herbs and all kinds of trees 2c.,
which was food according to need: but paradise also gave food and food
according to desire, which was much more tender, better and more lovely
than that which the trees on the rest of the earth bore, which also
served as food for the animals.

II\.

**And the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge good and evil.**

\(49\) Moses describes Paradise as making God a gardener who, after
having planted a garden of his liking with great diligence, chooses some
trees which he builds and loves before the others. Among these, one is
the tree of life, created so that if a man were to eat of it, he would
be preserved in perfect health, without sickness or fatigue.

\(50\) And here again man is distinguished from the unreasonable
animals, not only because of the place, but also because of the
advantage of a longer life and that he should always remain in one state
and form. For since the bodies of other animals increase and become
stronger only in youth, but become weak and fall in old age, man would
have had much different opportunity. He would have eaten and drunk, food
and drink would also have changed in the body, but not as unpleasantly
as now; but this tree of life would have preserved man in constant
youth, so that he would never have felt any hardship or burden of old
age. The forehead would not have been wrinkled, so that

No foot, hand, or other member of the body would have become weak,
feeble, or infirm. And through the help and service of this fruit,
man\'s strength would always have remained perfect for childbearing and
all kinds of work, until he was finally transferred from the physical or
natural life into the spiritual. And so he would have had nourishment
from the other trees, if they had been good, tender and sweet: but this
tree would have been as a medicine, by which his life and all his powers
would have been preserved in perfect vigor.

\(51\) But here another question arises: How could a bodily food or
fruit have preserved the body, so that it would not have become sicker
and weaker with time? To this it is easy to answer: He spoke, and it
came to pass. For if God can make bread out of stones, should He not
also be able to preserve strength and vigor in the body through a plant
or an apple? Let us see now, after the sin, that very great power and
effect is also in the smallest herbs and seeds.

52 But let us look at our own bodies. Where does the power come from
that bread, when eaten, is digested by natural heat and turned into
blood, after which the whole body is strengthened and increases? If you
bring whole ovens of fire, you will not be able to turn bread into
blood, which a small amount of heat in our bodies can do. Therefore, we
should not be surprised that this tree was a tree of life, since it
pleased God to plant and make it so. Adam had a natural body that was
subject to movement, which begat children, ate, worked, etc., all of
which are works that are considered to contribute to decay, or at least
to some change, by which man would naturally finally have decayed. But
to this natural order God provides a remedy and advice through the tree
of life, so that man should have a long and healthy life in constant
youth without any loss of his strength.

These are all historical things:

**[114 i, iiv-ii\". Interpretation of Genesis 2:9. W. i, i \"7-iss.
115]{.underline}**

which I order to be diligently noted, so that the imprudent may not be
misled by the reputation of the fathers, who abandon the histories and
seek allegories. I love Lyra above others, and consider him to be one of
the best, because he diligently sticks to history everywhere, even
though he allows himself to be moved and overcome by the reputation of
the fathers at times, that he, according to their example, turns away
from the actual opinion and history to inconvenient allegories.

54 But it is even more strange that it is said here about the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil. For here it is asked: What kind of tree
it was and why it was named so? What would have happened if this tree
had not been in paradise? Augustine and the others who follow him
rightly say that it was thus named for its future effect. For Adam was
created in such a way that if he had felt any deficiency or difficulty
in nature, he should have had help and advice against it from the tree
of life, which should have preserved his strength and perfect health at
all times. Therefore, he would have been completely drowned in the
goodness of his Creator, where he would have remained in innocence. He
would have recognized God, his Creator, and would have ruled the animals
according to his pleasure without any effort and burden, even with the
highest pleasure. For everything was created and prepared in such a way
that it could not harm man, but could amuse him to the highest.

55\. After Adam was created in such a way that he was as it were drunk
with joy towards God, and also had his pleasure and joy in the other
creatures, a new tree is now created to distinguish between good and
evil, so that Adam would have a sure sign of service and honor towards
God. For after all things had been given to him, that he might use them
as he pleased, either for need or for pleasure, God finally requires of
him that he should show reverence and obedience to God on this tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, and thus have, as it were, an exercise
of worship, and not eat of it.

\(56\) What has been said about Moses so far belongs either to nature,
or to the house and world government, jurisprudence or medicine. But
this belongs to theology, that here Adam is presented with a word and
commandment from this tree, on which he should also, according to his
natural life and nature, have an outward sign to serve God and to render
outward obedience; just as the Sabbath, of which we have said above,
also belongs primarily to the proof of the inward spiritual services of
God, to faith, love, invocation 2c.

But this way of outward obedience, which was done for the very best,
unfortunately turned out to be the very worst. As we see even today, the
word, over which there is nothing more holy or better, is an offence to
the wicked. Christ instituted baptism to be an image of regeneration,
but has not this given rise to a great deal of trouble from sects and
cults? Is not the whole doctrine of baptism miserably falsified? And
what has been more necessary to us than such order and institution? So
it was also necessary that the natural man should have a natural or
outward service of God, so that he might be trained in obedience to God
according to the body.

So this text really belongs to the church or theology. For after God has
given man police and house rule and made him king and regent of the
creatures, He has also given him help and counsel to maintain this
temporal life, namely, the tree of life: so He now builds him a church,
as it were, so that he may serve and give thanks to God, who has so
graciously given him all this. In our churches we have an altar on which
we administer the sacrament; we also have preaching stands or pulpits
from which we teach the people: all this we have not only for necessity,
but also for the sake of solemnity and church adornment. Adam\'s altar
and preaching stand was this tree of the knowledge of good and evil, at
which he was to render obligatory obedience to God, recognize God\'s
word and will, and give thanks to Him; indeed, he was also to call upon
God against temptation.

**[116 L. I, na. IM. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 9. W. l, I6S-I7L.
117]{.underline}**

\(59\) Reason is indeed unwilling that this tree was created, because we
sinned against it and fell into God\'s wrath and death. But why is it
not equally unwilling that God gave us the law and then revealed the
gospel through His Son? For have not innumerable errors and heresies
resulted from it? Therefore we are to learn that it was necessary for
man, after he was thus created, to have all other living creatures in
his hand and power, to recognize and give thanks to his Creator; item,
that he have an outward service of God and a sure work of obedience. And
if Adam had not fallen, this tree would have been like a common temple
and main church, where the people would have gathered; as afterwards in
the corrupt nature a certain place was appointed for the service of God,
namely, the tabernacle and Jerusalem. But because the tree of knowing
good and evil caused such a terrible fall, Moses rightly called it the
tree of knowing good and evil, because it became an unfortunate and
miserable story.

But here one would like to ask: whether there was only one tree, or more
of them? and whether, according to the Scriptures, one is taken for
many, as we generally say: one pear, apple 2c., and yet mean the whole
species or kind of fruit, not individual pieces? It does not seem to me
to be almost inconvenient that one understands that the tree of life was
a certain place in the middle of paradise, and as it were a forest, in
which there were many trees of the same kind and were called by one name
the tree of life. For it is possible that the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil can be called in general a whole forest, which was like a
chapel, in which there were many trees of one kind, namely trees of the
knowledge of good and evil, of which God forbade Adam not to eat
anything, otherwise he would die of death. But not that the nature or
property of the tree was to kill people, but that this was done by the
word of God.

God\'s word was thus proclaimed, which word gives all creatures their
effect, also preserves all creatures, so that they do not go out of
their way, but each remains in its kind, even though they are infinitely
reproduced.

61 Thus it came to pass by the word that out of a rock in the wilderness
much water gushed forth, Exodus 17:6; item, that the serpent of brass
healed and made whole all those who looked upon it, Exodus 21:9. In the
same way this certain tree or certain kinds of such trees in the midst
of Paradise strangled Adam, because he disobeyed the word of God; not
that the tree was created for this kind and quality, but that it was
thus spoken by the word. This we are to understand also of the tree of
life, of which God had called Adam to eat, if he wanted to have his
strength renewed; which then could happen by power of the word of this
tree.

This seems to be very ridiculous to reason, how a single plant could
have been so harmful that it could have corrupted and damned the whole
human race in an infinite sequence, and that with eternal death. But
this power and ability did not exist in the plant or apple. Adam set his
teeth on this apple, but in truth he set his teeth on a thorn, which was
God\'s prohibition and disobedience to God. This is the true and real
cause of this wailing, namely, that he sins against God, despises His
commandment, and follows the devil. The tree of the knowledge of good
and evil was indeed a good tree, in that it bore the most noble and
delicious fruit: but because the prohibition is added to it and man does
not obey it, it becomes a tree much more harmful than all poison.

63 Thus, because it is commanded by God\'s word in Exodus 20:15, \"You
shall not steal,\" anyone who touches something that is not his own
sins. But since in Egypt the Jews were commanded to steal money from
their neighbors and take it away with them, it was not a sin, because
they were excused by God\'s command and commandment, which was obeyed in

**[118 L. l, iro-irs. Interpretation of\' Genesis 2, 9-12. W. 1,
172-175. 119]{.underline}**

all ways and be obedient in all things. If a young man loves a virgin,
desires her in marriage and marries her, he does not commit adultery,
although the law says that mail should not desire or be lusted after:
for the marriage state is instituted by God and commanded to those who
cannot live chastely without it. It is the same with these trees. The
tree of life gives life by the power of the word, which thus promises
and orders it; but the tree of the knowledge of evil and good kills,
also by the power of the word, by which it is forbidden to eat of it.

64 The name of the knowledge of good and evil, as Augustine says, comes
from the fact that after Adam sinned on it, he not only saw and
experienced what good he had lost, but also what great misery he was
thrown into through disobedience. Therefore it was in itself a good
tree, as also the commandment, so happened to it, was good, that it
should be a tree, at which Adam should perform and prove God service and
obedience also with an outward work; but because of the following sin it
becomes a tree of condemnation. Now Moses describes the garden more
extensively.

V. 10. **And there went out of Eden a river to water the garden, and
there it divided itself into four principal waters.**

The Latin text is missing here, that it makes a generic name out of the
proper name, namely out of the name Eden; as also here Origenes and
those who followed him are guilty of making allegories out of the
history. For in truth it happened that in Eden there was a great water,
by which the garden was watered; the same water went out from the
morning and was divided into four parts, so that no part of the garden
remained unwatered. For one must take here before oneself a very wide
area on the earth, on which this garden was so created that Adam should
have in it with his whole coming generation, which should be large, an
own and constant dwelling.

**V. 11. 12. The first is called Pison, which fleeth about all the land
of Hevila, and there is found gold. And the gold of the land is
precious, and there is found bedellion, and the precious stone onyx.**

This is one of the greatest annoyances in Moses. For the things that are
before the eyes cannot be denied. And so this is actually a description
of the land of India, which he calls Hevila, in which the great water is
Pison, which is called the Ganges. The other three waters, Gihon,
Hiddekel and Phrath, that is, Nile, Tigris and Enphrat, are also known
to rise far from each other. Therefore the question is: Since it is
known that these waters, which are well known in the whole world, are
situated very far from each other, how can it be true that Moses says
they all spring from one source, that is, they go and spring in the
Garden of Eden towards the morning? For although one cannot really know
where the Nile has its origin, there are certain proofs that it rises at
the place located at noon; but the Ganges, Tigris and Euphrates flow
from midnight, and have an origin that is opposite to this.

For this reason Moses openly contradicts reason and public experience;
therefore also many have taken their cause and pretended that Eden was
the whole earth. But without the fact that this is publicly wrong, it
does not improve Moses\' opinion everywhere, who says that these waters
have both a beginning and an origin. Although it is plausible that if
Adam had remained innocent and his family had been increased, God would
also have enlarged this garden, it cannot be said that Eden was the
whole earth, for the text clearly separates the Garden of Eden from the
other places of the earth. What then shall we say to this text of Moses,
which is quite contrary to reason and public experience, and because of
which many have been annoyed by it, as Origen and others, who have taken
cause from it and invented strange fables and tales? Some of the
teachers do not let it be known that they are annoyed by this text, and
so they walk through this sea with dry feet, as it were;

**[120 L. r. 12t- Interpretation of Genesis 2:11, 12. W. i, 17s-178.
121]{.underline}**

which, however, should also not be at a teacher and interpreter.

Therefore this is my opinion, which I have also indicated above, that
first of all the paradise was completely closed to man for the sake of
sin and then was completely devastated and rejected by the Flood, so
that now one can no longer see any footprint of it. For, as I also said
above, I think it is completely true that the paradise remained after
the fall of Adam and Adam\'s descendants were known and aware of it; but
they were not able to come to it because of the custody of the angel,
who kept the garden with a fiery sword, as the text says. But the Flood
devastated everything after that; as it is written in Genesis 8:2, that
all the springs and depths were broken up and blocked up.

\(69\) Who would doubt, then, that the source and springs of these
waters have not been broken up and mixed together? Just as after the
Flood there are mountains where before there was a beautiful and
pleasant land, so there is no doubt that now there are springs and
fountains where there were none before, and again. For the whole shape
of the earth has been changed. And I have no doubt that it is still from
the Flood that in places where there are mines, wood is often found that
is almost hardened into stones. Thus one finds in the stones various
fish forms and other animals pictures. I also believe that the sea,
which runs through the middle of the earth and is therefore called the
Mediterranean Sea, was not within the earth before the Flood, but that
this course, in which it now stands and runs, was made for it by the
Flood. Thus the place of the Red Sea was undoubtedly a fertile land and,
as is probable, about a piece of this garden; so still from the Flood
are the Persian and Arabian gulfs 2c.

70 Therefore, one must not think that these waters today still have the
same origin that was at that time; but, just as the earth is still and
bears trees and herbs, 2c. which, however, to be reckoned against the
unchanged and undecayed nature, is hardly as

the rest of the rich treasures and goods which the earth, as it was then
created, has borne: so these waters are still found as remnants, but not
in the places where they were before, much less from the same first
springs and wells. How much of our own bodies has been corrupted and
lost through sin? Therefore we must speak of the whole of nature as it
is after the Fall as a completely new form of all things, which nature
took on itself first through sin and then through the common Flood.

And God still does this. When he punishes sins, he also maligns the
earth; as he threatens in the prophet Zephaniah 1:3 that he will gather
the fish of the sea and the birds of the air into one heap: just as in
our time many waters have fewer fish than of old, so the birds are no
longer so mean 2c. So also Isaiah 13:6, 20, 21. is written of Babylon.
For when God takes away the people, the beasts of the land also are
lost, and nothing remains there but monstrous, hideous and horrible wild
beasts. Thus it is said that the land of Canaan, which was very rich and
fertile in ancient times, is now a barren and unfruitful land, as the
107th Psalm v. 34 threatens. If this happens when God punishes and
attacks only one [country]{.underline}, what do we mean by saying that
the punishment that was once inflicted on the whole world has been
executed?

Therefore, let no one be offended by the fact that Moses says that the
four waters had one origin, and that even now they are very far apart
and have different sources. For no one should think that the world is
still in the form in which it was before sin. And because Origen was
under this delusion and thought, he got into the most clumsy and
tasteless allegories.

73\. the water Nile is still present, Ganges also 2c., but in such a
form that one would like to say well, as Virgilius says from Troy, since
it was destroyed:

**122 L. I, IL4-127. Interpretation of I Genesis 2, 11-14. W. 1,
178-180. 123**

\"And the region where Troy stood.\" For if anyone had seen the Nile and
the other waters in their first creation and glory, he would have seen
them much differently than they are now, since they not only do not have
their former origin and nature, but also do not have their former
course: just as the other creatures are all deformed, insane and
corrupt. Therefore Peter says Ap. 3:21 that Christ must occupy heaven
until the time when all things are brought again. For he indicates, as
Paul also says Rom. 8, 20, that the whole creature is subject to vanity,
and a restoration of all things, not only of man, but also of heaven,
earth, sun, moon 2c. is to be hoped for.

\(74\) Now this is my answer to this text: that the Nile, the Ganges,
and the other waters are still, but not as they were. For not only are
their rivers and their sources broken up and mixed together, but their
forms have also been changed. Just as a man has feet, eyes, ears, and
form, so that he was created in paradise; but all these members have
been most miserably corrupted and disfigured after sin. Adam, before the
fall, had the most clear and sharpest eyes, the most tender and delicate
smell, a body very comfortable and obedient for childbearing, but look
how far our limbs are from this strength and dexterity. It is the same
with these first waters, if you want to see their and the whole
creature\'s first origin.

Therefore we wait for the restoration of all things, not only of the
soul, but also of the body, which in that day will be more glorious,
noble and beautiful than it was in paradise. For we shall not be placed
in a natural life, which by its nature is subject to change, but in a
spiritual life, into which Adam also should have been placed if he had
lived without sin. For this hope is pointed out to us by Christ, who
restores our innocence through the forgiveness of sins, and puts us in a
much better state than Adam was in paradise.

**(76)** The word sad, which **Moses** uses here, is very emphatic, for
it means to go about by rings, as the watchmen go about in the city.
Thus the Pison or Ganges is still present, if you look at its name: but
if you consider its pleasantness, fertility, power and course, you will
find that all this, so it has now, is hardly the dregs and a shadow of
the first noble water.

The land of Hevila is India, situated after the east, which the
Scriptures here and elsewhere praise more as a rich land; as even today
Indian gold and precious stones are considered the noblest and most
precious. But I think that under this name Hevila, as Moses speaks of
it, also belongs the blissful Arabia and other countries near it. What
he says about Bedellion and the precious stone Onyx, I understand that
he summarizes with it in general all precious stones. For we still see
today that India has not only these precious stones in abundance, but
also emeralds, rubies, sapphires, turquoises, diamonds, etc., as they
are commonly called. And here consider what I have said above, if this
country is still at present graced by God with such rich treasures and
jewels: how much happier and richer will it have been before sin? For
all that we have now, as I said, is hardly worthy to be called the rest.

**The other water is called Gihon, which flows around the whole land of
the Moors**. **The third water is called Hiddekel, which flows from
Assyria. The fourth water is Phrath.**

The other three waters he remembers only by the name Gihon, which is the
Nile. Which water, because it flows through Egypt, Moses understands
with the name Chus or Aethiopia, also Egypt. Hiddekel is the swiftest
water, Tigris (in Armenia). The fourth, he says, is Phrath, close to us.
So we have described here the paradise with its waters, which is now
completely lost and of which nothing is left, because these four waters,
corrupted and made leprous, as it were, first by sin, then by

**[124 D. 1, 1L7. ISS. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 13-15. W. l,
iso-1SS. 125]{.underline}**

Now Moses will continue and show how Adam, before Eve was created, was
given a law, so that he also had an outward service, so that he proved
obedience and gratitude to God.

**Third part.**

**Bold of the introduction of man into the garden, and the prohibition
that God gave him, along with the threat that he attached to the
prohibition.**

I.

**V.15. And God the Lord took the man, and put him in the garden of
Eden, to build it, and to keep it.**

After God had adorned and decorated the whole earth in many ways, He
also prepared the garden, which was to be the dwelling place and royal
seat of man, to whom He had commanded the rule over all animals. So he
put the man in this place as in a castle and temple, from which he could
have gone, if he wanted, and walked on the other earth, which was also
most fertile and fun, and play with the animals, as often as he wanted.

\(80\) God commands Adam to take care of two things: first, to work and
build in this garden; then, to take care of it and preserve it. We still
find many signs and footprints of this command in this misery and sorrow
that has remained upon us. For even now these two are to be together,
not only to build the land, but also to keep what has been built. But,
alas, both of these things are innumerably obscured and broken up; for
not only the building, but also the preservation, is full of all kinds
of toil, labor, and misery. What the cause is, however, will be
sufficiently indicated in the third chapter, for there we will see that
this structure of the earth is confused and disfigured with thorns,
thistles, sweat of the face, and other things.

the innumerable miseries. For that I keep silent, how much toil and
labor the food costs, how hard and sour it becomes and how much toil and
labor goes into bringing up a child!

But if Adam had remained in innocence, he would have built the earth and
planted little gardens, not only without difficulty, but as it were
playing and with the greatest pleasure. Since also children would have
been born to him, they would not have needed and needed the mother\'s
milk so long, but would have stepped perhaps soon from their feet and
would have looked for their food themselves, without all work and
trouble of the parents, as we see at young chicks. Now one sees,
however, how with great misery and lamentation our birth and beginning
approaches.

And if we were to speak of food or sustenance, we see that not only do
other animals have it in common with us, but also one man deprives and
steals it from another by fraud. That is why we must have walls, fences
and other safeguards; yet we can hardly keep what we have built and
acquired with great labor. So we also have building or work, but very
unequal to the first: not only because it is done with the greatest
difficulty and unwillingness, but also because the earth gives, as it
were, with unwillingness and very meagerly what it would have given Adam
with the greatest goodwill and superfluously, where he also would have
sown either in the garden or outside of it. Thus he would have had
nothing to fear from thieves and murderers, but would have had
everything in quiet peace and safety.

So we also see in this piece what a pity and shame original sin is, when
we look at the thorns, thistles, hedges, sweat of the face 2c. For just
as man fell through sin in the spirit, so he also fell with the body
into punishment; for work is a punishment, which in the state of
innocence would have been play and air. And even now, in this
wretchedness and misery of nature, we learn that where one has a
pleasant garden, sowing, planting, and digging are not alone no
punishment.

**[126 i, in. iso. Interpretation of Genesis 3:15-17. W. i, iss-188.
127]{.underline}**

But it is also done with diligence and pleasure. But how much more
perfect this would have been in paradise, in innocence!

Here it is also useful to remind that man was not created for idleness,
but for work, even if he had remained in a state of innocence. For this
reason, the idle life led by monks and nuns is cheaply cursed and
condemned.

\(85\) But as we have said of the work and cultivation, that it had been
without vexation and displeasure: so also the defense or preservation
would have been the highest pleasure, since it is now full of all
danger. Adam had chased away the bears and lions with a single word,
even with a single wave. We, however, still have the preservation, but
quite horrible and terrible, as for this we must have swords, spears,
guns, walls, fences, ditches, etc., and yet we can hardly remain
satisfied with what we have. That is why we have only dark and almost
extinct footprints of work and preservation.

86 Others interpret this text to mean that God is to build and preserve.
But the text simply speaks of human work and preservation; as it is said
below that Cain was a tiller. And in Job and Ecclesiastes the kings are
called cultivators, not only for the sake of work, but also for the sake
of preservation. But, as I said, to build and to preserve are sad and
heavy words with us; but in the beginning they were a game and the
highest pleasure of man.

II\.

**V. 16. 17. And God the Lord commanded the man, saying, Thou shalt eat
of every tree of the garden: but of the tree of knowledge, of good and
evil, shalt thou not eat.**

This is the order and statute of the church, before the house rule and
police, because Eve was not yet created. But the church is arranged and
ordered without walls and all splendor, in the most spacious and fun
place. According to

The house regiment is also confirmed in the established and ordered
church, since God creates Adam the Eve to the journeyman. That therefore
the church is rather ordered, than the house; as also more is attached
to the church.

Before the fall, however, there was no police, nor was it necessary; for
the police is a necessary help and remedy for corrupt nature. For the
lusts and inner impulses must be restrained by coercion of laws and
punishment, so that they do not run too free and wide. Therefore one
could call the police a kingdom of sin just like Paul calls Rom. 8, 2.
Moses a servant of death and sins. For this alone is the main purpose of
the police, that they ward off sin, as Paul Rom. 13, 4. says: \"The
authorities bear the sword for vengeance against the wicked.\"
Therefore, if men had not become wicked through sin, there would have
been no need for police or worldly rule and order, but Adam and his
descendants would have lived in the highest joy, peace and security, and
with one finger would have been able to defend and do more than all
swords, wheels and gallows are able to do now. Nor would there have been
a robber or a murderer, a thief, a slanderer, or a liar: what need would
there have been of laws or political order, which is like a branding
iron and a terrible medicine, by which the harmful members are cut off,
so that the others remain healthy?

Therefore, according to the church, Adam would have been commanded to
rule the house in paradise. But this is why the church is first ordered,
so that God wants to prove with it, as with a sign, that man was created
for something different than the other animals. Because it is
established and ordered by the Word of God, it is certain that man was
created for an eternal and spiritual life, into which Adam would have
been called, but without death, after he had lived in the Garden of Eden
and on the other earth to satiety, but without burden and unpleasure.
There would not have been such a shameful lust pestilence in him, as
there is now in man, but the love between man and woman would have been
in him.

**[128 L. 1, 1S1-13S. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 16. 17. W. 1,
188-IS1. 128]{.underline}**

Woman would have been simple, pure and without all sinful covetousness.
Thus, childbearing would have been without sin and would have been
obedience. The mothers would have borne and given birth to children
without pain, and they would have been brought up without such sorrow
and great effort.

But who can reach with words this great glory of innocence that we have
lost? There remains in nature the love and covetousness of the man for
the woman, item, the fruits of childbearing, but with ghastly stain of
fornication and great sorrow and pain of birth. In addition, there is
shame, disgrace and confusion, even among husbands and wives, as often
as they want to enjoy the pleasured company. Thus, the great and
miserable damage of original sin is painted before our eyes everywhere.
Although childbearing is not evil, and blessing is also good, these
things have become so insane and corrupted by sin that husbands and
wives cannot use them without shame. But if Adam had remained in
innocence, there would have been none; but as without shame man and
woman sit and eat together at table, so also childbearing and
childbearing would have been a peculiar honor, and no shame nor blush of
shame. But I come back to Moses.

\(91\) Here, as I have said, the church is ordered before the house was
kept. For the Lord here preaches to Adam and sets before him a word
which, though brief, is worthy of a more extensive treatment. For this
sermon would have been Adam\'s Bible, and all of ours, if he had
persisted in innocence; nor would we have needed paper, ink, pens, and
so innumerable books, which we must now have, and yet cannot attain the
thousandth part of the wisdom which Adam had in Paradise. But this short
sermon would have summarized and concluded the whole study of wisdom,
and would have shown us, as if painted on a tablet, God\'s goodness, who
created nature pure and perfect, without all the harm and infirmities
that followed sin.

92\. and this sermon, which, as the text says

The commandment, which Adam alone heard, was given on the sixth day, and
Adam then communicated it to Eve. And if they both had not sinned, Adam
would have given this one commandment to all his descendants, who would
have become the best theologians, the most learned lawyers and the most
experienced physicians. Now we have books that cannot be counted, in
which theologians, jurists and physicians are instructed: and yet all
that we learn with the help of books can hardly be called a pittance
compared to the wisdom that Adam would have drawn from this one word. In
fact, everything is corrupted and lost through original sin.

Therefore, this tree of the knowledge of good and evil, or this place
where such trees were planted in a large heap, would have been the
church, where Adam and his descendants would have gathered on the
Sabbath and, after refreshment from the tree of life, would have praised
God there and praised him for giving him dominion over all creatures on
earth; as the 148th and 149th Psalms almost lead to such a form of
thanksgiving, since they describe the sun, moon, stars, fishes, dragons,
and the like. and 149. Psalm almost lead and indicate such a form of
thanksgiving, since it calls sun and moon, the stars, fishes, dragons
2c. No psalm is so high and glorious that each one of us could not have
made a better and more perfect one if we had been begotten in innocence
by Adam. And Adam would have praised the greatest blessing of God, that
he and his entire family were created in the image of God; he would have
admonished his descendants to live holy and without sin, to build
faithfully in the garden and to keep it diligently, and to guard with
the utmost diligence against the tree of knowledge of good and evil. And
so, when man had had this outward place, use, word and service, he would
have gone back to his work and preservation, until the appointed time
had been fulfilled, in which he would have been taken up to heaven with
the greatest pleasure and joy.

\(94\) But now we speak of such goods as of a lost treasure, and we
groan with a good heart, and we long for that day when all things shall
be restored to us, and we shall know that we have lost them.

**1302 lA-iss-interpretation of Genesis 2:16, 17. W. i, isi-i \"4. 131**

will be reimbursed. But it is good that we often think at the same time
about the good that we have lost and the evil that we have on us and
thus live in all misery; so that we awaken ourselves to hope and
maintenance for the redemption of our bodies, of which the apostle Paul
says Rom. 8:23. For as far as the soul is concerned, we have already
been redeemed through Christ, and we hold this redemption in faith until
it is revealed.

It is also useful to consider in this text that God gave Adam the word,
worship and religion completely pure and simple, without any special
effort or expense. For he did not command him to slaughter oxen, burn
incense, make vows, fast, or mortify and afflict his body, but only to
praise God, to give thanks to God, to rejoice in Him, and to render this
obedience to Him, that he should not eat of the forbidden tree.

In this weakness of our flesh we still have some of this worship left,
for which Christ has helped us again, so that we also praise God and
thank Him for all kinds of blessings, spiritual and physical; but in
truth this is nothing but a remnant. But when we will come to the choirs
of angels after this miserable life, then we will perform these services
in more holiness and purity. So this is also a remnant of the blessed
state in which Adam first was, that through marriage we can guard
against adultery and avoid it; item, that this bodily and temporal life
not only has nourishment and entertainment, although with great toil and
labor, but also has protection and salvation against all kinds of harm
and danger, in which we would otherwise have to remain. These are indeed
remnants, but very miserable ones, if one wants to look at the first
state and opportunity.

Furthermore, I must warn you here against the false prophets, through
whom Satan tries to falsify the pure doctrine in many ways. But I will
tell you one of my histories, how I was challenged by an ungodly spirit
about the beginning of this teaching.

and were afflicted. In the text there is the word of command: vajezav
jehova, \"the Lord commanded\"; nor was he allowed to argue against it:
\"The law is not given to the righteous\", 1 Tim. 1, 9. Adam was then
still righteous, therefore no law was given to him. From this he deduced
that this was not a law, but only an admonition. But since there is no
sin, since there is no law, Rom. 4, 15, he finally came to the point
that he said that original sin was nothing, and he made a big deal of
it, bragging and triumphing with this mended argument, as if he had
found such a treasure, which until then had been hidden and unknown to
the whole world. But now it is useful to learn how the devil deals, so
that we can meet him wisely.

It is true that both sayings are St. Paul\'s, that there is no law given
to the righteous, 1 Tim. 1, 9, and that there is no transgression where
the law is not, Rom. 4, 15. But it is right for a good dialectician to
pay attention to the devil\'s cunning and presumption, which is also
used afterwards by his serfs, the poor sophists. They stand on the
Scriptures (for it would be ridiculous that they would teach people
nothing but their own dreams), but they do not bring them out
completely, but always take such sayings that seem to be for them, but
that which is against them they either avoid and cunningly conceal, or
falsify with devious glosses.

\(99\) So Matth. 4, 2. 3. when the devil heard that Christ stood on the
trust of God in great hunger, he presumed to lead him on the forbidden
trust, that is, that he should tempt God; and for this he used the
saying from the 91st Psalm, v. 11. 12. which was convenient for him:
\"He has commanded his angels over you, that they should carry you on
their hands, so that you do not strike your foot against a stone. But
that which was contrary to his purpose, namely, that the angels should
guard us in our ways or in our occupation, he cunningly avoided and left
it undone. For in this is the resolution of the whole argument, namely,
that the angels may find our guardians and keep us, but so far as we are
in our

**[132 L.i,i3L-E. Interpretation of Genesis 2:16, 17. \".i, im-im.
133]{.underline}**

Because of it. To this resolution Christ points out finely, when he
reproached him with the commandment Deut. 6, 16: \"Thou shalt not tempt
thy Lord God. For with this he indicates that man\'s way is not to fly
in the air, for this is the way of birds, but the steps that descended
from the temple and were made so that one could come down through them
easily and without any danger. Therefore, when we are in our profession
or office by God\'s command or by the command of men who have the right
virtue of the profession, we should believe that we cannot lack the
protection of the dear angels.

This is a useful rule when one has to argue with swarm spirits. For
careless people are deceived and seduced when they have to deal with
cunning and devious people who, according to their habit, argue a
divisis ad conjuncta, or use what scholars call fallaciam compositionis
et divisionis, that is, they put together what is supposed to be
separate and does not belong together, and do not fully present the
sayings of Scripture. And this is precisely what happens in this
argument: no law is given to the righteous; Adam was righteous,
therefore no law was given to him, but only an admonition. Whoever is
not careful and prudent here is easily and unawares caught with a
terrible conclusion that it was no sin for Adam to have eaten of the
apple, because the law had not yet been. For it is true that where there
is no law, there is no transgression.

\(101\) And I was about to say that even some in our time have been
deceived by this very argument. For thus they speak of original sin as
if it were not a guilt, but only a punishment; just as in one place
Erasmus expressly argues that original sin is a punishment of the first
parents, which we descendants must also take upon ourselves for the sake
of another\'s guilt, without our merit. Just as a child of a whore must
have shame and disgrace upon him, not from his own fault, but from his
mother\'s; for what can he have sinned, he says, who has not yet been
born? Such an argument is probably in harmony with reason.

She also likes it, but it is full of sin and blasphemy.

What then is the defect of this argument or conclusion? Just this common
defect, that the text is not completely quoted, but mutilated and
shortened with the highest infidelity. For the text reads thus: \"We
know that no law is given to the righteous, but to the disobedient, to
the slayers, to the adulterers\" 2c. What else follows from this, but
that Paul speaks of the law given after sin, and not of the law given by
God the Lord when Adam was still perfect, pious and righteous. To the
righteous, says St. Paul, no law is given, therefore it follows
irrefutably that the law is given to the sinful and harmful nature.

\(103\) But is it not a great sin and confusion that in such important
matters the sayings of the Scriptures are thrown together? Adam after
the fall is not what he was before the fall in the state of innocence,
and yet such enthusiasts make no distinction between the law given
before sin and that given after sin; but what Paul says of the law that
came after sin, they draw with lies and blasphemy on the law given in
paradise. For if sin had not existed, neither would the law, which
reproaches sin, have existed; as I said above, that the perfect nature
had no need of police and law, which is as a branding iron and, as Paul
calls it Gal. 3, v. 24, a disciplinarian. Just as a child, because it is
evil, must have a disciplinarian and a rod; and a prince and ruler,
because he has disobedient citizens and subjects, must have city slaves
and executioners. Therefore Paul actually speaks of such a law, which
was necessary after nature had been corrupted by sin.

Now I have also said above for what Adam needed the command from the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, namely, that he might have an
outward worship and an outward work of obedience to God. The angel
Gabriel is also without sin and a pure and innocent person.

**134 L. 1, 137-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 2, 16. 17. W. 1, 1SK-1SS.
135**

Nevertheless, he takes a command from God that he should instruct Daniel
in great things, item, that he should announce to the virgin Mary that
she should be a mother of the Lord Christ, who was promised to the
fathers. These are indeed faithful commandments or orders, which were
given to the innocent nature. So also Adam was commanded by the Lord
before the fall that he should not eat of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, which he would have done willingly and with great
pleasure if he had not been deceived and seduced by the devil. But Paul
speaks of another law, namely of that, as he himself clearly says, which
is not given to the righteous but to the unrighteous. Now who is either
so stupid or foolish and nonsensical who would conclude from this that
no law was given to Adam, because he heard that Adam was righteous? For
nothing else follows from this, but that this law, which is given to the
unrighteous, was not given to the righteous Adam; but because a law was
nevertheless given to the righteous Adam, it must follow that it was
another law than that which is afterwards given to the unrighteous.

\(105\) Therefore in this argument there is the error or fallacia
compositionis et divisionis, as stated above; for the text is not
presented whole, but mutilated. Moreover, there is also a double
ambiguity here: first, that there is another law before sin, and another
after sin; second, that to be righteous is much another thing before sin
than after sin. This is useful to remember, and good arts should thus
serve and be used in important dealings and disputations. For they were
not invented for the useless quarreling that was carried on in schools,
but so that by them one could get out of great and difficult affairs.
For the devil has a great purpose in this argument, namely, to persuade
people that there is no original sin, which in truth is no different
than denying the suffering and resurrection of Christ. Therefore St.
Paul\'s saying should not hinder us, but we may boldly conclude with
Moses that Adam in his righteousness was given a law and commandment
that he should not eat of the tree.

of the knowledge of good and evil; as God gives commandments and orders
to the angels. But because he transgressed this commandment, he sinned,
and afterwards in sin begat men who are also sinners.

III\.

**For the day you eat of it, you will die of death.**

First, this clear threat also shows that Adam was given a law; second,
it also proves that Adam was created in a state of innocence and
righteousness; for there was no sin then, because God did not create
sin. If Adam had kept this commandment, he would never have died. For
death came for the sake of sin; so were all the other trees in paradise
created to serve man for this natural life, and to keep it fresh and
healthy, without any defect or change.

\(107\) But it seems to us to be a strange business now, that this
natural life should be without death and what tends to cause it, as
diseases, pox, and foul and stinking superfluity in the body; (2c.) as
in the state of innocence there was nothing unhealthy or stinking in the
body of man, nor did it pass away, but everything was most beautiful and
without any defect or injury to the limbs and senses, and yet was a
natural life. For Adam ate, drank, digested, 2c. and would also have
done other natural works of this life, if he had remained so, until he
had been taken up into a spiritual and eternal life.

\(108\) For we have also lost this through sin, that now between the
temporal and the future or eternal life there is such a terrible means,
namely death. In the innocent state, however, such a means would have
been sweet and joyful, through which Adam would have been delivered into
spiritual life, or, as Christ calls it in the Gospel, Matth. 22:30, into
the life of angels, in which all natural works cease. For in the
resurrection of the dead we shall neither eat, nor drink, nor be free
2c. So such a natural thing would have ceased and would have been
followed by a spiritual one.

**[136 L-1, i \"s-in. Interpretation of Genesis 2:17. W. i. is\"-\"\".
137]{.underline}**

Life; just as we still believe, through the grace of the Lord Christ,
that it will follow. And if Adam had put away childish honor and had put
on heavenly honor, he would also have put away all earthly works, which
would have been pure and without any unpleasantness or burden, and would
have been transferred from this childish innocence (that I call it so)
into a manly innocence, which the angels have and we will also have in
the life to come.

For this reason I call it childish innocence, that Adam was created in a
middle class, that is, in such a state, in which he could be deceived by
the devil and fall into this misery, in which he has come. Such danger
of sinning and falling will not be in the perfect innocence that we will
have in the future and spiritual life, and this also means here the
threat of punishment: \"Whichever day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt
surely die the death. As if he wanted to say: You can indeed remain in
the life for which I have created you, but you are nevertheless not
immortal, like the angels. You have, as it were, a free hand over your
life, you can remain in it and afterwards be raised to an eternal
immortality; but again, if you are not obedient, you will fall into
death and lose immortality.

Therefore there is a great difference between the spiritual state or
life of the angels and Adam\'s innocence. The angels, as they are now,
cannot fall; but Adam could fall, for he was in such a state that he
could become immortal (for he was without all sin), and could be
transferred from filial glory to an eternal life in which he could no
longer sin. Again, he could also fall from this childish innocence into
condemnation, sin and death; as also happened. He was immortal, because
he had the trees, the fruit of which was to serve vigorously for the
preservation of life; but this immortality was so certainly not assured
and confirmed to him that it would be impossible for him to fall again
into mortality.

But why God wanted to create man in this middle class is not clear.

Do not stop us to discuss or to inquire about it, as also this, that man
is created in such a way, that from one all the others are begotten. But
angels are not created in this way, for they do not beget, nor are they
begotten, but live in a spiritual life. But this is to be wondered at,
that God created man with this counsel and purpose, that, after having
created him for a natural life and natural and bodily works, he
nevertheless gave him the power of understanding that is in the angels;
that therefore man is composed of two natures, one which he has in
common with the other animals, the other which is angelic.

Since we are about to speak of the nature of angels, we must also say
that the Fathers wrote that something similar happened in the creation
of man and angels. But this similarity does not refer at all to the
reproduction, because there is no such thing in the spiritual nature,
but to the imperfection. For as I have said of man that he was given a
free hand, as it were, by God, so also the angels, as soon as they were
created, were not made so firm and stable in their nature that they
could not have sinned. That is why Christ says John 8:44 that Satan did
not exist in truth. Therefore the holy fathers thought that there was a
fight and a rebellion between the angels, in which some of them stood by
the most beautiful angel, who, because of certain gifts, had risen above
all the others. This does not seem to be out of keeping with the truth,
nor is it out of keeping with the fact that Christ says he did not exist
in truth, and that Jude says in his epistle, v. 6, that the angels did
not retain their principality, but lost their dwelling place. On this
opinion they also drew the text Isa. 14, 12. But as far as this text is
concerned, it is certain that the prophet there speaks of the king of
Babylon, who wanted to sit on the throne of God, that is, wanted to rule
over the holy people and the temple.

113\) Now whether there has been a discord among the angels, or whether
there has been a discord among the angels, which to me is the same, is
not clear.

**[1382 .i, 141-14\". Interpretation of I Genesis 2, 17. W.i, 202-svs.
139]{.underline}**

If the proud angels were more pleased with the great humility of the Son
of God and wanted to prefer and exalt themselves above him, it is
certain that the angels were also in such a state of innocence, which
was changeable. But since the evil angels were thus judged and
condemned, the good ones were so confirmed and assured that they could
no longer sin; for they were all chosen, just as the evil ones were all
rejected. But if the dragon or the evil angels had remained innocent,
they would also have been confirmed afterwards, so that they could not
have fallen. In this way the fathers say that the angels were created in
righteousness and were confirmed in it afterwards, but those who fell
did not exist in the truth, as Christ says.

\(114\) But we should not think that they were few in number, for Christ
says in the Gospel Luc. 11:18 that Satan has a kingdom. And as among the
highwaymen there is one who rules all things by his counsel and power:
so also the evil angels have their prince and chief, Beelzebub, who has
been a boaster of this sedition and division among them.

Here we find a question of which all sophists\' books make much talk and
yet report nothing certain, namely: What is hereditary righteousness?
And some make a skill or ability out of it, some something else. But if
we want to follow Moses, we can say that hereditary righteousness can be
called that, that man has been righteous, truthful, sincere, not only
bodily and outwardly, but especially inwardly in the heart, and that he
has known God, has been obedient to Him with all his desire, has
understood the works of God without instruction from another, from
himself. How this is a clear example, that when Adam sleeps a deep sleep
and God builds Eve out of his rib, Adam recognizes God\'s work as soon
as he wakes up, and says: this is the bone of my leg. But isn\'t this an
excellent, high mind, that it understands and recognizes God\'s work as
soon as it looks at it?

116\. to this hereditary righteousness also belongs the fact that Adam
has been

He loved with all his heart and with the purest affections; he lived in
peace among the other creatures, without fear of death and without
shying away from all diseases; he also had a body sent to all obedience,
without all the evil affections and base lust that we now feel in our
bodies. How then we can have a beautiful and certain picture of
hereditary righteousness in the corruption that we now feel in this
nature of ours.

When the sophists speak of original sin, they speak only of the wretched
and shameful fornication and lust pestilence. But in fact, original sin
is the fall of the whole nature, by which first of all the mind is
darkened, so that we can no longer perceive and understand God and His
will, nor His works. After that, the will is also wonderfully insane and
counterfeited, so that we do not trust in the goodness and mercy of God,
do not fear God, but are sure, abandon God\'s word and will, and follow
the lust and stimulation of the flesh; item, that our conscience is no
longer quiet and satisfied, but despairs, seeks and follows unseemly and
forbidden means and help, when it thinks of God\'s judgment. Such great
and abominable sins are so deeply rooted in nature that they can by no
means be completely torn out in this life; and yet they do not touch the
wretched sophists with a word. So original sin shows what original
righteousness is, and again, if you consider original righteousness, you
can understand what original sin is, namely, a loss or deficiency of
original righteousness; just as blindness is a deprivation or deficiency
of sight.

And this extends much further than the monks think, who understand
hereditary righteousness from chastity, when one should first look at
the soul and then at the body, which is also thus tainted and defiled
with evil desire. In the soul, however, the most noble pity is that it
has lost God\'s knowledge, that we do not thank God everywhere and in
all things, that we do not take pleasure in His works and deeds, do not
trust Him, become enemies of Him and blaspheme Him when He attacks us
with well-deserved punishment.

140 L i, i4s-145. Interpretation of I Genesis 2:17. 18.W.i, sos-sio. 141

Item, if we have to deal with our neighbor, we follow our lusts and own
affections, rob, steal, find adulterers, death slayers, are tyrannical,
unkind, merciless 2c. Heat and fornication are also part of original
sin, but much greater are the inward sins of the heart, such as
unbelief, blindness, despair, enmity and blasphemy; of which spiritual
misery and misery Adam in his innocence knew nothing.

119\) Therefore, there are also many punishments of original sin, which
cannot be called better than to say that original sin is the loss of all
perfection, which Adam had in paradise: as that he was of a sharp mind
and soon understood that Eve was of his flesh, also had finished and
actually knew all creatures, was righteous, upright, of an excellent
mind and sincere, but still of an imperfect, will. For perfection was
saved after the natural life into the spiritual. That is enough of this
text, in which the order of the church is presented to us. Now Moses
continues.

**Fourth Part.**

**From the creation of Eve.**

V. 18. **And God the Lord said, It is not good that man should be alone;
I will make him a helpmeet to be with him.**

We have heard of the church that it is included in the word and service
of God and that it is appointed with it; for nature, while it was still
perfect and without sin, had no need of the police and worldly order.
Now also the housekeeping is established here, and God makes a husband
out of the lonely Adam, adds a wife to him, whom he needed for the
increase of the human race. As I have said above about the creation of
man, namely, that Adam was created with well-considered counsel; so we
see here also that Eve is made with special counsel. Which Moses
therefore indicates once again, that we see that the

Man is a special creature, created to be partaker of divinity and
immortality. For a man is a better creature than heaven and earth, with
all that is therein.

In particular, Moses speaks of the other part of human nature, that is,
of the woman, in such a way that she was created with the special
counsel of God, so that he might indicate and prove that the female
gender, which was to serve for the increase of the human race, also
belonged to this life for which Adam was waiting. And it follows from
this that if the woman had not been deceived by the serpent and had
sinned, she would have been equal to Adam in all respects. For that she
must now be subject to man is a punishment laid upon her after sin and
for sin\'s sake, as well as other hardships and dangers, such as labor
and pain in childbirth and other innumerable miseries. Therefore Eve was
not as a woman is now, but she was in a far better and more excellent
condition than Adam, who was not unequal to any thing, neither in bodily
nor spiritual gifts.

\(122\) Now here is a question, because God says that it is not good
that man should be alone: What good is he talking about, since Adam was
righteous and had no need of a wife, as we, who have a sinful, corrupt
and leprous flesh, do? Answer: God speaks of the common good that
affects the whole human race, not of that which affects a person. For
the fact that Adam has innocence is a good that pertains to his person
alone; but he does not yet have the common good that the other animals
have, of which every species multiplies and breeds. For Adam was still
alone and had no companion for this noble work of begetting children and
preserving his species. Therefore good is called here the increase of
the human race. And so Adam, although he was innocent and righteous, did
not yet have the good for which he was created, namely immortality, in
which, if he had remained innocent, he would have been placed by God in
his time. And is this the opinion that Adam is probably the most
beautiful creature and, as much as his

**142 L itü-147. interpretation of Genesis 2:18. W. i, rn-ri\". 143**

He still lacks one thing, namely the gift of multiplication and
blessing, because he is still alone.

Now that nature is corrupt, the woman is necessary not only for
increase, but also for companionship and the protection of life; for
housekeeping requires the servitude of women; indeed, which is to be
lamented, the woman is also necessary for the remedy against sin.
Therefore both this, namely, the household service and medicine, are to
be considered in the woman; as Paul 1 Cor. 7, 2. says: \"To avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife.\" And Magister
Sententiarum rightly says that the marriage state was ordered in
paradise for service, but after sin also for medicine. So then we must
use wives to prevent sin; which is a shameful thing to say, but
nevertheless the truth; for those who take wives only for the sake of
service are very few.

The other animals, however, do not have this need; therefore they come
together only once a year and are satisfied with that, as if they wanted
to say and prove by this act that they come together only for the sake
of service. But it is different with people: man and woman must come
together in marriage to avoid sin. That is why we are conceived and born
in sins; for parents come together not only for the sake of service, but
also for the sake of the remedy to avoid sin.

\(125\) Nevertheless, under this medicine and in this miserable state,
God the Lord fulfills His blessing that people are conceived and born in
sin and with sin, which would not have been the case in Paradise. For
the begetting of children would have been a very holy work and without
all rutting and fornication (which is to be found nowadays), and if the
children had been born in hereditary righteousness and sincerity, they
would have immediately recognized God without teaching and admonition,
praised Him and thanked Him 2c. But these things are now all lost, and
yet it is profitable that we should know them, that we may know the
difference of the state wherein we are now, which is original sin, and
that wherein Adam was, which is hereditary righteousness; whereupon also
we may know the difference of the state wherein we are now, which is
original sin, and that wherein Adam was, which is hereditary
righteousness.

hope when everything will be brought back, Acts. 3, 21.

For the sake of the word \"let us make,\" I have indicated above that
Eve is created with special, well-considered counsel, so that one should
see that she also belongs to the company of an eternal and better life;
for the other animals, which have only a natural life, are without hope
of an eternal life.

That the Latin text has simile sibi (a helpmate), who is like him, is in
the Hebrew: Quod sit coram eo, \"who is around him\"; and this word also
makes a distinction, so that the woman, as a man, is distinguished from
all the females of the other animals, who are not always around their
husbands. But the woman in the human race was created to be everywhere
and always around her husband; just as the imperial laws call the
marriage state an inseparable and indistinguishable society. But the
female sex of the other animals desires the man only once in the whole
year, and when she has become pregnant, she goes back to her own and
takes care of herself, takes no further care of the young that are born
of her at the other time, and does not live with the man all the time.

But with the marriage among men it is different. There the woman must
commit herself to the man in such a way that she must remain around him
and live with him as one flesh. And if Adam had remained in the state of
innocence, this would have been the most loving company between man and
woman, and the work of childbearing would also have been completely holy
and honest, and the shame, which is now and comes from sin, would not
have been that man and woman then had to hide themselves. But, as it is
now no disgrace to eat, drink and sleep with a woman, 2c., so also the
conjugal cohabitation would have been an honor and not a disgrace.

But is this not a terrible case? For in truth no work in all nature has
been more excellent or more wonderful than childbearing, which is the
highest work according to the divine service.

**144 L. I, \"7-I \"o. Interpretation of Gen. 2, 18. 19. w. 1, 213-SIS.
145**

without sin than to praise and thank God without sin. This work still
remains in nature, like other remnants of the first creation. But how
disgracefully this same work is corrupted and insane by the Fall! Man
and woman are honestly given together by the church, but they themselves
come together with the utmost shame; that I should not know what
filthiness is in the flesh, as the animal lust and heat, which are all
manifest signs of original sin.

\(130\) Thus the woman was given to Adam as a helpmate, for he alone
could not beget children, just as the woman alone could not beget
children. This is indeed a great praise and glory of man and woman, that
in childbearing the man is a father, and the woman a mother and helpmate
of the man. But if we look at the state of innocence, childbearing was
far better, more sweet and more holy.

Now one finds many people who do not want to have children, and such
barbaric cruelty and inhumanity is most common among nobles and great
lords, who often abstain from marriage for this one reason, so that they
do not have heirs and children. It is even more disgraceful that lords
and princes are found who allow themselves to be forced not to take
wives, lest their family be multiplied too much. Such people are worthy
to have their memory wiped out from the earth. And who would not want to
curse such swine and unfaithful people? But, as I said, this is also a
sign and fruit of original sin, otherwise we would marvel at
childbearing as the highest work of God, and praise it as the greatest
gift.

For this reason, it has been found that the female sex has been attacked
with insults and blasphemies, which the ungodly illegitimate state of
the priests in particular has done a great deal. Now, on the other hand,
it is a great blessing that God, as it were against our will, preserves
the female sex for us, both to bear children and as a medicine against
the sin of fornication. In paradise, the woman would have been the
man\'s helpmate,

Now it is almost primarily and most of all a medicine, of which one can
hardly speak without shame; after all, one cannot use it without shame.
This is the fault of sins. For in paradise, the lying together of man
and woman would have been done without any shame, as a work created and
blessed by God, and would have been an honest pleasure, like eating and
drinking. Now, unfortunately, it is such a shameful and terrible lust
that physicians compare it to the terrible disease, the falling
addiction. And it is actually a real disease during and besides the work
of childbearing. For since we are in the state of sins and death, we
must also bear this punishment in ourselves, that we cannot use the
woman without abominable heat and fornication and, as it were, without a
terrible falling addiction.

133 And this same thing happens to us in spiritual gifts because of sin.
For though we have faith and live by faith, yet we cannot be above
doubting and feeling death; and such punishment of original sin the holy
fathers have well seen and felt. Therefore the Scripture calls the
members of the marital works ervah, which is shame or disgrace. What
follows here is, as it were, a repetition, which Moses uses so that he
may be able to describe how the woman was created; therefore it is to be
read as a thing that happened long ago, thus:

**V. 19 For when God the Lord had made of the earth every beast of the
field and every fowl of the air, He brought them to man to see what He
called them.**

\(134\) As if to say, God would create the woman with certain and wise
counsel; for he saw that every one of the other animals had his helper,
except Adam, who was still alone. Therefore he brought to him all the
animals, which, when Adam had noted and named them all by name, he found
none like him. Here we are reminded once again to consider the excellent
intellect and wisdom, which are in

146 L. 1, 14S-IK1. interpretation of Genesis 2, 19. 20. W.I, SIS-S19.
147

Adam was, who, after having been created in innocence and righteousness,
looked at all animals and knew, without any special input and new
enlightenment or revelation, only by the excellence of his nature, each
nature and quality, of which he gave each one a name according to its
nature and convenient. To such a knowledge and light was also followed
the dominion over all animals, which is also indicated herewith, that
Adam gives to every animal a name of his liking. Therefore he was able
to rule and force lions, bears, gentle pigs, tigers and all other
animals with one word, so that they had to do all kinds of things that
were according to their nature. We have also lost this through sin.

Therefore it is no wonder that we have no knowledge of God, because we
do not know nor understand the nature of animals, what power and effect
they have. There are many books describing the nature and properties of
trees and animals, but how much time and how much attention must have
gone into them before they were discovered by experience? But in Adam
there was another light and knowledge, who, as soon as he looked at an
animal, understood its whole nature and power, much better than we do,
even if we follow and investigate such things throughout our lives. And
as such knowledge was an excellent gift in Adam, so it was also
especially pleasing to God. That is why he called him to use such
knowledge and to give names to all animals.

V. 19, 20: **For as man would call all living creatures, so should they
be called. And Adam gave to every beast, and bird of the air, and beast
of the field, his name: but for man there was found no helper round
about him.**

How much knowledge and wisdom there was in the one Adam! Although he
lost a great deal of it through the fall, I still believe that
everything that is still in all wise people\'s books, which were written
so many hundreds of years ago, is still there.

From the time when the arts were invented, taken together, they could
not have been equal to this wisdom, which nevertheless remained in Adam
after the sin, but after that was gradually obscured in his descendants
and has now almost disappeared altogether.

Further we may note here that Moses is still in the description of the
works of the sixth day. For that which he said in brief words in the
first chapter, v. 26: \"Let us make man,\" he wanted to emphasize more
abundantly and powerfully in this chapter and distinguish man from the
other animals with many proofs and arguments. That is why he spends the
whole of the other chapter explaining how man was created. He said of
man that he was made from the earth and that God had blown a living
breath into his face and then brought before him the whole collection of
all animals. Since Adam could not find a helper among them, God made the
woman a helper and companion for the procreation and preservation of the
human race. For God did not want Adam\'s descendants to be created from
the earth in such a way as he was, but wanted man to be begotten like
the other animals. For as far as natural life is concerned, we eat,
drink, beget and are begotten like other animals. And yet Moses dealt
with this with great counsel and concern, that he should separate and
distinguish man from the other animals, so that it might be accomplished
that man, after his natural life, should be partaker of the spiritual
and eternal; but this, as I have said, belongs all to the work of the
sixth day. For since God had said, \"Grow and multiply,\" an explanation
was needed as to how the woman was related to Adam, made and trusted.

But this belongs to the fact that we remain firm and certain on this
opinion that there were actually six days in which God created
everything, against the understanding of Augustine and Hilarius, who are
in this delusion, as if everything was created in a moment.

**148 L. 1, 151-154. interpretation of Genesis 2, 19-21. W. I, S15-2S1.
149**

That is why they come far from history, follow allegories and invent I
do not know what kind of dreams. I do not want to say this to disgrace
or diminish the holy fathers, whose effort and work we should honestly
keep and recognize, but I say it to confirm the truth and to comfort us.
It is true that they were great men, but still they were men who could
have erred and erred and erred; that we do not exalt them as highly as
the monks did, who so worshipped all their things (and thought them to
be vain sanctities) as if they could not have erred. But I consider this
a great consolation, that one sees and finds that they have erred and
missed the mark at times. For so I think: if God has been able to credit
and forgive them for the same error and sin, why would I doubt His grace
and forgiveness? But again this brings despair, if you believe that they
have not suffered the very thing you suffer. Now it is certain that
there is a great difference between the apostles\' and the fathers\'
profession. Why then do we want to make the fathers\' writings equal to
the apostles\'?

\(139\) And as for this text, tell me, how is it possible that six days
can be an hour or a moment? For neither reason nor faith, which relies
on the Word, admits of such a thing. Therefore we are to know that there
were differences of time in creation; that is, that Adam alone was
created first, and after that the animals were brought to him and tried
whether he could find or see his equal and a helper in the same heap of
the animals. After all this Eve was ultimately created. And truly,
because these words: \"You shall eat of all kinds of trees\" 2c., Adam
actually heard, they indicate that they were spoken with time and time.
Unless someone wanted to turn to the most absurd allegories, as Origen
has done. For God, before whose eyes everything past and future is
present, is not spoken of here: but Adam is spoken of, who was and lived
in time, in whom also, as in a creature, there is a difference between
the time and the future.

past and future. I have recently wanted to repeat this here. Now let us
look at the text further.

V. 21 **Then God the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and
he fell asleep. And he took one of his ribs, and closed up the place
with flesh.**

Here again, not only faith, but also reason and necessity require that
there be another time to sleep and another time to watch, for all these
things must take their time. Now that Adam was created on the sixth day,
that the animals were brought to him, that he also heard the Lord, who
gave him a commandment from the tree of knowledge of evil and good,
item, that the Lord caused a sleep to fall on him, all this is clear and
in the day, that it belongs to time and a natural life. Therefore these
six days must be understood as true (natural) days, contrary to the
opinion of the holy fathers. For if we see that the opinion and thoughts
of the fathers do not agree with the Scriptures, we bear with them in
patience and acknowledge them in all reverence for our fathers and
forefathers: but for their sake we do not depart from the prestige of
the Scriptures.

And Aristotle has rightly and finely said that it is much better to
follow the truth than to cling too firmly to those who are dear to us
and our friends, and that this is especially proper for a philosopher to
do: for if both truth and friend are dear to us, we should prefer the
truth to the friend and respect it more. Now if a pagan is to do this in
worldly matters, how much more is it to be done in matters which have
the manifest testimony of Scripture, that we should not prefer the
reputation of men to the holy Scriptures! For men can be lacking, but
God\'s word is the wisdom of God Himself and the most certain truth.

But as far as this history is concerned, tell me, what could be more
fabulous and said, if one would follow reason? Would there also be
someone who would believe this history, how Eve is created, where it is
not reported so clearly and expressed in the Scriptures? Because here

**[150 A i, is-isa. Interpretation of I Genesis 2, 21. W. i, rsi-ss4.
151]{.underline}**

you see the contradiction in all other animals. For that which is
begotten alive is begotten of a man and a woman, and born of the woman
into the world; but here the woman herself is created out of the man:
which is as strange a work as that Adam should be made a living man out
of a lump of earth. If you were to ignore the Scriptures and follow the
judgment of reason, these would have to be the greatest and most
monstrous lies and fables. As Aristotle says that one can neither put
the first nor the last man; which reason would also force us to say,
where this text would not be. For if you suppose that this is true, as
it is in the whole creature, that nothing living can be born except from
male and female, then the first man cannot be made.

The same should be said of the world, of which the philosophers have
therefore concluded that it is eternal, according to which opinion
reason directs itself with all its force, even though there are causes
and proofs to prove that it is not eternal. For what will reason find a
beginning in that which is nothing? Now if you say that the world began
and is a time in which the world has not yet been, it follows
immediately that nothing was before the world. Other infinite
absurdities follow, which have moved the philosophers and caused them to
think that the world is eternal. But if you wanted to say that the world
was infinite, then a new infinite thing is found from hour to hour, that
always men would have to come and follow one another. But philosophy
does not admit many infinite things (infinita) and yet must admit them,
because it knows of no beginning of the world and of men. Such
contradiction and darkness gave the Epicureans cause to say that the
world and men would be approximately and without certain cause, and
would also perish approximately (and accidentally), as cattle fall and
die, as if they had never been. From this, then, other things follow,
namely, that either there is no God or God is not.

He does not take care of the world and people. Behold, reason is led
astray when it pursues its judgment and thoughts without a word.

Therefore it is useful to see how our reason or wisdom cannot come far
enough when it wants to measure and observe the creature. For what can a
philosopher know of heaven or of the world, since he does not know where
it comes from or where it finally wants to go? In ourselves we see and
feel that we are human beings; but that we have this father and this
mother we can by no means know, we must believe it. Thus all our
knowledge and wisdom go no further than matter and form extend (that is,
as far as they can think and see), although at times we are also
shamefully mistaken and lacking in this. But what causa efficiens and
finalis are (that is, what initially drives and causes a thing, and how
or where it ends, and for what purpose it is to serve), we cannot
indicate at all, especially when we speak (which is to be pitied) of the
world in which we are and live, item, when we are to dispute or think of
ourselves. But is this not a rather miserable and poor wisdom?

Aristotle says: Man and the sun produce man. This is well said, but if
you follow this wisdom, you will finally come to the conclusion that man
and the sun are eternal and infinite. For you will never find a man who
is either the beginning or the end; just as I cannot find the beginning
or the end of my own person if I know it for certain and do not rather
want to believe it. But what wisdom or science is this, if one does not
understand end and beginning? For that we know the [form]{.underline}
and shape of a thing is not much different than how a cow knows its
house and, as they say in the German proverb, looks at a gate.
Therefore, it can be seen from this that original sin is a terrible
case, because we have lost this knowledge, that we can neither know the
beginning of ourselves nor the end.

146\. that Plato, Cicero and other philosophers, who are the best,
disputes, the

**152 L. I, sol-IM. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 21. W. 1, 221-227.
153**

Let man walk straight, and bear up his head, as the other animals strike
it down to the earth; item, that they praise the power in man, by which
he can understand, distinguish, and judge; also, finally, conclude that
man is a peculiar creature, made for immortality: Dear, is it not a
small and sheer futile thing? for it is all because one knows and knows
the form of man. But if you want to understand the matter of man, will
not reason force you to conclude that this nature must be dissolved
again and cannot be immortal?

Therefore we should learn that the right wisdom is in the holy
Scriptures and in the Word of God. For the latter not only teaches about
the matter and form of the whole creature, but also shows at the
beginning and end of all things who created them and for what purpose
they were created. And if we do not know these two causes, our wisdom is
not much better than that of the unreasoning animals, which can also
hear and see, but of the beginning and end they know nothing.

For this reason, this is an excellent text, which is all the more worthy
of notice and certain belief, because it seems to be completely contrary
to all experience and reason. For here we are told of the beginning of
man, namely, that the first man was not naturally begotten, as the
others were begotten of him, as Aristotle and the other philosophers,
who let themselves be deceived by reason, dreamed. The procreation of
the offspring is done by procreation; but the first man is made and
formed from an earthen vessel, the first woman from the rib of the
sleeping man. Therefore we find here the beginning of man, which one
will never find in the philosophy of Aristotle.

When this beginning has been set, procreation follows, that one human
being is begotten and born from another through the union and mingling
of male and female. Which is also a strange creature, namely, that from
a droplet of the human body the whole human race is begotten; as Paul
from this text at Athens with the philosophers finely describes.

disputirt, Apost. Hist. 17:25, 26, 27: \"God Himself gives life and
breath to all men everywhere, and makes that of one blood all
generations of men may dwell on the face of the whole earth, that they
may seek the Lord, whether they may feel Him or find Him, though He is
not far from every one of us. Here Paul says how the whole human race
was created and came from the first man; as he says: from one blood. Now
if man is begotten from a little drop of blood, as the experience of all
men on the face of the earth testifies, then this is truly no less
wondrous, that the first man was created from a lump of earth, and the
first woman from the rib of man.

How is it that the creation of Adam and Eve seems so incredible and
wonderful to us, but the other work, how we are conceived and born of
each other, which we know and see, we do not wonder so much? Undoubtedly
because God\'s works and miracles become small with us, because they
are, as Augustine says, common and go on daily. So we are not surprised
at the miraculous sunlight, because it is daily, nor are we surprised at
other innumerable gifts of creation. For we have become deaf to all
these works and no longer pay attention to them; as Pythagoras probably
said that the equal and orderly movement of the heavenly bodies under
the firmament gives off a beautiful and lovely song; but because people
hear it daily, they become deaf to it: just as the people who live near
the waters of the Nile pay no attention to the great roaring and roaring
of the water, because they hear it daily, which would be offensive to
others who are not accustomed to it. Pythagoras undoubtedly took this
saying from the teachings of the Fathers, who did not want the movements
of the celestial spheres to make a sound; but this they did want, that
their order, nature and quality be very lovely and quite wonderful, but
not respected nor noticed by us ingrates and insensitive, nor is God
thanked for such a wonderful state and preservation of the creature.

**[154 D-1. rsb-i \"v. Interpretation of I Genesis 2:21. w. i, 227-230.
155]{.underline}**

It is a great wonder that a small seed falls into the earth and grows
into a great oak tree, but because all this is common and daily, it has
become small, as is the way of our reproduction. For why should this not
be worthy of all wonder, that a woman conceives male seed, which then
grows together and, as Job Cap. 10, 10. finely says, coagulates
together, and after that is formed into a child in the womb, lives and
increases, until it can bear the air. When the child is born, it does
not find new nourishment, but nourishment comes to it by a new way and
in a new manner, namely, that milk flows from both of the mother\'s
breasts, as from a well, so that the child is nourished. All these
things are highly miraculous and completely incomprehensible, but are
disregarded by us because they are mean and we have become quite deaf to
this most beautiful and lovely song of nature.

But if in true faith they were regarded and respected by us as they are,
they would truly be no less than what Moses says here: God took a rib
from the sleeping side of Adam and created Eve from it. Yes, if it had
pleased God to make us in just this way, like Adam, from a lump of
earth, we would no longer consider it a miracle, but would be more
astonished at this way that men are begotten of one another from the
seed of the man. For it is true what is said in a barbarous verse, but
not without cause: omne rarum carum, vilescit quotidianum, what is
strange is held dear, but what is common and daily is held in low
esteem. If the stars did not go out every night or in every place, how
could they be seen in the places where they were?

For this reason, our ingratitude is justly reproached and punished. For
if we believed that God was causa finalis and efficiens (i.e., wisely
ordered and created all things), then should we not also think ourselves
above

wonder at his works, delight in them, and praise and extol them always
and everywhere? But how many are those who do this from the heart? When
we hear that God took a lump of earth and made a man out of it, we are
so astonished that we think it is a fable; but that He now takes a drop
of the Father\'s blood and makes a man out of it, we are not astonished.
For this happens every day, but that has happened once; yet both works
One Master, equally artificial and mighty, performs. For he who made a
man from the earth still creates men from the blood of the parents every
day.

For this reason Aristotle engages in useless and futile talk, saying
that man is begotten by the sun and by a man. For although the bodies
are preserved by heat, the procreation of man has much another cause,
namely God\'s word, which thus gives and says to the man: Now shall thy
drops of blood become a male, a female. Which word the reason does not
know, therefore it must lead childish speeches of the cause of so great
things. Thus the physicians who follow the philosophers base procreation
on the right mixture of forces, the effect of which goes into matter
that has been previously disposed and prepared. And although reason
cannot deny this, for it sees that cold and dry natures are incapable of
procreation, while those that are moist and not too hot are convenient
for it, it still does not reach the first and foremost cause. For the
Holy Spirit leads us higher than nature and the qualities and their
mixtures, when he presents to us the Word by which all things are
created and preserved.

The fact that a human being is born from a drop of blood, and not a cow
or a donkey, happens by virtue of the word that God has spoken.
Therefore, as Christ teaches us in prayer, we call God our Father, and
our Creator, as we speak in faith. And if we want to look at this cause,
we can speak of such things chastely, purely and with joy, otherwise we
would not be able to speak of these things when we speak of them.

**[156 2 r, loo-isL. Interpretation of Genesis 2, 21. W. i, 230-233.
157]{.underline}**

The reason for this is that we cannot think without insolence and
disgrace.

From this disputation it can be seen once again what a terrible case
original sin is, since the whole human race does not know its beginning
or origin. We see that a man and a woman are made familiar with each
other and are given together; we also see that a woman becomes pregnant
from a drop of male blood and then gives birth to a child in her own
time. All these things, I say, we have before our eyes and are well
acquainted with them; but where the Word does not remind and teach you,
you do not understand and do not know the things you know and see
yourself, as the philosophers\' disputations, of which we have now said,
sufficiently prove. But is this not a terrible blindness and shameful
ignorance?

157 If therefore Adam had stood and remained innocent, it would not have
been necessary for him to inform his descendants of their origin; just
as it was unnecessary to inform Adam how his Eve was created: but he
himself knew her as soon as he looked at her, that she was bone of his
legs, and flesh of his flesh. Such a knowledge of himself and of the
other creatures would also have remained on the descendants of Adam, who
would all have known and understood causam efficientem and finalem, that
is, whence and for what purpose they were created, of which we now know
not much more than cattle:

Therefore this was a beautiful and lovely fable to the ears of reason,
which the philosophers used for all their pleasure when they heard it.
As some of them have heard it, especially those who have learned the
Egyptian arts and wisdom. But to us it is a precious and inexpressible
wisdom that we know, as this mocking and ridiculous fable (as the world
considers it) shows us, that the beginning of the human race is by the
word of God. For God takes an earthen lump and says, \"Let us make
man\"; then He takes Adam\'s rib and says, \"Let us make him a
helpmeet.\" Now let us look at the words and consider them, after we
have read the

The teaching, which has been necessary, has been sufficiently indicated.

159\. \"God the Lord,\" says Moses, \"caused Adam to fall thardemah,\"
that is, \"a deep sleep. For the word radam means to be overcome with a
sleep, as when one sleeps unknowingly and nods his head. For there is a
difference in sleep. Some are deep or heavy sleeps, which cannot be
prevented by dreams, and these are healthy sleeps; for they moisten the
body well and serve the digestion, and do not cause any major pain.
Some, however, are light sleeps, in which one is half awake and has many
dreams, but they harm the head and are an indication that the body is
not too healthy and strong.

\(160\) Moses says that Adam was overcome with a deep sleep, so that he
stretched himself out on a green place and drew his breath slowly, as
those who sleep well and sweetly do. This sleep, he says, the Lord let
fall upon him. For sleep is actually a very beautiful gift of God, which
falls on a man like a dew and moistens the whole body.

161 While Adam slept, the Lord took one of his ribs. The Hebrew word
zela means the ribs and sides. Therefore I understand that he did not
take a bare rib, but a rib covered and clothed with flesh; as Adam says
afterwards, \"This is bone of my legs, and flesh of my flesh. This is
also what God did by His word, so that we do not think that He cut or
divided the body, like a surgeon, but He said, \"Let this leg be clothed
with flesh and become a woman,\" and so it was done, after which He
closed up the open place of the side with flesh.

162 Here a disputation arises among the useless gloss poets, who engage
in so much useless talk. They say that the man has more ribs in one side
than in the other. But the physicians who understand anatomy know this
best. Lyra disputes and asks: \"Was there too much ribbing left in
Adam\'s body? But if this was the case, he says, then it is

**[158i , iW-i\". Interpretation of Genesis 2, 21. W. i, sss-ssb.
159]{.underline}**

was an unnatural and unusual thing; but if it was not so, it follows
that Adam had one ribbe less afterwards. Now this, he says, is also
monstrous and unusual. Finally, he answers and concludes that, as much
as Adam\'s body alone was found, the same rib was so superior that, when
it was taken away, Adam\'s body nevertheless remained whole and perfect,
and yet Adam needed such a rib beforehand, so that a woman could be
built from it.

To all this I answer with the word: \"God spoke\", which word resolves
all these arguments. For what is it necessary to dispute from where God
took the other matter, who in one word is able and creates everything?
But these questions arise from philosophy and medicine, in which one
disputes about God\'s works without the Word, and thereby accomplishes
so much that one loses the honor and glory of the holy Scriptures and
the majesty of the Creator. Therefore, let us leave these disputes and
simply stick to the simple history as told by Moses, namely, that Eve
was created from Adam\'s rib and that the same place of the womb was
closed up again with flesh, just as Adam was made from a lump of earth
and I from a drop of my father\'s blood. But how my mother conceived me
and how I was formed, grew and increased in her body, I leave to the
honor of my creator. For although it is unbelievable in truth that a man
should be born from a drop of blood, it is nevertheless true. If a drop
of blood has the power to beget a human being, why should God not be
able to build and create a human being from an earthen vessel or a
ribbon?

The fact that Adam sleeps in this way, that he does not feel, that he is
treated and acted upon in this way, is an example of the change that
would have taken place in the state of innocence. For if nature had
remained innocent, it would not have felt death, but would have lived in
the highest pleasure, in obedience to God and wonder at his works, until
the time of change came.

Adam would have found something similar to this sleep, which he had
while lying under roses and the most beautiful trees. In the same sleep
he would have been changed and transferred into the spiritual life, and
would just as little have experienced some pain and sorrow, as little he
feels here that his body is opened and a rib of flesh is taken from it.
Now the corrupt nature must suffer death and body and soul must be
separated from each other, but this is followed by a very sweet sleep
for the pious and faithful, until we awake to a new life. Just as Adam
here says with amazement, this is the leg of my legs, when he was
overcome with such a sweet and gentle sleep that he did not feel it
coming out of his side, so we will say in that day, behold, how to a
great glory suddenly stands my body, which is eaten and devoured by
worms 2c.

So far we have said far enough how Eve was created, which, although it
may seem like a fable to reason, is nevertheless the most certain truth.
For it is revealed and indicated in the Word of God, which, as I have
said, teaches correctly only of the two primary causes, the active cause
and the purpose cause, the knowledge of which, even in natural things,
if it can be had, is and serves much good. For what is the use of
knowing how beautiful a creature man is, if you do not know what he was
created for, namely, to serve God and to live with him for eternity?

Aristotle says something when he says that man was created for a blessed
state, which is to practice and prove virtue. But who, in this frailty
and weakness of nature, can attain such a goal, because even the most
pious and best have to contend with many a misfortune and evil, caused
partly by accident, partly by people\'s malice and stupidity? For this
perfect and blessed state, of which Aristotle says, wants to have a
quiet and calm heart, which a man cannot always keep in so many
temptations and troubles of misfortune. Therefore, man is given a

**[160 L.i, Interpretation of Genesis 2:21, 22. w.i, rss-s\^o.
161]{.underline}**

such goal, which he is not able to attain, prescribed in vain.

The primary and ultimate cause for which man was created is this, as
Scripture tells us, namely, that man was created to be like God and to
live with Him forever. Here on this earth, however, he should praise and
glorify God, give thanks to Him, and be obedient to His word in
patience. This goal we grasp to some extent, though weakly, in this
life, but in the life to come we will reach it fully. The philosophers
do not know such things; therefore the world is most foolish, since it
wants to be most clever, if it does not have the holy scripture or
theology. For men know neither their beginning nor their end, if they do
not have God\'s word; that I do not know of the other creatures, let
alone of the world.

**Fifth part.**

**[From establishment of domestic and marital status.]{.underline}**

[V. 22. **And God the LORD made a woman of the rib which He took from
man, and brought her unto him.**]{.underline}

This is a new and unheard-of way of speaking, that Moses no longer uses
the word \"to make\" or \"to create\", as happened above (Cap. 1, v.
26.), but says: God built; which has moved and caused all the teachers
to think that there must be a secret under this word. Lyra with his
Rabbi Salomon thinks it is seen with this word from the new form of the
female body. For just as the shape of buildings is broad at the bottom
and narrow at the top, so, he says, the body of women is also somewhat
broad and thick at the bottom, but narrow and indented at the top, while
men have broad shoulders and breasts. But these are accidental things of
the body (which can be in some and not in some). The Scriptures speak of
the whole body of man as a building, just as Christ called the body of
man a house (Matth. 12, 44).

The Others Seek a Secret Deu

They say that therefore the woman is called a building, that she is a
figure or likeness of the church. For as in a house there are various
parts, as the walls, beams or rafters, the roof, etc., so, they say, in
the church there are various services and offices, which for the sake of
various members is compared to a body. What is interpreted and drawn
from this to Christ and the church, I do not take amiss, but because it
is definitely a vain allegorical thing, one must stick to the historical
and proper meaning of this text and keep it. For a woman, especially one
who has a husband, is called a building not in the allegorical but in
the historical sense; as Scripture uses this kind of speech everywhere.
For example, Rachel says to Jacob, \"Take my maid, that I may be built
up by her,\" Gen. 30:3; similarly, the Scripture says of Sarah, Cap.
16:2. And in the 2nd book of Moses, Cap. 1, 21, it is said of the
mothers of sorrow: \"The Lord built them houses,\" that is, forgave
their family by his blessing for the good deeds that had been done to
the people of Israel against the king\'s command. In the story of David,
when he wanted to build a house for the Lord, he was told: \"You should
know that God wants to build you a house,\" 2 Sam. 7:11.

It is also a common way in the Scriptures that the woman is called a
domestic building for the sake of childbearing and rearing. Which
building form, which it should have had in paradise, we have so
completely lost through sin that we cannot even grasp it with thoughts.
But as I said above, that our present life is only a small and miserable
remnant of the original care and protection, item of the rule over the
animals (for sheep, cows, geese, chickens we still rule, but wild pigs,
bears, lions, etc.), we do not ask anything about our rule. ask nothing
of our regiment): so we also still have a dark image of this building,
that is, that he who takes a wife has the same as a nest or house, to
which he adheres as a certain place, as birds dwell with their young in
a little nest. Such dwelling have

**[162 \"i, im-iss.Interpretation of I Genesis 2, 22. W. i, 240-213.
163]{.underline}**

not those who live without marriage, as the impure and unchaste papists.

This cohabitation between man and woman, that they live with each other,
keep house with each other, bear and raise children, is a dark image and
remnant of the blessed cohabitation in paradise, for the sake of which
Moses calls the woman a building. For if Adam had remained innocent, his
descendants, if they had married, would have moved from him into a
little garden of their own, would have lived there with their wives,
would have built the earth with each other and begotten children, would
have needed no large walled houses, no kitchen, nor cellar, as we do
now; but, as the nests of birds are, they would have dwelt now and then
in the work and occupation of God; and the woman would have been the
noblest cause that the men had their certain seats and dwellings. But in
this misery of sins, since we now have to have houses for the sake of
cold, rain, snow and wind, we cannot even conceive with thought a
picture of the blessed state: and yet this same miserable remnant, if we
still have it, is an excellent gift of God, which to use without
thanksgiving is a great sin.

We all feel how much of the dominion that man had in paradise is lost,
now that we are so miserably disguised and defiled by sin; but is it not
still a great blessing that the same dominion is given to man and not to
the devil? For how would we stand against the invisible enemy if he had
the ability as well as the will to do harm? For if he only set the wild
beasts on us and provoked them, we would all die in an hour, in a
moment. Even though this dominion is almost completely lost, it is still
a great gift and blessing from God that we still have a little of it;
just as we still have something of childbearing; even though the women
in the innocent state would not only have borne and given birth to
children without all pain and suffering, but would also have been much
more fertile. Now there are a thousand diseases which prevent
procreation, and

often comes that either the fruit is not lasting, or the marriage comes
off barren; which are all infirmities and punishments of the terrible
fall of Adam and the original sin. So the woman is still a house of the
man, to which the man keeps himself, where he lives and with which he
takes care and labor to raise children and to feed them; as it will be
said later: \"The man will leave his father and mother, and cling to his
wife\" 2c.

In addition to other misfortunes and miseries, of which there are
innumerable in the state of marriage for the sake of sin, domestic
attendance is also disguised and corrupted by perverse people. As one
finds not only those who consider it wisdom to blaspheme the female sex
and to despise marriage, but also those who leave taken wives and throw
away all care for the children. All of these, by their wickedness and
perverse ways, tear down this building of God and are, in truth,
abominable monsters of nature. Therefore, we should be obedient to
God\'s commandment and recognize our wives as God\'s buildings, by which
not only the house is built up through child rearing and other services
and help necessary in housekeeping, but also the men are built up
through them, to whom the wives are like a nest and dwelling place,
where they keep themselves and live with pleasure.

The fact that Moses adds: \"and brought her to him\" is a fine
description of the betrothal or wedding ceremony, so that it is to be
especially noted. For Adam does not go to his pleasure and attack the
created Eve, but waits for God to bring her to him; as Christ also says
Matt. 19:6: \"What God has joined together, let not man put asunder.\"
For that man and woman come together in an orderly manner is God\'s
order and appointment; therefore Moses retains his peculiar and own way
of speaking. \"He brought her to him,\" he says. Who? Jehovah elohim,
that is, the whole divine Being, GOD Father, Son and Holy Spirit. These
say unto Adam, Behold, this is thy bride, with whom thou shalt dwell,
and with whom thou shalt beget fruit. And without a doubt, she gave Adam
the greatest pleasure and joy.

**[164 2 i. iss-iN\>. Interpretation of Genesis 2:22, 23. w. i, -
\"s-stö. 165]{.underline}**

How then still in this depraved nature the bride and bridegroom\'s love
for each other is cordial and great. But without this epileptic and
apoplectic lust, which is now in the state of marriage, it was a chaste,
very friendly and airy love: so also the giving together was very honest
and holy. Now, however, sin creeps and creeps into the eyes, ears and
all the senses at the same time.

For this reason, this text should be especially noted, not only against
the terrible abuse of desires and lust, but also so that the marriage
state can be affirmed and defended against the ungodly blasphemy and
abuse with which the pabstry has disguised and defiled it. For is it not
a great thing that God has ordered and instituted marriage even in the
state of innocence? But now we need such order and institution so much
more, how much more this flesh is weakened and corrupted by sin.
Therefore, this consolation stands firm against all doctrine of the
devil, namely, that the marriage state is a divine state, that is,
ordered by God Himself.

What must have occurred to the devils and the enemies of Christ that
they said that marriage is an unchaste state and that those who do not
have wives are the most suitable for church offices, since the Scripture
says in Deut. 11:44 that \"you shall be clean\"? Are husbands and wives
unclean? So God is a founder and instigator of uncleanness, who himself
gives his Eve to Adam? And did Adam do evil because of this, that he let
himself be persuaded to impurity, who in the innocent nature of marriage
could have done without it? For the sake of such blasphemies, is not the
godless priesthood justly punished, not only because it is defiled by
the multitude of fornicators and harlots, but also because it indulges
in other abominable and horrible sins to the point of disgust and
revulsion, so that it has long been ripe for the punishment of Sodom and
Gomorrah and has well deserved it?

177 Since I was a boy, I know that because of the ungodly and impure
conjugal life, the married state was so infamous that I thought I could
live without sin.

not think well of the conjugal life. For this had been inculcated in all
men, and all believed that whoever wished to live in a holy state
pleasing to God would not have to become a spouse, but would have to
live outside of marriage and take the vow of celibacy. For this reason,
many of those who were married still became monks or priests after the
death of their wives. For this reason, all those who have been diligent
in this work have undertaken and done a very necessary and useful work
in the Church, so that the married state would again be honored by
God\'s word and, as is only right, praised and glorified. Therefore,
praise God, it has now come about that everyone considers it good and
holy where one lives united and peacefully with a wife, even if one has
a barren wife or one who is burdened with other deficiencies.

178 But I am not against it, nor do I deny that there are some who can
live chastely without marriage. But because they have a greater gift
than other common people, they may use it and, as they say, sail with
its wind. But this chastity, which the pope praises in his monks, nuns
and priests, is stained and sullied with terrible sins, without which
the celibate life is conceived and instituted without the word of God,
yes, as this present history testifies, against the word of God. For how
would they triumph and rejoice if they could prove their illegitimacy
from God\'s Word in the same way that we can prove that the married
state is ordered by God? What diligence and force would they use to
force everyone to their celibate state? Now the whole celibate life of
the clergy and monks has this certain glory and praise, that it is a
human statute or, to speak with St. Paul 1 Tim. 4, 1. 3, a \"doctrine of
the devil\".

**V.23. And the man said, This is bone of my legs, and flesh of my
flesh: she shall be called a woman, because she is taken from a man.**

The saying that soon follows this text: \"For this reason a man will
leave his father and mother\" 2c., is thus drawn from Christ Matth. 19,
5. as if it were from

**[166 V 1, 17\"-17\". Interpretation of Genesis 3, 23. W. I, -tü-218.
167]{.underline}**

God Himself and not by Adam. But this is not difficult to understand.
For because Adam is pure and holy, his words are rightly called the word
of God; for God spoke through him, and in the state of innocence all of
Adam\'s words and works were truly God\'s word and works. Thus Eve is
also brought to him by God Himself. And as therefore God\'s will is
ready to establish the marriage state, so also Adam is ready with all
lust and holiness to take Eve to himself; just as a bridegroom\'s
heartfelt lust and love for his bride still is; but it is still tainted
by the leprous lust of the flesh, which was not in Adam when he was
still righteous.

\(160\) But it is astonishing that Adam, as soon as he sees Eve as a
building from him, recognizes her and says: \"This is bone of my legs,
and flesh of my flesh. These are not the words of a foolish or sinful
man who does not understand God\'s work and creation, but of a just and
wise man, full of the Holy Spirit, who reveals such wisdom as is still
unknown to the world, namely, that the active cause of woman and
marriage is God; but the final cause is this, that the man has a worldly
building and dwelling in the woman. Such wisdom and knowledge does not
simply come from the five senses and reason, but is a revelation of the
Holy Spirit.

The word happaam, \"now\", or \"for this time\", or \"yet\", does not
stand here in vain, as it seems here, but finely expresses the male
affect, who desires and looks around for such lovely company or
attendance of the female, which is not only full of love, but also of
holiness. As if he wanted to say: I have looked at all the animals and
considered the females that God has given to each animal for the
increase and preservation of its kind, but all of these are none of my
business; however, this is flesh of my flesh and bone of my legs, with
which I desire to live and to be obedient to God\'s will in the increase
and edification of my race. Such a full affect of love is indicated by
the little word \"once\". But we

have lost such pure affections and innocence. There is still a joy and
heartfelt longing of the bridegroom for the bride, but it is very impure
and frail, for the sake of sin. But Adam has had the very purest,
holiest and most pleasing to God affections, from which he is caused and
driven, that he says: \"This is at last once bone of my legs\"; not of
wood or of stones, not even of an earthen vessel, but it belongs more
closely to me; for it is made of my flesh and legs. And speaks further
thus:

**Mau will be her name, because she is taken from the man.**

\(182\) Just as Adam, through the Holy Spirit, recognized the past
things he had not seen, praises and glorifies God for building him a
helpmate and companion out of his body, so here he prophesies what will
happen in the future, because he says that she should be called a woman.
But here we cannot comply at all with the purity and niceness of the
Hebrew language. Isch means a man: but now Adam says here that Eve
should be called ischah, as if one wanted to say: a manly brave woman
who can do manly things.

183 This word is a wonderful and lovely description of the marriage
state, in which the woman, as the lawyers also say, shines through the
man\'s rays. For everything that the man has, the woman also has and
possesses, and so they have in common not only their goods, but also the
children, food, food and drink, bed, house and farm. They are also of
the same mind and will towards each other. So that the man is not
differentiated in any other thing than sex; otherwise the woman is
completely like the man. For whatever a man has in his house and is in
it, that also a woman has and is, except that there is a difference in
the sex. Therefore, as Paul indicates in 1 Timothy 2:13, she is male
from her origin, because she came and was taken from the man and not the
man from the woman.

184 We still have something of such a married community.

**[168 L.i, i-\"-174. interpretation of Genesis 2:23, 24. w. i,
169]{.underline}**

But this is very miserable, if we want to look at the first beginning.
For in the married state, the woman, if she is only honest, demure,
pious and God-fearing, shares equally with the man in care, food and all
kinds of household duties and housework. For this is what she was
created for in the beginning, and for this reason she is called a male,
so that she is distinguished from the father of the house only by her
sex, since she was taken from the flesh of a man.

\(185\) For though this might be said of Eve alone, who was created in
this way, yet Christ (Matt. 19:5) applies it to all women, saying that
man and woman are one flesh. So although your wife is not made of your
legs and flesh, yet because she is your wife, she is a master in the
house as well as you, without the law, which is given after the fall,
making the woman subject to the man. Which then is a punishment, like
others more, that diminishes the honor and glory that man had in
paradise, of which this text reminds us. For Moses does not speak here
of the present miserable and wretched life of the spouses. For Moses
does not speak of the present miserable and wretched life of the
spouses, but of the life of innocence in paradise, in which the man and
the woman would have been equal and one thing. As Adam prophesies here
that she should be called woman for the sake of equal rule and
housekeeping. But now the labor and sweat of the man\'s face is laid
upon him, and the woman is commanded to be the servant of her husband;
and yet there remaineth something residual, and as it were a remnant of
the same dominion, that the woman might yet be called woman, because of
the companionship or fellowship of the goods and possessions.

**V. 24 Therefore a man will leave his father and mother and cling to
his wife.**

186\. Matth. 19, 5. and Paul 1 Cor. 6, 16. also apply this as a common
rule to our marriage after the lost innocence. And if Adam had therefore
been innocent, his children would also have become husbands and wives,
leaving their parents\' table and home, and having their own children.

They would have had trees, under which they would have lived especially
from their parents. At times they would have come to their father Adam
and praised and glorified God with him, but after that they would have
gone back to their own. But now, after the fall, although everything
else has changed, this union and bond between husband and wife remains
firm, so that the man leaves his father and mother before his wife. But
since this does not happen, as at times husbands and wives leave each
other, this is not only contrary to this commandment of God, but it is
also a sign of the horrible madness and corruption that has come upon
mankind through sin and is fostered by the devil, who is the father of
all discord and disunity.

The Gentiles have also seen that nothing is more convenient or useful
than this union and companionship of husband and wife; therefore they
say that it is naturally decided that one cannot do without a wife, but
that it is necessary for her to keep her husband company until death.
And Christ also says in Matth. 19, 8 that Moses allowed divorce because
of the hardness of the hearts of the Jews, but from the beginning it was
not like that, but such evil and mischief, as adultery, sorcery and the
like, which happens at times between married couples, arose afterwards
from sin. Therefore, hardly the thousandth part of the first order and
institution has remained with us, and yet, for the sake of the children,
husband and wife still have their own little nest, according to this
saying, so that this estate and conjugal life may be gloriously and
powerfully confirmed by our first Father, even by God Himself, as Christ
attracts.

This \"abandonment\" is not to be understood in the sense that the
children, who would have entered the marriage state, would not have
visited their parents at all; but that the children, after they had
become married, would have had their own seat and nest. Now, in this
wretchedness of sin, it is also found that the children have to feed
their parents in their poverty and old age;

**[170 s i, 174-177. interpretation of i Genesis 2:24, 25. w.i. \"i-\"ö.
171]{.underline}**

But in paradise it would have been different and much better for us, and
there this would also have been kept so, that the man would have chosen
his own nest, like the birds, for the love of the woman and would have
left the dwelling with the parents. And this saying also belongs to
prophecy; for there was neither father, nor mother, nor children, and
yet Adam prophesied of the life of the husband and wife, of their own
dwelling, of a distinct territory or dominion through the whole world,
that each sex in particular should have its own place and nest to dwell
in.

V. 25. **And they were both naked, the man and his wife; and were not
ashamed.**

Here it can be seen as if Moses could have kept silent and omitted this
clause, if it did not indicate a particularly necessary thing. For what
does it matter whether Adam and Eve were naked or clothed in Paradise?
But it is truly an excellent and necessary clause, which in such a
thing, which we regard as bad and small, shows us and reproaches us with
how much misery and misfortune nature has fallen into through original
sin.

190 All peoples, especially those who live after midnight, shy away from
walking naked. Hence it also comes that what modest and serious people
are, in young fellows not only punish and scold short and warlike
mutilated coats, but also stay away from public bathing; but in such
places both men and women diligently cover the shame. This is a wisdom
and discipline that is to be praised. For what father could uncover
himself in the presence of his son without great sin and annoyance? But
Adam and Eve, says Moses, went naked and were not ashamed. Therefore,
going naked in those days was not only not a disgrace, but was also
praiseworthy, honest and sweet.

We have now lost this through sin. We are born naked and with smooth
skin, because the other animals bring all their skin, hair, feathers,
scales 2c. with them. Therefore we must

Against the heat of the sun we have the shade of the houses, against
rain, snow, hail 2c. various clothing. Adam would not have felt any of
these, but just as the eyes of man\'s body have this kind that neither
frost nor heat particularly affects them, so the whole body would have
remained safe from the cold. And if Eve, our mother, had sat with us
naked in many ways better, also our none would have been annoyed by the
bare shape of the breasts and other limbs on the body, of which one must
be ashamed now and which ignite evil desire and covetousness for the
sake of sin.

Therefore this text teaches us finely how much misfortune and misery
followed Adam\'s sin, for now it would be considered the greatest
nonsense if someone walked around naked. So now it is our greatest
shame, which would have been our highest honor and adornment at that
time. For while all animals, in order to cover their bare limbs, would
have had to have hair, feathers, scales, etc., it would have been very
honest for man that he alone would have been created with such a
glorious and beautiful body that he could have walked in smooth and bare
skin. But we have now lost such honor. For we must cover our bodies with
more diligence and care, not only for the sake of necessity, but rather
to prevent disgrace, than other animals, which are covered and protected
by nature.

193\. So this chapter emphasizes the work of the sixth day somewhat more
clearly, namely, how man was created with special, well-considered
counsel; and how a garden was made in Eden, in which man would like to
dwell and walk with pleasure; how also ultimately, with the prohibition
of the tree of knowledge, good and evil of the future church is decreed
and ordered by God Himself, an outward service, by which they would have
proven their obedience to God, if it had remained without Satan\'s
deceit and cunning, so as it was made. And so Adam, as some think, was
the same night with his Eve in paradise until the following Sabbath. But
what happened on the same day will be reported in the following chapter.

**[172 L. 1, 177-17\". Interpretation of Genesis 3, 1. W. I, Sbb-SSI.
173]{.underline}**

**The third chapter.**

**First part.**

**From temptation to fall.**

**V. 1. And the serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field
that God the LORD had made.**

In the previous chapter we heard how man was created on the sixth day in
the image and likeness of God, that his will should be good and pure,
and that his reason or understanding should also be sound, so that what
God wanted or said, man should also want, believe and understand. Such
pure and perfect knowledge must necessarily be followed by the knowledge
of all other creatures; for where the knowledge of God is perfect, the
knowledge of other things under God must also be perfect.

These things show how terrible and horrible the fall of Adam and Eve
must have been, by which we have lost the mind of reason, so gloriously
and beautifully enlightened, and the will, which was directed according
to God\'s word and will. Thus we have also lost the honor of our bodies,
so that now walking or being seen naked is the greatest shame, which at
that time was the most beautiful honor and a special advantage of the
human race over all other animals. But like all this, the greatest harm
is that not only is all this lost, but it is followed by a reversal and
turning away of the will from God, so that man does not want or do what
God wants and gives, item, that we do not know what God is, what grace
is, what mercy is, nor what sin is in itself. These are truly terrible
infirmities, and those who do not understand or see them must be blinder
than a mole. Experience teaches us much of such sorrow, but we cannot
fully feel how great it is.

We cannot look at the image in the state of innocence, as we can grasp
and understand it, in which the will was good and the reason was
righteous; in addition, the body of man was full of the highest honor
and glory. If we now consider the loss and deprivation of such gifts, we
can reflect and understand to some extent what a shame and sorrow
original sin is.

\(3\) Therefore, they give rise to many great errors that make light of
this terrible damage, and philosophically speak of corrupt nature as if
it were not corrupt. As they say, then, that the natural powers have
remained intact not only in man\'s nature but also in the devil. But
this is obviously false. For what and how little of it has remained, we
can see and feel to some extent; but how much of it we have lost, they
truly do not see who still argue that the natural powers have remained
intact. For the will, which should be good and righteous and please God,
be obedient to God, trust God and use the creature rightly and with
thanksgiving, is lost, so that our will makes a devil out of God, shies
away and is frightened when God\'s name is mentioned, especially when it
is pressed with God\'s judgment. But does this mean that the natural
powers are intact?

4 Now consider other lesser things, which are far below God. The
marriage state or union of man and woman is ordered by God, but how
terrible is it after sin? what nonsense and rutting is in the flesh?
Therefore, after sin, this union is no longer done publicly as a work of
God, but even married people flee the light and hide themselves. So we
still have the body, but, dear God, how miserable and wounded and
corrupted in many ways! We also have the will and ver-

**[174L .i, iTs-iA. Interpretation of Genesis 3, I. W. i, sss.
175]{.underline}**

But how in many ways it is shattered, insane and weakened! For as reason
is darkened and weakened by great and various ignorance, so also the
will is not only broken and destroyed, but is even turned away from God,
is hostile to God, and rushes with desire to evil, since it should do
the opposite.

Therefore, one should not so surely make such manifold corruption of
nature harmless or small, but great, namely, that man has fallen from
God\'s image, from God\'s and all other creatures\' knowledge, from the
most honest nakedness into blasphemy, into hatred and contempt of God,
yes, that is even more, into enmity against God; not to mention the
cruel tyranny of the devil, to which this wretched nature must be
subjected for the sake of sin. Therefore, I say, let such things be made
great, so that where the greatness of the harm and the disease is not
rightly recognized, the remedy is not recognized nor desired. For the
more you revile and belittle sin, the more grace will also become small
and little.

\(6\) Now this is what Moses said above, that Adam and Eve were not
ashamed when they were naked. Neither of them burned at the other with
vile lust, but when one looked at the other, they recognized God\'s
goodness, rejoiced in God and were secure in His goodness; since we now
not only cannot escape sin, but also fall into despair and enmity with
God. Which terrible case clearly enough indicates that the natural
powers have not remained intact.

7 But even more insolently may the sophists say this of the devil, in
whom there is much greater enmity against God, resentment and rage, than
in man: if he was not created evil, but had a will that was according to
God\'s will, which he has lost; has also lost the most beautiful and
purest mind, and has been transformed into an abominable spirit, which
rages and rages against its Creator. For is this not the greatest
disruption, that he has been turned from God\'s friend to the

most bitter and obdurate enemy?

\(8\) But against this they bring Aristotle\'s saying, when he says that
reason always stimulates and drives to the best; they also presume to
confirm this saying with other sayings of the holy Scriptures, item with
that, that the philosophers say that right reason is the cause of all
virtues. Now I do not say that this is not true when it is understood of
the things which are subject to reason, as when it is said how to rear
and govern cattle, build houses and sow fields: but in higher and
superior things it is not true. For how can one call reason righteous
that is hostile to God? and how can one call the will good that resists
God\'s will and does not want to be obedient to God?

9 Therefore, when they say that reason directs and leads to the best,
you say, yes, to the best of political and civil affairs, of which
reason can judge; in the same it says, judges and leads to that which is
honest and useful in the flesh and in the world. But how can it be
called good in higher and spiritual matters, because it is without all
knowledge of God and has even turned away from God\'s will? Now this is
also known, when one teaches about the knowledge of God, and deals with
the fact that reason may be set right again, then it is found that those
who want to be of the best reason and will (that I call it so) are most
bitterly hostile to the gospel.

\(10\) Therefore, in theology, we should first say that reason in man is
most hostile to God and God; secondly, the will, since it wants to be
most honest, is most contrary to God\'s will: as from this comes hatred
of the Word and persecution of pious Christian teachers. Therefore, as
we have understood, we should not minimize but rather magnify this harm
that has come upon human nature because of the sin of our first parents:
then it will follow that we will lament our sorrow and misery, and sigh
for the Lord Christ, your only physician and helper, who for this reason
has received from the Father

**[176L . 1, 181-IN. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 1. - W. I, L \"L \"s.
177]{.underline}**

is sent, that these damages and wounds, which the devil has inflicted on
us through sin, may be healed through him, and that we may return to
eternal glory through him.

\(11\) As for the history described by Moses in this chapter, I have
given my opinion before, namely, that I believe that this temptation and
temptation happened on the Sabbath, so that Adam and Eve were created on
the sixth day, Adam first, and Eve in the evening. The next day, early
on the Sabbath, Adam preached to Eve about God\'s will, how the most
gracious Lord had created the whole paradise for the benefit and
pleasure of mankind; that he had also created the tree of life out of
special kindness, from which the strength of the body could be renewed
and constant youth preserved; but he had forbidden one tree, the
knowledge of good and evil, from which one was not allowed to eat,
therefore one had to keep and render such obedience to a kind Creator.
Perhaps, as he told her about it and led her around in the paradise, he
would have shown her the same forbidden tree. Thus, Adam and Eve, in the
most splendid perennial of innocence and righteousness, full of all
peace and security for the sake of trusting in such a kind and gracious
God, went about naked and bare, speaking of God\'s word and commandment,
praising and thanking God as is proper on the Sabbath. There,
unfortunately, Satan came and reversed all this within a few hours, as
we shall hear.

Here again a whole bunch of questions is found. For cheeky people ask:
Why then did God let happen and allow the devil so much that he tempted
Eve? Why did Satan pursue her in the form of a serpent rather than
another animal? 2c. But who can show the cause of all things that the
divine majesty, as we see, has caused to happen? Why do we not rather
learn with Job Cap. 9, 2. and Cap. 33, 13, that God cannot be accused in
court, nor can He be held accountable to us for the things He does or
causes to happen? Why do

Do we not also agree with him that grass and trees are not green all
year round? Just as I believe that there would have been a constant
spring in paradise, without winter, snow and frost, which are now after
sin. But all this is in God\'s will and power, and we have enough to
know it; but to ponder and inquire about it more really and more closely
is an ungodly presumption. Therefore we, who are the clay of His hands,
Isa. 64:8, should refrain from disputing about such things and not judge
God our Lord, but rather let Him judge us.

\(13\) Therefore, let this be the answer to all such questions and
arguments, that it pleased God that Adam should try himself and exercise
his ability. As he still does today; when we are baptized and placed in
Christ\'s kingdom, he does not want us to be idle, but to practice his
word and gifts. That is why he allows us poor and weak people to be
sighted by the devil. In this way we also see that the Church, which is
now, praise God! swept and cleansed by the Word, must stand in constant
danger and struggle. For the Sacramentarians, Anabaptists and other
swarm spirits are stirring up, attacking and tempting the Church with
all kinds of temptations; in addition, there are also other internal
trials and temptations. God allows these things to happen, but not
because He has decided to leave the church or to let it remain in
trouble and perish, but, as the Book of Wisdom says in Cap. 10, 12, the
church and devout Christians are left in the battle so that they may
overcome and learn by experience that wisdom is the strongest of all.

\(14\) Here is another question, whereof it may be argued with less
danger, but with more profit; namely, why do the Scriptures thus involve
all things, and not rather clearly and openly say, that the angel, being
fallen, took hold of the serpent, and spake by him, and deceived Eve? To
this I answer thus: That the Scriptures have thus involved it, so that
it would be reserved for the Lord Christ and His

**[178 L.l, iW-iss. Interpretation of I Genesis 3, I. W.i, sss-sss.
179]{.underline}**

Spirit, which should shine through the whole world, like the sun at
noon, and open and discover all the mysteries of the Scriptures. And
because such spirit of Christ was in the prophets, they understood such
parables of the Scriptures.

\(15\) Now I have said that the serpent (as the animals have different
gifts among themselves) was especially cunning by nature, therefore it
was more convenient for the devil\'s game than other animals. And there
is a clear testimony of this here in the text of Moses, who says that
the serpent was more cunning than all animals on earth. We are now
surprised that there is such a strange cunning in the fox to pursue;
likewise a peculiar wit and skill to flee the danger: as it is known
that when he is tired, he throws his tail to the dogs that chase him; if
the dogs now catch him with great impetuosity and stand still, he takes
a great run and thus escapes. There are other animals like this, whose
special cunning and dexterity amaze us. But in the serpent all these
things were special and excellent, therefore it became a convenient and
comfortable tool for the devil to chase Eve.

**She said to the woman, \"Yes, should God have said that you should not
eat from all the trees in the garden?**

\(16\) Of this temptation the sophists also dispute what manner of
temptation it was: whether Adam and Eve sinned with idolatry, or with
pride, or safety, or with the mere eating of the apple? But if we want
to think about this matter diligently, as is proper, we will find that
this was the highest and most severe challenge and temptation. For the
serpent attacked the good will of God, and subjected himself to prove
from the prohibition of the tree that God\'s will against men was not
good, and thus attacked the very image of God and highest ability that
was in the perfect and not yet corrupt nature; yes, he subjected himself
to and endeavored to turn back and abolish the very highest will of God.

service that God Himself had ordained. Therefore, we argue in vain that
it was this or that sin, for Eve is tempted to all sins by being driven
to act against God\'s word and good will.

017 And Moses therefore spake very carefully, saying, The serpent spake;
that is, with that word he controverted the word. But the word which the
Lord had spoken to Adam was this: \"Do not eat from the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. This word was Adam\'s gospel and law, his
service to God and obedience that he could render to God in this
innocence. This is what Satan is doing, and this is what he is doing to
turn back, and this is not his only intention, as the foolish and
inexperienced think that he is pointing out the tree to them and
instructing them to break fruit from it. He does indeed instruct them,
but he adds a different and new word to it, as he is still wont to do in
the church.

\(18\) For if the gospel be taught pure and true, men may be assured of
their faith, and beware of idolatry. But where this is done, Satan does
not celebrate, but subdues and tempts himself in many ways, either to
lead people away from the word, or to counterfeit it. Thus, even in the
time of the apostles, many heresies arose and were stirred up in the
Greek church. One taught that Christ was not the Son of God; another
said that he was not the Son of Mary. As even today the Anabaptists
impudently and ungodly say that Christ took nothing of Mary\'s flesh.
And in the lines of St. Basil, some have specially dared to deny that
the Holy Spirit is God.

\(19\) We have also had examples of this kind in our lines, in which,
after the pure doctrine of the gospel has come to light again, there
have been found many a tempter of the works and of the word of God; and
there are other temptations besides these, and they do not cease, such
as that the devil drives men to fornication, adultery, and other
abominations and vices. But this temptation, when Satan GOt-

**[180-L. i, i\"-iM. Interpretation of Genesis 3:1. W. i, 2\"-\"7\".
181]{.underline}**

The one that attacks the word and works is far more serious and
dangerous and especially affects the church and the saints.

20\. In this way, Satan makes himself at Adam and Eve, so that he takes
away their word and they abandon the word and trust in God and believe
his lie. And when this has happened and he has brought it to this, it is
no wonder that a man becomes proud and a despiser of God and men,
becomes an adulterer, a murderer 2c. Therefore, this is certainly the
sum and origin of all temptations, which brings with it the fall or
transgression of all God\'s commandments. For unbelief is the cause and
origin of all sins, and when the devil has either wrested or
counterfeited the word from the hearts and brought them to unbelief,
nothing is difficult for him anymore. So, since Eve allowed herself to
be deprived of the word by lying, it was very easy for her to get to the
forbidden tree and break an apple from it.

Therefore, these are foolish thoughts that the sophists and monks have
here, that after Eve had seen the tree, she had more and more desire to
break off the apple, until finally, overcome by the desire, she brought
it to her mouth. For this was the highest temptation, namely to hear
another word, and to depart from that which God had spoken before,
namely, that if they had eaten of the tree they would die. But let us
look at Moses\' words one by one.

First, Satan imitates God. For as God had first preached to Adam, so he
preaches here also to Eve. And it is true, as it is said in Proverbs: In
God\'s name all misfortune arises. For as from God\'s word, if it is
righteous, comes blessedness, so also from it comes destruction, if it
is counterfeit. But I do not call the falsified word only the verbal
preaching, but also the inner thoughts, delusion and good judgment, if
they fall away from the word. And Moses indicates such here with the
word: \"They spoke.\" For this is how the devil dealt with it, that he
led Eve away by his speaking from that which was

God had said. And so, after he had removed the word from the way, he
corrupted the best will that man had before, so that he went against
God; he also maddened and corrupted the mind, so that he doubted God\'s
will. From this follows a disobedient hand that goes against God\'s
commandment to break the apple; then also a disobedient mouth and teeth
that go against God. In sum, unbelief or doubt in God and His word is
followed by \'all evil. For what can be worse than disobeying God and
obeying the devil?

\(23\) Such cunning and wickedness of Satan is followed by all heretics,
who, under a pretense of goodness, tear God and His word out of
people\'s eyes, and present them with a new God, who is nowhere. For
when one looks at their word, they seem as if there is nothing more
holy, nothing more devout. They testify with God that they seek the
benefit and happiness of the church with all their heart; no one curses
those who preach false doctrine more than they do; they confess and let
themselves be heard seriously, as if they desire with the utmost
diligence to spread God\'s name and glory far and wide. And what can one
say? They do not want to be regarded or held as heretics or teachers of
the devil, and yet they do nothing else but suppress the right doctrine
and obscure God\'s knowledge.

\(24\) For this reason the case is soon over; for careless people let
themselves be led away by the word into dangerous disputations, and
after they are not satisfied with the word, they ask how and why this or
that happens? Just as Eve, as soon as she hears the devil put the word
in doubt, is lost, so also when we doubt whether God wanted us miserable
and damned sinners to be saved by Christ, it is easy for us to be
deceived and put on fool\'s caps, and persuade ourselves as if we had to
be saved by works.

So the devil can soon paint a new god, so that people do not even notice
it. For he also gives a word,

**[182 L. i, 187-189. Interpretation of I Genesis 3, 1. \" i, \"\"-\^74.
183]{.underline}**

but not such as is given by God, namely that one should preach
repentance and forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ, but such that
one acquires forgiveness of sins when one becomes a monk 2c. and prays,
fasts and sings a lot 2c. So when God\'s word is changed or falsified,
new gods come, as Moses says in his song, which our fathers did not
honor, Deut. 32, 17.

\(26\) Such snares of the devil are to be known, and are good. For if
Satan taught that one should kill, commit fornication, disobey one\'s
parents, anyone could soon see that he smelled something forbidden by
God; therefore one could easily beware of him. But here, when he puts
forward another word, disputes God\'s will, and speaks before the name
of God, of the church, of the people of God, one cannot so easily beware
of him, but it requires a sharp judgment of the spirit that we can
distinguish between the right and the new God; just as Christ makes a
distinction when the devil wants to persuade him to say that the stones
should become bread, that he should let himself down from the pinnacle
of the temple. For there he wanted to persuade him that he should
undertake and dare something without God\'s word. But he could not
deceive Christ as he deceived Eve. For Christ keeps the word and does
not allow himself to be led away from the right God to a wrong and new
one. For unbelief and doubt, by which one departs from the word, is
actually a source and origin of all sins; but because the world is full
of this, it remains in idolatry, denies the truth of God and makes
itself a new god.

27 Thus a monk is an idolater, because he makes these thoughts as if
this were the way to eternal life, if he keeps to the rule of Francis or
Dominic. But this means to paint a new god in front of oneself and to
practice idolatry. For the right true God says that this is the way to
eternal life, if one believes in Christ. Therefore, when such faith is
gone, unbelief and idolatry follow, which gives the glory of God to
works. Thus are

All Anabaptists, Sacramentarians and Papists are idolaters, not because
they worship stones or wood, but because they abandon the Word and
worship their own thoughts.

Therefore this text belongs to us, so that we learn from it that this
temptation of the devil was the beginning of the original sin, when he
led Eve away from the word of God to idolatry, against the first, second
and third commandment. For that is where these words actually belong:
\"Yes, should God have said?\" This is a terrible audacity of the devil,
that he makes a new God and denies the first true and eternal God with
such great defiance and presumption. As if he wanted to say: \"You are
truly fools, if you believe that God has spoken in this way; for God is
by no means one who asks whether you eat or not. For since it is the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, how can you accuse God of such
envy that He would not have you be wise?

29\. But this unspeakable wickedness shows sufficiently, although Moses
only remembers the serpent and not the devil, that Satan was the author
and master of this deal. And the fathers and prophets, although these
things are complicated, have seen through the enlightenment of the Holy
Spirit that this was not the serpent\'s doing, but that in this serpent
was the spirit that was hostile to innocent nature, of which Christ
clearly says in the Gospel John 8:44 that he did not exist in truth and
was a death-slayer and liar. For clearer and clearer to indicate that
this would be God\'s and man\'s enemy, has actually belonged to the
gospel.

\(30\) But the fathers saw this very thing, and thus concluded: It is
certain that at that time all creatures were still in perfect obedience,
according to this saying: \"God saw all that he had made, and behold, it
was very good. But here such a spirit arises from the serpent, which is
God\'s enemy and falsifies and perverts God\'s word, so that he

**184 \" i, iM-i-i. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 1. W7. 185**

put the innocent man into sin and death in such a way. Therefore, it is
clear and evident that there was something evil in the serpent, which
actually wants to be called God\'s adversary, a lying spirit and
murderer, in whom is the greatest and most horrible presumption, that he
is not ashamed to falsify God\'s commandment and to drive man to
idolatry, because he knew well that through this idolatry the whole
human race would have to die and perish. These are truly terrible
things, if we want to consider them rightly: we also see that among the
papists and other cults and sects there are examples of the same
presumption, so that they falsify God\'s word and deceive the people.

Eve at first resists the tempter finely, for she is still governed and
guided by the spirit that shines before her; as I have shown above that
man is perfect and created in the image of God; but in the end she does
not endure, but allows herself to be persuaded.

But on what day the angel fell is uncertain, whether it happened on the
second or third day of creation. This alone can be proven from the
gospel, that Satan fell from heaven; as Christ testified in Luc. 10:18
that he saw him fall. But whether at that time the heavens were
completed or still raw and unfinished, I do not know. So this
disputation does not really belong in this place. But this really
belongs here, that we see that the greatest wickedness and the most
horrible presumption are here with each other, that this spirit is not
afraid to doubt the commandment of the divine majesty, especially
because he knows what a great misery of the whole human race would
follow.

33\) Secondly, one should also consider the special cunning of the
devil, which can be seen first of all in the fact that he touches the
highest powers of man, and assaults and challenges the image of God,
namely the will, which was right against God. \"The serpent\'s
cunning,\" says the text, \"was greater than that of any beast of the
field.\" But this cunning is above all the natural cunning of the
serpent, in that it is with man.

The serpent was not able to do this by natural power because it was
subjected to the rule of man. The serpent was not able to do this by
natural power, because it was subject to the dominion of man. But the
spirit that speaks from the serpent is so cunning that it can overcome
man and persuade him to eat of the fruit of the forbidden tree.
Therefore, a creature of God that is good does not speak in this way,
but the most severe enemy of God and of man, who is also a creature of
God, is not created so evil by God, \"for he does not exist in truth,\"
as Christ says John 8:44. This follows clearly from the Gospel and this
text.

34\. then this cunning is also noticed by the fact that Satan attacks
the human nature where it is weakest, namely the female person, Eve, and
not the man, Adam. For even though they were both created equally
righteous, Adam was above Eve. For just as in the whole of nature the
male power surpasses the female, so also in perfect nature the male was
somewhat above the female. That is why the devil must not make a move on
Adam, because he sees that he is a little more excellent: for he is
afraid that his pretensions might fail him. And I also believe that if
the devil had first tempted and attacked Adam, Adam would have won. He
would rather have trampled the serpent under his feet and said: \"Be
quiet, the Lord has commanded us to do something else. That is why Satan
tries Eve as the weaker part and tries her strength, because he sees
that she relies on her husband in such a way that she does not think she
can sin.

\(35\) And here again we have a reminder of divine permission that the
devil is forbidden and allowed to attack the animals, as he attacks the
serpent here. For there is no doubt about it, it will have been a real
serpent, in which Satan dwelt and held conversations with Eve. But that
one disputes about it, whether it looked like a human face, is
ridiculous. For the serpent was a beautiful little animal before the
fall, otherwise Eve would not have talked to it so surely. After the
fall

> **[186 L I. 1S1-1M. Interpretation of Genesis 3:1. \" I, S77-L80.
> 187]{.underline}**

**Interpretation of Genesis 3:1.**

But not only has the beauty of the serpent changed; for God threatens it
that it should crawl on the earth afterward, since it had previously
walked straight like a rooster; item, that it should eat the ground and
the earth, since it had eaten better fruits before; But this security is
also lost, which Eve had at first; because we flee from the serpents,
they flee from us again, and nature has come to such harm because of
sin; just as we have lost the honor of walking naked, the sincere will
and pure mind. I also believe that the serpent has lost much of his
cunning, which Moses praises here as a special gift of the Creator. As
the serpent is therefore evil among the animals, I believe that it was
first beautiful, good, blessed and lovely, so that not only man but also
the other animals loved it and enjoyed it. That is why she was very
useful to Satan for this purpose, so that he spoke through her and
brought Eve down.

These are my thoughts about the natural serpent, which Satan wanted to
abuse, which before was the most beautiful little animal without a
poisonous tail and ugly scales. For all these things came upon them
afterward for sin\'s sake; as we see that in Moses there is a law that
the beasts which had done a death stroke should be killed again, for no
other cause than that the devil sinned by them and killed man. So also
the serpent was punished as a testimony of this fall and devilish
wickedness.

37 As far as grammar is concerned, the Latin text gives the little word
aphki by cur, why. However, although it is not almost inconsistent with
the opinion as it stands here, it is not actually given enough. For the
first and greatest challenge is when one disputes about God\'s counsel,
why God has made this or that so? But to my mind, the little word cur,
how or why, does not have so much to do with it, but rather lies in the
word elohim, God; for this makes the challenge stronger. As if the
serpent wanted to say: You are truly very mad and foolish, if you think
that God did not want you to be

eat from this tree, who has made you masters of all the trees in
paradise, yes, he has created them for your sake. How can he, who has
granted you everything, not grant you the fruit of this tree, which is
so sweet and lovely? For this is Satan\'s way of taking away the word
and the knowledge of God from them, so that they may think to themselves
and conclude: \"This is not God\'s will, God did not command this. For
the fact that he has this opinion also confirms what follows, since the
serpent says: \"You will not die. For the devil is all interested in how
he may deceive us from the word and faith, that is, from the right and
true God, to a false one.

\(38\) And all devils follow this way; as Arius said: Do you think that
Christ is God, who himself clearly says that the Father is greater than
I? So also the sacramentarians: Do you think that the bread is the body
of Christ and the wine his blood? Christ never thought of such
uncomfortable and inconsistent things. When people dwell on such
thoughts, they gradually get away from the Word and fall into error.

39 Since this is the main part of all contestation, that one doubts
whether God has said this, the emphasis is to be placed more on the word
\"God\" than on the word \"should,\" which gives a weak understanding.
Therefore, I like it better to read, \"Should God have said that you
should not eat from all kinds of trees in the garden?\" For Satan does
not go there primarily to ask the reason why God said this, but rather
so that Eve may be persuaded and believe that God simply did not say it,
so that he may take away her word and win it away. For he sees that
reason is easily deceived when God and the Word are lost under God\'s
name and Word. To this end, it is also spoken in the most insidious way,
that it speaks in general and sums up all the trees. As if to say: You
have a general dominion over all animals, should God, who has given you
such a general dominion over all animals, not also give you a general
dominion over all animals?

**[188L. i, is3-iss. Interpretation of Genesis 3:1-3. W.i, Äso-sss.
189]{.underline}**

have all the trees? Rather, you should consider that just as God has
subjected the whole earth and all animals to you, so he has also given
you the use of all the things that grow from the earth.

\(40\) This is certainly a great temptation, so that she will be able to
make Eve\'s heart think that God is not against herself. For if he had
given them a general power over all creatures at the same time, he had
also given them power over all trees. And so it follows that the
commandment not to eat from the tree is not God\'s commandment, or at
least not to be understood as if God did not want one to eat from the
tree.

So Satan puts two temptations before you, so that he may seek one thing.
The first is, God has not said this, therefore you may well eat from
this tree. The other is: God has given you everything, therefore you
have everything and this one tree is not forbidden to you 2c. Now both
temptations are to lead Eve away from the word and faith. For this
commandment given to them by God not to eat of this tree proves that
Adam with his descendants, even if nature had remained perfect, would
have lived in faith until he was taken up from this temporal life into
the spiritual. For where the word is, there is also necessarily faith.
Now here is a word that he should not eat of this tree, otherwise he
shall die. Therefore Adam and Eve had to believe that this tree was
contrary and hostile to life; therefore faith is also included with this
commandment.

We, who have passed from sin to righteousness, and from the mortal body
to the immortal, also live by faith. But we have another word, which
Adam did not have in the perfect nature, who was simply to be
transferred from the natural life to the spiritual. That is why I said
above that this tree in the middle of paradise would have been like a
church, in which this word of God would have been preached, that the
other trees were all wholesome and healthy, but this one alone was
harmful.

Therefore, they would have learned to be obedient to GOD and perform
this service, that they would not eat of it, because GOD would have
forbidden it.

\(43\) Thus, the uncorrupted, perfect nature, which had righteous
knowledge of God, nevertheless had a word or commandment that was above
Adam\'s understanding and had to be believed. But this commandment was
given to the innocent nature so that Adam should have a sign or way to
serve God, to give thanks to God, and to instruct his children. But
because the devil sees this and knows that it is above man\'s reason, he
tempts Eve to first consider whether or not this is God\'s commandment
and will. This is the origin and main cause of all temptation, when
reason, without the Word, dares to judge God and His Word by itself.

44 For God intended that man should have cause for obedience and outward
worship by this commandment; item, that this tree should be a sign by
which man proved that he was obedient to God; but because Satan makes it
a matter of dispute whether God commanded this, he deals with it by
turning man away from such obedience and causing him to sin.

\(45\) This would have been the only blessedness if Eve had stood and
stood on God\'s commandment, and had not allowed herself to be seduced
by other disputations, whether God had commanded it; and after God had
created all things for the sake of man, whether this one tree was
created to corrupt man? It seems as if it were wisdom to inquire into
these things thoroughly and actually: but as soon as the heart begins to
indulge in such disputations, it is done. Now let us hear what Eve
answers.

**V. 2. 3. Then said the woman unto the serpent, We eat of the fruit of
the trees of the garden: but of the fruit of the tree which is in the
midst of the garden God hath said, Eat not of it, neither touch it, lest
ye die.**

In the beginning it is still well: Eve makes a difference between the
other trees and this one and tells God\'s commandment. But there she
sinks down, because she experiences the punishment.

**[190 L i, i \"L-iss. Interpretation of Genesis 3:2-5. W. i, rss-sss.
191]{.underline}**

counts. For she does not tell it thus, as she had threatened God. For he
had said plainly and directly: \"Whichever day ye shall eat thereof, ye
shall surely die. She does not take this statement, which is to be
understood as absolute and bad, as absolute, but adds, \"that we may not
die at all. This is a noticeable falsification that should not be
ignored. For it indicates that Eve wavered from faith to unbelief, since
as the promise demands faith, so does the threat. Therefore she should
have concluded: If I eat of it, then I will surely die. This faith,
however, Satan assaults and attacks so deceitfully that Eve adds the
little word \"perhaps\". For the devil had already persuaded her to
think that God would not be so cruel and merciless that he would kill
her for the sake of an apple; thus her heart was already drenched with
the devil\'s poison.

Our text is badly given here because it reads as if Eve were telling her
words, when she is telling God\'s words and adds the word \"perhaps\"
from her own to God\'s words. That is why the deceitful spirit has so
soon found out and started its deceit. For he primarily sought how he
could lead Eve away from the word and faith, which he has now brought so
far that Eve falsifies God\'s word, that is, he had turned her away from
God\'s will, as St. Paul says, so that she followed him, 1 Tim. 5, 15.
But this is the beginning of the fall, to turn away from God and turn to
the devil, that is, not to remain steadfast in the word and faith. When
the devil sees such a good beginning, he presses on with all his might
and opposes it as if it were a wall that hangs and has fallen down, so
that he oppresses Eve.

V. 4. 5 **Then the serpent said to the woman: Ye shall not surely die:
but God knoweth that in the day ye eat thereof, then shall your eyes be
opened, and ye shall be as God, and shall know what is good and what is
evil.**

This is Satan\'s rhetoric, so that he may even oppress the poor female,
after

when he sees that she has turned away from God and has decided to listen
to another preacher. Since he says above (v. 1): \"Should God have
said\", he obviously did not deny the word, but sees how he
questioningly made Eve doubt it. Since he now sees that he has brought
it to this, he starts here with the highest presumption to deny God\'s
word altogether, to punish God with lies and to accuse Him of being
unkind and cruel. He is not satisfied with the fact that Eve had added
to the word of God and said: \"perhaps,\" but now turns the doubt into a
denial: \"you will not die.

\(49\) Now we see here how terrible a thing it is when the devil begins
to tempt a man, for one fall always follows another, and a seemingly
small sin causes a grave and great fall. A great sin was that Eve turned
away from God and His word and listened to the devil; but much greater
is the one that happens here, that Eve falls in with the devil, who
punishes God with lies and, as it were, strikes her with fists;
therefore, she is no longer turned away from God alone, as in the first
temptation, but starts here with the devil to despise God, to deny
God\'s word, and believes the father of lies against God\'s word.

\(50\) This shall be a trial unto us, that we may learn what a man is.
For if this has happened in nature, while it was still righteous and
perfect, what will happen to us? And the examples are before our eyes:
for we see that many of those who praised God with us in the beginning
of the gospel, and gave thanks that he had restored his word to the day,
have not only fallen away again, but are also against us.

51 Thus, when the Arians began to fall away from the faith of the
divinity of the Son of God, they soon fell into such nonsense that they
became enemies of the true church and persecuted it most cruelly. We
have also seen similar examples in the case of the Anabaptists. For
after first being led by the devil to the doubtful word \"perhaps,\"
they then turn the \"perhaps\" into a \"not\" and become \"not\" from
\"perhaps.

**[192 L. I. lss-soo. Interpretation of Genesis 3:4. 5. W. I, LSS-SSS.
193]{.underline}**

Apostates from God are also God\'s persecutors. For they follow their
father, the devil, who, after he fell from heaven for the sake of sin,
Luc. 10, 18, has become the most fierce enemy of Christ and His Church.
Such examples are not lacking today. For we have no greater enemies than
those who have fallen away from our teachings. For from this sin follows
this frightening speech, Ps. 14, 1.: \"The foolish say in their heart,
There is no God.\" For they are not satisfied with the fact that they
are fallen, that they have turned away from God, but they also have to
dispute God and His word.

\(52\) For this reason we must have this rule in particular, which we
should look to and take refuge in throughout life, as if it were a sure
anchor: that when we are certain that what we have and confess is the
word of God, we fall into it with simple faith, and do not arrogantly
dispute about it. For all presumptuous disputations entail a certain
fall.

\(53\) The word of the Lord Christ concerning the Lord\'s Supper is
clear: He says of the bread, \"This is my body, which is given for
you,\" and of the cup, \"This is the cup of the New Testament in my
blood. Now, when the sacrament enthusiasts abandon the faith of these
words and dispute how this can be, they gradually end up denying and
disputing the word of Christ outright, as happens here to Eve.

So also, since Arius thinks of God as the simplest unity, he first
states this proposition: Perhaps Christ is not God. After that, he puts
together so many inconvenient and unfounded things that he defends them
completely and concludes with certainty that Christ is not God. And
there is nothing wrong with the fact that John says John 1:1: \"The Word
was God\"; nor with the fact that Christ is called baptizing in the name
of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, Matth. 28:19; nor with the
fact that we are commanded by God to believe in Christ, to worship Him
and to call upon Him, Acts. 13, 39. Ps. 97, 7. But how could we do
anything more imprudent and presumptuous than that

we presume to judge GOD and His Word, who are to be judged by Him?

Therefore, one should simply stand and insist that when we hear God say
something, we believe it and do not argue about it, but rather take our
reason captive to the obedience of Christ. Here belongs the saying of
Isaiah 7:9: \"If ye believe not, ye abide not.\" For even if we were to
go astray and tear one another apart, we would never understand how it
is that the eye sees, the ear hears, or what the soul is; and yet we
carry all these things about us, and use them every day and every moment
in all our works. How then shall we understand the things which are
above all our five senses in the word alone? As it is written in the
word alone, that in the supper the bread is the body, and the wine the
blood of Christ. Therefore we should believe it; we should not
understand it, nor can we.

As for this text of Moses, these were very simple and simple words:
\"From the tree in the middle of Paradise you shall not eat,\" but
reason did not understand the cause of these words, why God wanted it
that way. Therefore, as soon as Eve inquisitively investigates this and
is not satisfied with the fact that God had commanded and said it, she
is lost. And this temptation is a true example of all temptations, by
which the devil challenges the word and faith. For before Eve gets the
air to eat the apple, she has already lost the word that God had said to
Adam. If she had kept this word, the honor towards God and the faith
would have remained in her; since, on the other hand, after having lost
the word, she finds in herself God\'s contempt and obedience towards the
devil.

This is useful for us to know, that we learn to stand firm in
temptation, as Peter says in 1 Epist 5:9, and to resist the tempter, so
that we hold fast to the word and close our ears and do not let in what
is not according to the word. For such suffering and temptation of Eve
is our doctrine, that we should not turn away from the word and the
temptation.

**[194 L. I, Aw-sos. Interpretation of Genesis 3:4, 5. W.I, SSS-BN.
195]{.underline}**

Let faith lead away and the like have to suffer.

58\. that follows in the text: \"God knows that your eyes will be
opened,\" or \"will become open,\" has two meanings; for one can either
understand it as if the serpent had said it so that Eve should become
angry with God, as he would be unfavorable to her, since he had
forbidden her such a useful fruit; or, as I understand it, that he
praises God with it, so that he might the more easily captivate and
seduce Eve. As if she wanted to say: God is truly not such that he wants
you to live in darkness, without knowledge of good and evil; but he is
kind, does not begrudge you anything that can help and be of some use to
you, and will also be well pleased that you are like him.

When the devil praises our Lord God, he certainly has a shear knife in
his hand and intends to cut off the throat of man. For this case is very
easy and soon to happen, if to that, to which the desire otherwise
carries you, also the pretext of the word and will of God comes. This
causes me to understand that Satan has said this, rather to persuade Eve
that God is kind, than that he wants to judge her into thinking that God
is envious. But I leave everyone free to follow whatever opinion he
wants. The sum of it is that he tries to lead Eve away from the word and
to persuade her to do what was forbidden in the word. For he is a bitter
enemy of the word, because he knows that in its obedience stands all our
salvation.

\(60\) But here it is not asked uselessly: How is it that Eve does not
yet feel her sin? For even though she had not yet eaten the apple, she
had already sinned against the word and faith, since she had turned from
words to lies, from faith to unbelief, from God to the devil, from
worship to idolatry. Since this is the main part of the sin (for
breaking off the apple was not the main part), how is it that death did
not follow soon after? how is it that she does not feel her sin? yes,
how is it.

that after eating the apple, she does not feel death before persuading
Adam to eat it too?

\(61\) The schools dispute various things about the highest and lowest
part of reason, and say that Adam is the upper part and Eve the lower.
But let us leave such unlearned and scholastic things and follow the
right understanding, which is this.

First of all, God is long-suffering, which is why He does not let the
punishment follow the sins soon; otherwise we would soon perish in the
sins. Such long-suffering of God is abused by the devil, who finds it
useful and convenient for his purposes that man does not feel the sin
soon. Therefore it happens that because the punishment stops, Satan
makes the heart full of certainty that man not only does not notice that
he has sinned, but also takes pleasure and joy in his sin. As we see in
the case of the pope and the papists, if they could see with their eyes
and hearts the torment and torture of consciences, yes, of people\'s
damnation, to which they bring them through false teaching, they would
undoubtedly change their teaching. But now the devil makes a noise
before their eyes and blinds them, as it were, so that they cannot see
God\'s wrath and their judgment; therefore, in the midst of their most
grievous sins, they live with all security, joy and rejoicing, flaunting
and throbbing as if it were well done.

This is exactly what happened to Eve. Through unbelief she had fallen
away from the word in lies, therefore she was already dead before God\'s
eyes. But because Satan still holds and restrains her heart and eyes,
she not only does not see nor feel death, but gradually gains more and
more desire for the apple and tickles herself in this idolatry and sin.
If she had not left the word, it would have been an abomination in front
of her to look at the apple in such a way that she would have wanted to
eat it; now, however, she deals with this sin with pleasure. Since she
would have run away before, if she had seen another reaching for this
tree, she cannot wait now, because the sin is breaking out of the heart
and the other limbs.

**196 \".I, \"\"-rai. Interpretation of Genesis 3:4-6.\'\".i\"i-s\".
197**

pervades. Therefore, this lust and desire to eat the apple is like a
plague arising from sin, which is finally followed by death, although
Eve, because she sins, does not feel it, as follows.

**Second part.**

**From the miserable fall of man.**

**V. 6: And the woman saw that the tree was good to eat of, and pleasant
to look upon, that it was a good tree, because it made one wise: and she
took of the fruit, and did eat, and gave it also unto her husband, and
he did eat.**

Notice here how sin gradually creeps and is poured into all the senses.
For what does Eve fail to do that serves to make sin greater and more
serious, after she believes the devil against God\'s commandment that
she will not die, but rather that her eyes will be opened so that she
may know what is good and what is evil? Her eyes cannot see enough, and
she considers it a small thing that she has God\'s knowledge and right
reason, but also wants to know what is evil. This is actually the
devil\'s natural poison, that she wants to be wiser than she is
commanded by God. For this wisdom is death, and obviously hostile and
contrary to the wisdom of God in the Law, which makes it consider as
righteousness that which is sin, and as the highest wisdom that which is
the utmost and greatest foolishness.

For this reason there is once again an emphasis in what the Latin text
has left out, namely, that the tree has pleased her and moved her to
pleasure, that it has made her wise. For in all temptations and
temptations the devil is wont to bring it about that the farther a man
gets from the word, the more learned and wise he lets himself think.
Thus the sacramentarians consider it great wisdom to say that bread is
bread, that wine is wine, and not the body and blood of Christ. And so
Arius thinks that he has achieved great fame and something special,
because he has found from some sayings that he draws on his error evil
and unjust.

that the Word was before the creatures, but was still created. Thus the
Anabaptists also consider this to be great wisdom, so that they can
mouth off and blabber impudently that the water cannot touch the spirit
or the soul, but only affects the bare skin, and therefore baptism does
nothing for the forgiveness of sins. As we know, then, that such swarm
spirits have baptized without water in some places, and yet boast that
they have never disagreed with us in doctrine. And it is true, there is
a wisdom, but a devilish wisdom, which is contrary to the word and
wisdom of God. This is the devil\'s own temptation, that he makes us as
wise against and above the word of God as he himself was in heaven; and
this temptation of wisdom far surpasses all other gross temptations with
fornication, avarice, pride and the like.

66 The word hiskil means to be wise, therefore maskil means a wise man
and a prudent man; as Psalm 14:2: \"God looks from heaven on the
children of men, to see if anyone is wise and asks about God\"; and Isa.
52:13: \"My servant\" jaskil, \"will do wisely\": but it actually means
wisdom, by which God is known. Eve had this light or knowledge in her
heart before, like a bright sun, because she had God\'s word, then also
the knowledge of all creatures. But because she was not satisfied with
this wisdom, she wanted to climb higher and recognize God differently
than He had revealed Himself in His word. This is the terrible case, by
which it loses the right wisdom and falls into the highest darkness and
blindness.

But as the devil did then, so he does now. God tells us not to believe
the gospel of His Son and thus be saved. This is the true wisdom, as
Christ also says John 17:3: \"This is life eternal, that they may know
thee, that thou alone art true God, and that thou hast sent Jesus
Christ. A monk despises this wisdom and turns to another thing, puts on
a cap and girds himself with a rope, vows chastity 2c., and thinks that
he thus wants to please God and become blessed. This is the high wisdom

**[198 2 i.Interpretation of Genesis 3:6. 7. W. i.\"\"-sss.
199]{.underline}**

The reason for this is that the devil and original sin have planted in
this wretched nature the vainness of worship and religion, so that
people abandon the word that God has given for salvation and fall into
their own thoughts. Just as Eve, who was created in the right wisdom,
lusted after another wisdom apart from and against God\'s word, and for
the sake of this wisdom sinned so manifold with all her senses, with
sight, thoughts, desires and actions.

\(68\) Therefore, do not listen to those who still argue that it is a
cruelty that this whole nature has been miserably corrupted and put to
death and other miseries for the sake of an apple. For when Epicureans
hear this, they laugh it off as a fable. But whoever reads and
contemplates the text diligently can easily see that the bite of the
apple is not the cause, but the sin, that Eve sins against both tables
and against God and his word itself; and sins in such a way that she
throws God\'s word far away from her and becomes completely the devil\'s
disciple.

\(69\) This can in no way be disparaged or diminished, for the causes of
this punishment that we have upon us are great and important, namely,
such an abominable sin and abominable turning away from God. This is
what we should look at and think about, and not only speculate on the
broken and eaten apple. For those who only look at this work and not at
the sin from which this work followed, they cannot avoid it, they must
accuse God of cruelty, that he has struck the whole human race with such
great punishments for the sake of such a small sin. Therefore, they
become God\'s enemies and despair, or, in an Epicurean way, they
ridicule it as a fable.

70\. Therefore, one should look at the word. But this is the word of
God. As great as the word is, so great is the sin that is committed
against it. This sin oppresses and brings under itself the whole of
nature: for how could nature here be obliged and overcome that sin which
is so great and exuberant that it cannot be measured? Therefore, if one
is to overcome this sin, he who brings with him abundant righteousness,
namely God\'s Son, belongs to it.

And this also shows Satan\'s cunning. For with the sweetness of the
apple he does not first make Eve sin, but attacks the highest virtue of
man, namely the faith in the word. Therefore, unbelief and turning away
from God is the root and origin of all sins, just as faith is the origin
and root of righteousness. And Satan first leads away from faith to
unbelief. Since he had brought it about with Eve that she no longer
believed the commandment given by God, he then easily persuaded her to
touch the tree, break the apple from it and eat it; for the outward
disobedience follows the sin that is committed in the heart. And so the
nature of sin is to be considered according to its proper greatness and
gravity, in which we are all lost. Now follows how sin is revealed with
its punishment.

**V. 7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they saw that they
were naked; and they wove fig leaves together, and made them aprons.**

\(72\) I have said above that all the temptations of the devil are of
the same kind and form, namely, that he first tempts (faith) and leads
away from the word, and then sins follow in the anchor table. For this
we learn ourselves, that it is so. What follows belongs to the
description of sin, what form it takes when it is in the works, and what
it is like when it is done and over. Because it is in the works, it is
not felt; otherwise, if we thought about the misery and harm it brings,
we would think about it and turn away from it. But because the harm is
hidden, after we have come from faith, we continue safely and take hold
of the work: as Eve took hold of the apple, after she was persuaded
against God\'s word that she would not die, but her eyes would be opened
and she would become wiser. When she has heard the devil\'s poison, she
reaches out her hand to the forbidden fruit and eats it with her mouth,
thus sinning through all the senses of body and soul; and yet she still
feels the sin.

**[200 L i,ros. Interpretation of I Genesis 3, 7. W. i, rsg-soi.
201]{.underline}**

She does not, because she eats the apple with pleasure and makes her
husband do the same.

This is the same in all temptations and sins, both of lust and of anger
and avarice. For since sin is in the works, it is not felt, nor does it
frighten or bite, but presents itself in a friendly, sweet and merry
manner. And it is no wonder that it is the same with us, who are
poisoned by the poison of original sin from the sole of our feet to the
crown of our heads, because it happened while nature was still perfect.
That is why we see how godless people, then also the swarming spirits,
who either never had the faith or fell away from it again, are as sure
as they are so vehement and obdurate to defend their error, so that they
also do not refuse to die. For this is the characteristic of sin, that
it cannot be felt for a time; but when it is afterwards revealed by the
law, it oppresses man too much.

74\. But before this revelation, because sin is in the works, Eve\'s
eyes are not open, otherwise she would have died before touching the
apple. But because the eyes are not yet open and unbelief remains, the
desire for the forbidden apple also remains, as does the desire to gain
wisdom, which was also forbidden; and so poor Eve is swallowed up body
and soul in unbelief, so that she cannot see that she is doing evil.
Such examples of certainty are found in church history. Arius thought he
was now in heaven because he had found how to mock and reject the
sayings of the divinity of Christ.

But this security does not last forever. For as soon as Eve\'s eyes are
opened, she remembers the law which she had forgotten before, by which
she was forbidden to eat from this tree. And before she knew this law,
she was without sin; as Paul also says Rom. 7, 9: \"I lived without
law\"; not that the law did not exist, but that he did not feel the
threat and punishment of the law: therefore he made himself believe that
he was without sin. For \"through the law comes knowledge of sin,\" Rom.
3:20,

and when the law comes to life again, sin also comes to life at the same
time. Moses indicates this in this story of Adam and Eve, because he
says: \"Their eyes were opened\"; as if he wanted to say: The devil had
not only blocked Eve\'s eyes, but also her heart through the unbelief
and disobedience of all members, inwardly and outwardly. But since the
sin is accomplished, he is pleased to have their eyes opened and to see
what they have done. For here the devil seeks another hold, that those
who have sinned should die in despair and perish.

76 Therefore this history is like an interpretation of Paul\'s saying,
when he says Rom. 3, 20: \"By the law comes knowledge of sin. For the
law does nothing but reveal and bring to life the sin that lies dead or
asleep before the knowledge of the law; as it is said to Cain Gen. 4:7:
\"If you are not righteous, sin will lie dormant until it is revealed.\"
For because it is in works, it rests; but when the law comes, the eyes
are opened, that man may remember what God has commanded, and what
punishment He has ordained and decreed for the transgressors. When this
happens, so that the law reigns in the conscience and becomes powerful,
then the right knowledge of sins is there. Which a human heart cannot
bear, where God does not particularly comfort. That Moses therefore says
that after they have eaten the apple they see that they are naked, is
not in vain; but if one thinks about it diligently, one finds that in it
the original righteousness is beautifully and wonderfully described.

77 The scholastics argue that the righteousness in which Adam was
created was not in Adam\'s nature, but was like an ornament or gift, so
that man was first adorned; as when one puts a wreath on a beautiful
virgin, which wreath is not a part of the virgin\'s nature, but is
something special and separate from nature, which comes from the outside
and can be taken away again without violating nature. Therefore

**[202 \" i, 208-21\". Interpretation of Genesis 3:7. \" i, \"n-\^o\".
203]{.underline}**

They speak of man and devils, saying that although they have lost the
righteousness in which they were created, they have kept their natural
powers pure, just as they were created in the first place. But from such
teaching, because it belittles original sin, one should beware as from a
poison.

78\. and rather we are to take it for granted that righteousness was not
a gift that came from outside and was something distinct from the nature
of man, but was truly natural; that is, that Adam by nature loved God,
believed God, knew God 2c. For these things were as natural in Adam as
it is natural for the eyes to see the light. But if the eye is wounded
and corrupted, you can rightly say that the nature is wounded and
corrupted: so after man has fallen from his natural righteousness into
sin, you can rightly and truly say that the natural powers are not
intact, but are corrupted by sin. For as it is the nature of the eye to
see, so it was also natural in Adam\'s reason and will that he knew God,
trusted God, and feared Him.

Who would be so foolish and nonsensical as to say that the natural
powers are still intact, because we know and feel that everything is
lost? And yet, in schools, nothing has been more common than this
opinion. But how much more awkward and uncomfortable it is to say this
about the devils, of whom Christ says in John 8:44 that they do not
exist in truth, and of whom we ourselves know that they are the greatest
enemies of Christ and His Church! Now these intact natural gifts of God,
knowledge, faith, love, fear, were in man, which the devil has so
corrupted through sin that just as leprosy infects the whole body, so
the will and reason are so injured and weakened through sin that he not
only no longer loves God, but also flees Him and is an enemy of Him, and
would rather be and live without God.

80\. that is why here is finely described the

Corruption that came instead of the initial righteousness and honor. For
that they did not see that they were naked was an honor. But how can
nature be more profaned and corrupted than that being naked and bare,
which before was an honor, now becomes the highest disgrace? For the
sake of healthy and pure eyes no one is ashamed, but unshaped, dull and
evil eyes are not considered an honor, but one is ashamed of them. Thus,
in the state of innocence, going naked was the greatest honor: but now,
after the fall, Adam and Eve, seeing that they are naked, are ashamed
and seek aprons to cover the shame. But how much greater is this shame,
that the will is mad, the understanding corrupted, and the whole reason
defiled, counterfeited, and even transformed? Is this what intact
natural powers mean?

But see what follows from this, if one concludes that the initial
righteousness was not in the nature, but was a superfluous gift, added
to the nature of man. Does it not follow that, just as you say that
righteousness was not of the nature and character of man, so sin, which
followed, is not an essential and natural thing in man? Will it not also
follow that Christ was sent to be the Savior in vain, because original
righteousness is taken from our nature as an alien added thing, and the
natural powers still feast intact? What more shameful thing can a
theologian say (against himself and his own office and profession) than
when he teaches like this?

82\. Therefore, we are to flee and shun such idolatry as the true
pestilence and corruption of the holy Scriptures, and rather follow the
public experience that teaches us that we are conceived and born of
impure seed, and from inherent impurity have ignorance of God,
certainty, unbelief, hatred and enmity against God, disobedience,
impatience and other abominable and grievous sins and infirmities, which
are so sunk and planted in our flesh, and this poison so far veins
through the flesh, body and soul,

**[204 L. I, S1O-S1S. Interpretation of I Genesis 3, 7. W. I,
205]{.underline}**

Blood, marrow and bone, through the will, understanding and reason is so
pervaded that not only can it not be taken out completely, but it is
also not recognized for sin.

A pagan poet said that it is not a great shame for a young man to whore
and live in fornication; but such words must be held in favor of pagan
people. But it is the most shameful thing that Christians, and those who
want to be experienced in the holy scriptures, incline to this opinion
that mere fornication is not a sin. And monasteries and cathedrals
unanimously prove it with their life and conduct. If this happens in an
outward sin, what do we judge from impurity of the heart and inward
inclinations, which godless people do not consider a sin?

\(84\) Thus, man does not understand that the honor of the naked form is
lost through sin. For the fact that Adam and Eve walked naked was their
highest adornment and honor before God and all creatures. But now, when
we are naked, we not only flee from people\'s faces, but we are also
ashamed of ourselves, as Moses says here of Adam and Eve. Now this shame
indicates that the faith and trust in God in the heart, which they had
before sin, was lost. That is why Adam would have shied away, even if he
had been blind, from letting God and man see him naked, so that through
disobedience the trust in God was lost.

Nevertheless, all this proves that the hereditary righteousness of man
was natural. But now that it has been lost through sin, it is clear and
obvious that the natural powers have not remained intact nor perfect, as
the scholastics rave. For just as it was natural for man to go naked in
full trust and security towards God, and thus to please God and man, so
now, after sin, man feels that such nakedness of innocent nature is
displeasing to God, to himself, and to all creatures; therefore he makes
himself aprons and covers his body. But is this not a change of nature?
Nature remains there, but

corrupted in many ways! For trust in God is lost and the heart is full
of unbelief, fear and shame. So, too, in nature the members remain as
God created them: but having previously let themselves be seen naked
with honor, they are now covered as shameful and dishonest members
because of the inward infirmity and lack that nature has lost trust in
God through sin; for if we believed, we would not be ashamed.

From this corruption, which followed for sin\'s sake, another harm
followed, namely, that Adam and Eve were not only ashamed of being
naked, which before had been a special honor and adornment, but also
made themselves aprons to cover those members of the body as the most
shameful, which by their nature were the most honest and glorious. For
what is more noble in all nature than the work of procreation? which
work is not assigned by God to the eyes, nor to the mouth, which we
consider to be honest members, but to this part of the body, which for
sin\'s sake we must call shame, diligently veiling and covering it so
that it may be seen by no one. Just as in innocent nature the whole work
of procreation was completely holy and pure, so after sin the leprosy of
fornication has attacked this part of the body. That is why those who
live outside of the conjugal state feel the most wicked lust and ardor.
Again, when those who are married do not control their affections and
attractions and maintain love and unity among themselves with all
diligence and care, they also have many temptations.

\(87\) Do we not yet want to grasp and feel what an ugly and disgusting
thing sin is, since fornication cannot be controlled by any counsel or
remedy, not even by the state of marriage, which is ordained by God for
the remedy of the weak nature? For the majority of those who are married
live in adultery and sing this common song about their wives: \"I cannot
be with you, nor can I be without you. And does this disgusting disgrace
arise from the very-

**[206 i, 2I2-S14. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 7. 8. W. i, 3\<\>\"-sis
207]{.underline}**

the most honest and glorious member of our body, which I call the most
glorious member for the sake of the work of childbearing, which is the
most glorious work because it sustains the human race. Thus sin turns
the most honorable and useful members into the most shameful members.

For this would not have been in Adam and Eve, but because they were full
of faith against God, they would have, as often as they wanted to beget
children, come together with all the heat and stimulation that is now in
the sinful and leprous flesh, and would have done it with wonder at
God\'s order, with obedience and the highest discipline and modesty, as
we now come together to hear God\'s word and serve God. We have lost all
this through sin, so that we can only understand it negatively and not
positively. For from the damage that we have upon us, we must deduce
what good we have lost. We still owe God thanks for the rest that
remains from this work of procreation, however frail and corrupt it may
be, and which we need for the church and the police.

89\. but it is to be wondered at, that in all the languages of the
scribes there is not a single point that shows that the naked or naked
form, which was previously most honest, has become disgraceful and
shameful through sin. And does Moses alone teach us this, who shows in
the shortest terms that man, having fallen from faith, has become
disgraced, and that the honor of the natural members has become the
highest shame and disgrace, so that they had to cover Adam and Eve with
aprons.

\(90\) The word chagorah is in the plural here, and actually means a
girdle: so that you understand that the fig leaves have covered the
loins and hips everywhere, and the limbs, which were the most honest
before the sin, have been covered and hidden as shameful limbs, and are
not worthy to be seen. O what a terrible fall from grace! For thus their
eyes are opened, that they regard that which was in itself the most
honest, as the most shameful.

This is still the case today. When the law comes, we first see what we
have done, and there seems to be such a shame in the manifest sin that
hearts are frightened by it and cannot bear the sight of it. That is why
they try to cover it up. So no one wants to be considered a thief, an
adulterer, a murderer, if he is the same. And so the heretics do not
recognize their error, but defend it most stubbornly and want to be
regarded as members and teachers of the right church. And in order to
obtain this, they make the apron of fig leaves wide enough, that is,
they try everything that wants to serve them to color and disguise their
error. This kind of sin can also be seen in children, who, although they
are often taken in by the deed, nevertheless seek it out and use all
kinds of means to persuade another\'s parents and excuse themselves.
This is what people are wont to do: even if they have been found guilty
of wrongdoing and have been seized, they still try to find an excuse and
do not want to be disgraced, but to be considered pious and righteous.
And this poison is also put into nature by sin and is permeated, as this
text testifies.

**Third part.**

**Of the judgment that God holds over our first parents after the fall,
and of the account that He demands of them.**

**V. 8. And they heard the voice of God the Lord walking in the garden,
when the day was cool. And Adam hid himself and his wife from the
presence of God the Lord under the trees of the garden.**

This is now the third harm of the original sin, which proves that the
hereditary righteousness is lost. And here Lyra again confuses himself
with the interpretations of the rabbis, some of whom interpret the
coolness of the day from the place between noon and evening. Some
understand it from the time that this happened around the evening, when
the heat decreases and the wind begins to blow. My

**[208 n 1, 214-21\". Interpretation of Genesis 3, 8. W. 1, 312-315.
209]{.underline}**

Opinion is this, that one understands the coolness simply for the
[wind]{.underline}: that after the conscience had been convinced by the
law, Adam and Eve were frightened if they heard a rustling leaf. As is
seen in fearful people, when they hear a beam creak, they are afraid the
whole house will collapse; when they hear a mouse, they are afraid the
devil is present and wants to strangle it. For by nature we are all so
frightened that we are afraid even where it is safe and without all
danger.

Thus Adam and Eve, after their consciences have been convinced by the
Law and they have lost trust in God and now feel shame before God and
before themselves, are full of fear and terror, so that when they hear a
breeze or the wind, they soon think that God is there to punish sin and
hide. I also think that Moses called the voice of the Lord walking in
the garden the wind or the whispering of the wind, which went before the
Lord appeared to them; as Christ says of the wind in the Gospel John
3:8, \"You hear its whispering.\" For when they have heard the rustling
of the leaves, buffeted by the wind, they have thought, Behold, the Lord
is here, and will exact punishment from us.

94 For this reason, when Moses says soon after: \"when the day was
cool,\" I think that he wants to explain himself with this. As if he
wanted to say: There was a voice like the air of the day, so that the
emphasis lies in the word: \"of the day\"; for he does not say about the
wind in the night, no doubt because it makes the terror, which followed
the sin, great. As if to say, \"They were so fearful that even in broad
daylight they were afraid of the rustling of a leaf: what would have
happened if God had come in darkness and at night? for there the terror
is much greater. For as the day is fearful, so the night is fearful and
terrible. Therefore, the fear and terror that Adam and Eve felt in broad
daylight is also a clear and certain sign that they had completely
fallen away from the faith.

95 And this. I hold, be the right understanding of this text; for it
agrees with the threat in Moses, since he says 3 Mos. 26, 36. of the
punishments, which are to follow the sins, that the sinners should be
afraid of a rustling leaf and flee from it, as from a sword. For when a
man\'s conscience is struck and terrified, he is so oppressed that not
only can he do nothing, but he cannot even think; as it is said in a
battle, where the soldiers cannot move a hand for fear and terror, but
let the enemy choke them. Such a horrible punishment follows sin that
the conscience is horrified by the rustling of a leaf, even that it
cannot stand the most beautiful creature, the light of day, by which we
are naturally refreshed.

Therefore, you see here once again the greatness of original sin, which
is born with us and implanted in us through the sin of our first
parents. This also makes it all the more difficult for us to understand
what the first righteousness was. For in the first place there was in
man an excellent faith and trust in God, so that he would not have been
afraid even if he had seen heaven fall.

How joyfully and confidently does Eve talk to the serpent? We do not
talk like that to a little dog or a little chicken that we have brought
up and accustomed. That is why they did not seek holes to hide in before
the sin, but stood upright and praised God with upright faces; but now a
rustling leaf frightens them. O how is this such a heavy. Falling from
the highest security, trust and desire against God, they fall into such
a terrible fear that man flees from God\'s face more than from the
devil, if he saw him present! For Adam and Eve do not flee from the
devil, but from God, their Creator, they flee: they considered him more
serious and more to be feared than the devil, whom they consider better;
for they do not flee from him. Therefore, this fear is actually a
fleeing, hatred and enmity before God.

98\. here you shall also see how the sin

**[210 L. i, sis-sis. Interpretation of I Moses 3, 8. 9. W. i, sis-317.
211]{.underline}**

and becomes greater and greater until it becomes exuberant and
exceedingly sinful, as St. Paul uses to call it Rom. 7, 13. For first
man falls from faith into unbelief and disobedience, but unbelief is
followed by fear, hatred and fleeing from God, which finally bring
despair and impenitence. For where would a heart take refuge when it is
so afraid and frightened of God\'s presence? Should it flee to the
devil? This is neither useful nor advisable, and yet it happens. For
this history shows that God created man and made him master of
everything, and yet he flees from God and is nothing to which he is more
hostile and can tolerate more evil. For otherwise he would not turn away
from Him, would not flee from Him, nor be terrified by His voice when He
comes, not at night, nor with thunder and lightning as on Mount Sinai,
but in broad and bright daylight, when the air is fine and the leaves of
the trees stir and move a little. Therefore, there is nothing weaker and
more miserable than a conscience that is shocked by the law of God and
begins to see and feel its sin. This is what makes Adam and Eve flee
from their God and Creator and take refuge in a very bad protection,
namely to cover themselves and hide among the trees.

\(99\) Therefore it is to be seen here once again how right the will and
the reason are after the fall into sin. For that the will is wrong and
unjust is proved by this deed, that they let themselves be tempted by
that which is forbidden by God, and so let themselves be tempted, as
those who disobey God, but obey the devil. So now we cannot doubt that
reason is corrupt and counterfeit, because we see the plot by which Adam
and Eve think to be safe. For is this not the highest folly: first, to
subject themselves to impossible things, as they do because they flee,
from which they cannot flee nor be hidden; second, to make their escape
in such a foolish way that they think they are safe under the trees,
since they have no iron wall?

no great mountains nor crevasses were able to protect?

When faith and confidence in God are gone, then follows terrible fear in
the will; and when the most beautiful gifts, as wisdom and
understanding, are gone, then follows the most extreme foolishness, that
one submits to the most foolish ways of impossible things. Original sin
is such a deep pity, and yet this is hardly a prelude; for the matter
has not yet come to a conclusion and judgment, which is much more
horrible and terrible.

V. 9. **And God the Lord called Adam, and said unto him, Where art
thou?**

This is the description of the judgment. For after Adam is frightened by
the consciousness of his sin, he flees from God, and feels that not only
paradise, but the whole world is becoming too narrow for him, so that he
does not dare to remain safe anywhere. Therefore, in such fear he shows
his foolishness that he thinks of fleeing from sin, since he had already
fled too far from God. For sin is in itself a true renunciation of God;
therefore it would not have been necessary for him to make another
escape. But this is the way and nature of sin, that the farther a man
has gone from God, the farther he desires to go from Him. And he who has
once become a fugitive and an apostate remains a fugitive forever. That
is why it is said of the punishment of hell that this will be the
greatest fear and torment, that the wicked will always want to flee, and
yet feel that they cannot escape; just as here Adam also always wants to
flee, since he is already seized and caught.

\(102\) When Moses says that God called Adam, it is to be understood
that He called him to court and demanded it. But here the question is
about the person through whom God called Adam. And it is not foolishly
taught to say that God arranged all this through the ministry of angels
and that an angel represented God and spoke to Adam in the person of
God, as the authorities do when they speak or do something, not in their
person,

**[212 L I, SIS-\"21. Interpretation of I Genesis 3:9. 10. W. 1,
317-320. 213]{.underline}**

but speaks or does in God\'s stead; therefore the Scriptures also call
the judgments that are done and held by men God\'s judgment. For this
reason, I am not displeased that Adam was called by an angel and told
that it was impossible for him to escape.

103\. But it is to be noted in particular that Moses says that Adam was
called when on the sixth day alone we received the word of God not to
eat of the forbidden tree. Just as he alone had listened to God\'s
commandment, so he alone was summoned to court. Eve, however, because
she also sinned and fell away from God, must also listen to it and be
subject to the punishment.

These words: \"Where are you?\" are words of the law, directed and
spoken by God into the conscience. For although everything is discovered
and known before God, Hebr. 4, 13, He still speaks according to our
mind, because He sees that we want to avoid (and flee from) His sight.
Therefore, that he says, \"Where art thou?\" is as much as if he said,
\"Thinkest thou that I see thee not? For he wants Adam to see and feel
that he who is hidden is not hidden from God, and he who flees from God
has not fled from him.

For it is the nature of every sin that we foolishly try to flee from the
wrath of God, which we cannot escape. And this is the highest
foolishness, that we rather think of fleeing from God than of returning
to Him, and yet the sinful nature cannot come back to God. How do you
think Adam must have felt when he heard this voice? For behold, there he
stands before the judgment seat of God and is called to punishment,
having foolishly hoped that he could hide and conceal himself.

**V. 10. And he said: I heard thy voice in the husbandman, and was
afraid, because I am naked; therefore I hid myself.**

106\. as Adam had foolishly made his escape, so he also gives foolishly
here.

Answer. After the sin he lacks all wisdom and advice. For he wants to
teach God that he is naked, who created him naked. Thus he disgraces
himself, betrays and condemns himself with his own mouth. He also says
that he heard the voice of the Lord and was afraid, since he had heard
the voice of the Lord before when he was forbidden to eat from the tree.
Why then was he not afraid and hid himself? Why did he stand there
joyful and erect, seeing and hearing God before his eyes? But here he is
terrified of a rustling leaf. Thus it follows that he is no longer the
Adam he was, but has been completely confused and has become another
man, that he wants to protect and answer for himself with a false cause.
For how can it be true that the voice is the cause of fear, when he was
not afraid of God before, but had heard him with pleasure?

Therefore, let us learn that such perverse foolishness always follows
sin, namely, that sinners accuse themselves in order to excuse
themselves and betray themselves in order to protect themselves,
especially from God. As here Adam wants to hide his sin and adorn
himself by saying that he does not flee because he has sinned, but
because he has heard the voice of the Lord; he is frightened of this,
and is ashamed because he is naked. But the poor man does not consider
that he did not have this fear before, nor was he ashamed that he was
naked. For since God had created him thus, why should he be ashamed of
the nakedness that God had created? Before, he had walked naked in
Paradise before God and all creatures, knew that God loved him, and had
his pleasure in God; but now he is ashamed that he is naked, flees from
God, and hides himself. All of these are certain arguments and proofs
for Adam to \"condemn himself and\" reveal his sin.

\(108\) Thus the wicked will also condemn themselves at the last
judgment, for the darkness and the hiddenness of men\'s hearts will be
revealed, and all men\'s sin and iniquity will be revealed.

**[214 L. I, 221\--SS. Interpretation of I Moses 3, 10. 11. W. 1,
3LO-SS8. 215]{.underline}**

can be read, as it were, in open books. God knows that Adam has sinned
and is guilty of death, but asks him to prove by his own testimony that
he has sinned, because he flees from God, which is sin, as it is virtue
and obedience to flee to God. Adam gives such a testimony about himself,
although he hopes to conceal the sin with a lie, because he says that
the cause of his fleeing is the voice of the Lord and that he is naked.

Therefore, let us learn that this is the nature of sin. Where God does
not help soon and calls the sinner again, he flees from God without end
and cessation; and because he wants to excuse sin with lies, he piles
one on top of the other until he comes to blasphemy and despair. Thus
one sin always drags on another and makes an eternal fall, until the
sinner at last blames and accuses God rather than recognizes his sin.
Adam should have said: Lord, I have sinned. But he does not do that, but
accuses God of sin, and says nothing else but: Lord, you have sinned;
for I would have remained holy in paradise after the bite of the apple,
if you had been satisfied. For these words indicate that Adam\'s heart
and thoughts had finally stood thus: I would not have fled if your voice
had not frightened me.

Thus, even though man is accused of sin by God, he does not acknowledge
his sin, but rather accuses God and throws the blame away from himself
onto his Creator; so that sin accumulates and increases in countless
ways, where God does not come to the rescue with grace and mercy. And
yet Adam considers this ungodly and highest foolishness to be the
greatest wisdom. For he is so terrified and hasty that he does not know
what he is saying or doing, and in wanting to excuse himself, he accuses
himself most vehemently and increases sin infinitely.

We should not think that this happened to Adam alone, but we all do
this, and our nature does not allow us to do anything else when sin is
committed.

is. For we all rather accuse God, because we recognize ourselves as
sinners before God, as Adam does here, and says that the cause that he
fled was the voice of the Lord, thus considers God to be the author of
his flight. This sin is now followed by another. For he who does not
spare God, his Creator, how should he spare the creature? Therefore he
reproaches God for his nakedness, as if he had created a shameful thing.
For through sin he is so deceived that he makes the honor of the naked
form a dishonor and blasphemy of God, his Creator.

**V. 11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou not
eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat
thereof?**

Here Adam\'s conscience is touched and struck by a real sting of the
Law. As if God wanted to say: You know that you are naked, and that is
why you have hidden yourself: I have created you naked, why do you
consider it a disgrace? Therefore the fact that you are naked has not
disgraced you, nor has my voice frightened you; but your own conscience
accuses you of eating from the forbidden tree.

Here Adam was in the midst of death and hell because of God\'s
insistence on him, for he had to confess that being naked was not evil
nor a disgrace because it was created by God. But again he recognized
that this was evil, that he had an evil conscience from going naked,
which he had previously boasted of as a special adornment, and that he
was afraid of the voice of the Lord, which he had previously heard with
the greatest pleasure. To this sense of sin that God sees in Adam belong
these words: If you have a conscience and fear, you must have eaten from
the forbidden tree. For no commandment was given thee, that thou
shouldest not kill, nor commit adultery, but that thou shouldest not eat
of the fruit of this tree: because then thou art afraid, thou thyself
showest that thou hast sinned against the commandment.

114\. so adam has just received that from the

**[216 L. i, \"\"-\"s. Interpretation of Genesis 3, II. 12. W. i,
s-rs-32\". 217]{.underline}**

He heard the word of the Lord, which he thought. For so he must have
thought: I have eaten the apple, but will not confess that I am fleeing
because of it, but will conceal the sin, and say that I shrink from his
voice, and that I am naked. But because he says these things, he must
accuse himself, and hears a conscience within him that reproves him and
accuses his sin; in addition to this, God Himself accuses his sin
publicly and with dry and clear words, and yet Adam cannot yet be
brought to a simple acknowledgment of sin. For thus he says:

V. 12: **The woman whom you sent to me gave me of the tree, and I ate.**

Behold, how finely the wickedness and nature of sin is depicted here,
that Adam can by no means be brought to confess his sin, but denies it
and excuses himself as long as he can see a hope and appearance of
excuse. Now this is not a miracle, that he first hopes to conceal the
sin and rather accuses God, because he recognizes that he has sinned;
but this is a miracle, that he persists in the excuse, even after his
conscience has convinced him and he has heard from God Himself that he
has sinned. For he does not say: Lord, I have sinned, forgive me my sin,
be merciful (for the nature of sin is that it does not allow the heart
to flee to God, but rather drives it to flee from God), but blames the
woman.

\(116\) As in the schools of the rhetors it is taught that one should
either deny the evil of which he is accused, or defend that it has been
done justly; so here Adam does both. First, he denies the sin and says
that the voice of the Lord terrifies him and not his sin. But since he
is thus convicted that he cannot deny the deed, he wants to justly
defend it and says: \"If you had not given me the woman, I would not
have eaten from the tree. Thus he once again attributes to God that he
has sinned, and accuses him of his sin.

117: There is no sin in the act of sinning.

once one has departed from the word. First he sinned with disobedience
and unbelief; now he sins more with shame and blasphemy, saying, \"I did
not hear the serpent, I did not lust after the tree when I looked at it,
I never stretched out my hand to break the forbidden fruit of it, but
the woman you gave me did all these things. In sum, Adam does not want
to recognize that he has sinned, but wants to be pure and innocent.

\(118\) Therefore this piece also belongs to the description of sin and
what is the nature of sin. For if the promise of forgiveness of sins or
faith is not there, a sinner cannot do otherwise. If God had said,
\"Adam, you have sinned, but I will forgive your sin,\" Adam would have
cursed sin to the highest degree and would have recognized it humbly and
without falsehood. But because the hope of forgiveness of sins is not
yet there, he feels and sees nothing but death, because he has
transgressed the commandment. But because nature flees from this and
shuns it, Adam cannot be brought to the knowledge of sin, but tries in
every way how he can roll away the guilt from himself. Thus every sinner
is hostile to his punishment. But because he is an enemy of punishment,
he also hates both God\'s justice and God Himself, and subordinates
himself with all his might to persuade God and all men that he suffers
innocently.

So Adam reduces his sin here, that he did not obey the serpent, nor did
he break off the apple. \"The woman,\" he says, \"whom you gave me, gave
me of this tree.\" In the same way, people who fall into despair almost
feel sin, which, when they come to the realization of their sins, they
either confess to themselves or blaspheme God. As one knows from Job
that he Cap. 3, 3. 11. says: \"Cursed be the day in which I was born.
Why did I not die from the womb?\" 2c. For they blame God that they have
sinned, become impatient and grumble against God that He created them to
death and damnation. For a man

**[218 1, 225-227. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 12. 13. \". 1,
82\"-\"28. 219]{.underline}**

cannot do otherwise if the hope of forgiveness and the promise of grace
are not there. For because death is offensive to nature, it causes
despair and blasphemy.

120 Therefore these words, \"The woman whom you gave me,\" 2c., are full
of displeasure and anger against God, as if to say, \"You have laid this
burden on me; if you had given the woman a garden of her own, and had
not burdened me to dwell with her, I would have remained without sin;
but that I have now sinned is your fault, who gave me the woman.

Thus Adam is presented here as an example to all who sin and despair in
sins. For they can do nothing but accuse God and excuse themselves,
since they see that God is almighty and could have prevented such sins.
This is a terrible thing about sin, when hearts are not lifted up and
comforted in due time with the promise of the forgiveness of sins. And
this is what the law does when it is alone, without the gospel and the
knowledge of grace, namely, that it finally leads to despair and
impenitence.

V. 13. **Then God the Lord said to the woman: Why have you done this?
The woman said, \"The serpent deceived me so that I ate.**

Now follows the example of Eve, who, having been corrupted by sin, is no
better than Adam, who wanted to be considered innocent and blamed God
for having given him the woman. Here Eve also wants to excuse herself,
and blames the serpent, which was also God\'s creature, and confesses
that she ate the apple, but the serpent, she says, which you created and
let walk around in paradise, has deceived me. Doesn\'t that mean to
accuse its creator and to reject the guilt from itself?

. Thus we see that sin is and does one thing everywhere, namely, that it
does not want to be sin nor to be punished for sin, but it wants to be
righteousness. If it cannot obtain this, it blames God, who punishes
sin,

and wants to make him a liar, and thus a human sin becomes completely a
devilish sin and unbelief is turned into blasphemy, disobedience into
dishonor of the Creator. Therefore, I again call it a devilish and not
human sin that the devil is God\'s eternal enemy, accusing and
condemning God eternally, justifying himself above; it is also
impossible for him to say from his heart: Lord, I have sinned, forgive
me. Otherwise he would still have to hope, as one reads in the history
of Saint Martin, that he would come to the forgiveness of sins. But this
is impossible, because he does not recognize his sin and blasphemes God,
that he acts unjustly and cruelly with the creatures without cause.

Thus we see that Adam and Eve fell and sank into sin in such a way that
they could not go any deeper. For from unbelief follows the disobedience
of all members and powers in man; after disobedience follows the excuse
and defense of sins; after defense follows that man accuses and condemns
God. And this is the last degree of sins, namely blaspheming God and
attributing to Him that the sin comes from Him. Sin, when it thus rises,
cannot get any higher unless hearts are directed and raised by trusting
in God\'s mercy.

That is why it was a terrible state of the church under the papacy. For
nothing was seen or heard that could have comforted and sustained a
heart in its anguish and distress, without the history of the life of
Christ being taught once a year, from which one could see a little where
one should seek forgiveness of sins. The rest all pointed from the
promise of forgiveness of sins to one\'s own righteousness. That is why
we have seen that in many monasteries people went through their whole
life in melancholy and despair and finally died of sorrow and fear in
the struggle of conscience. The other brothers (because the doctrine was
unknown) did nothing but stand by and idolatrously call upon the saints
for help. Thus the poor people had to live without any hope, help and

**[220 L i, 227-sLs. Interpretation of Genesis 3:13. \" i,
22l]{.underline}**

Rath, in the highest fear of conscience, die there. But wasn\'t that a
terrible thing?

\(126\) Therefore, if the whole papacy and all the monasteries could be
overthrown with one finger, it should be done for the sake of this one
cause, that the consciences are so miserably afflicted and tortured. For
there is nothing more dreadful than to be in sins and yet not have, nor
know, forgiveness of sins, or comfort and promise of grace. Now the pope
has been a cause that the forgiveness of sins has completely gone out of
sight. For in the church neither the doctrine nor the service was kept
pure or righteous. But if some have been saved, they have been saved by
the mere text of the Passion, to which they have adhered with faith,
contrary to the will of the priest. For when people were in agony and in
their last moments, they were referred to the intercession of Mary and
the saints, and they were commonly taught that the mother Mary showed
her breasts to the son, but the son showed his wounds to the father, and
thus man would be saved through the intercession not of the son, but of
the mother Mary.

For this reason I have most diligently exhorted you to give great
respect to the doctrine of the gospel. For what happened to Adam and
Eve, when sin was present but the knowledge of the promise and grace was
not, we see here. And this is also shown by Satan\'s damnation, for
since he does not have the promise of grace, he cannot refrain from
sins, enmity and blasphemy. And in this case Adam is somewhat better
off, for he is required before the court to come to the knowledge of his
sin, and after he has been frightened by his sin, to be raised up again
and comforted by the promise of forgiveness of sins. A beautiful text
now follows, in which the sermon of the Lord Christ is also included.

\(128\) As the end and discharge of this transaction indicates God\'s
greatest goodness and mercy toward man, for He turns him back to the
forgiveness of sins.

and eternal life through the future seed: so also the beginning of this
trade, if we look at it rightly, is much easier and more friendly than
Adam deserved. For here is not the cruel figure and gesture that was
there on Mount Sinai, where the sound of the trumpets was mixed with
thunder and lightning: but here God comes by a very quiet desire to
indicate that the punishment will be fatherly. He does not strike and
push Adam away from Himself for the sake of sin, but calls him and draws
him back from sin. Still Adam, before his sin and great terror, does not
understand and see such fatherly concern, nor does he consider that God
acts much differently with the serpent. For he does not call the
serpent, nor does he ask him about the sin he has committed, so that he
might come to repentance, but condemns him immediately.

This shows that Christ, our Savior, also at that time interposed himself
as a mediator between God and man. For it is a sign of the highest grace
that God, after Adam has sinned, does not remain silent, but speaks, and
that with many words, so that he may sufficiently show and expose his
fatherly heart. But with the serpent everything is much different.
Therefore, although the promise of Christ is not yet here, it can still
be seen and felt from such counsel and thoughts of God.

\(130\) And so Moses has thus far recounted the judgment that God held
after the fall of our first parents, when he summoned them before his
judgment seat, asked them questions, and heard their answer. The poor
people wanted to escape this judgment, but could not, but because they
want to excuse themselves, they accuse and betray themselves twice. The
woman admits and confesses what has happened, but Adam dares to conceal
it, even though, as is the nature of sin, he does not consider it a sin.
For if grace does not come to this, it is impossible for a man to do
otherwise than to excuse sin and to consider it righteousness.
Therefore, God must quarrel with us for and for, so that He may bring us
to confess that we are sinners and let Him be righteous, as the 51st
Psalm v. 6. says about the confession of sins.

**[222 L.I, SSS-W1. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 13. 14. W. 1, 331-338.
223]{.underline}**

calls. But if the law alone has power and bites, then the frightened
conscience cannot make such a confession of itself; as the example of
Adam and Eve proves here.

131: And from this text the holy fathers, who read this book much more
diligently and faithfully than we do, have drawn many sayings, such as
Proverbs 28:1: \"The wicked fleeeth, and no man chaseth him\"; Isaiah
57:20: \"The wicked are like an impetuous sea\"; and Cap. 48:22: \"The
wicked, saith the Lord, have no peace\"; item Cap. 49:23: \"He that
believeth shall not be put to shame\"; and again, Prov. 28:1: \"The
righteous is as a young lion\"; item Habak. 2, 4: \"The righteous will
live by his faith.\" Christ also took a wonderful saying from this, John
3:20: \"He who does evil hates the light.\" For this is the way of sin,
that it would gladly remain in secret and darkness, and not come into
the light; as Adam covered himself with aprons, and fled under the
trees. .

132 But here we must also say something of St. Paul\'s saying 1 Tim. 2,
13. 14: \"Adam was made first, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived; but
the woman was deceived, and brought in transgression.\" Almost all of
them understand this saying to mean that Adam was not deceived, but
sinned knowingly, and did not let the devil persuade him, as Eve did,
but did not want to grieve his lust and joy, that is, his wife, and thus
loved the woman more than God. They want to confirm this opinion as
credible by pretending that the serpent was more afraid of the man than
of the Lord and therefore came to the woman, who, even if she was holy,
as a weaker creature, was more comfortable to accept the persuasion, and
therefore Eve alone was seduced by the serpent, but Adam was not. For
the same was entangled both by himself and by the woman. Through the
woman, that she gave him the apple; through himself, that after he saw
that the woman did not die as soon as she ate the apple, he thought that
this punishment, which the Lord had threatened, would not follow.

steals if he has once or twice been able to steal without danger, but if
he always saw the executioner and the gallows before him, he would not
steal.

\(133\) I do not punish this opinion, for it shows that both are true,
namely, that Adam is deceived and also not deceived. For he was not
deceived by the serpent, as Eve was; but he was deceived and beguiled by
the woman, and also by himself, that he thought the punishment would not
follow, which the Lord had said should follow.

**Fourth Part.**

**From the punishment indicated to the serpent and the devil, acting at
the same time from the first promise.**

**I.**

**V. 14 Then God the Lord said to the serpent, \"Because you have done
this, you are cursed before all cattle and before all the animals of the
field. You shall walk on your belly and eat earth all your life.**

\(134\) After the judgment has been held and the matter has been
diligently determined, the execution of the judgment follows, as it is
usually called, in which each one is rewarded according to his work, and
yet not one like the other, as we shall hear. But this text is to be
considered carefully, first of all because in the whole of Moses such a
long speech in the person of God is not found; then also for this reason
that here no law is said about what either the serpent or the man should
do, but are absolutely vain promises and threats, what good and evil
should befall both parts.

135 And it should be especially noted that no law was laid down for Adam
after his sin, even though the perfect nature had a law. But it was for
this reason that God saw that the nature, now corrupt, could not only
not be advised by any law, but would also be so torn apart and
devastated that it would

**[224 i!-1- s3i-23i. Interpretation of I Moses 3, 14. W. i, 338-340.
225]{.underline}**

not even one syllable of a law could suffer. Therefore, he no longer
weighs down nature, which was already burdened with sin, with the law,
but heals sin as a wound with a healing plaster, that is, with the
promise of Christ.

But for this he needs a sharp and hot branding iron, which the devil had
attached and caused. For just as healthy plasters bite into the flesh
when they heal, so the healing promise is given to Adam in such a way
that a threat is also made to heal the lust of the flesh with it. But I
call lust not only the filthy tickling of the flesh, but the filthiness
and defilement of the spirit; as Paul calls it, that we are by nature
inclined to idolatry, unbelief, security, and other abominable sins
against the first and other tables. In order that such folly and
filthiness of nature might be warded off, a sharp rod and branding iron
were needed.

However, I wish that I could deal with this text according to its
dignity, because it contains and summarizes everything that is glorious
and special in the entire holy scripture. And in the first part of this
text it is a figure. For God speaks with the serpent, although it is
certain that he does not understand such words. For they are not such
words as he used in creation and such as we had above, when he said to
the animals Gen. 1, 22: \"Grow and multiply\"; item, v. 11, when he said
to the earth that it should let grow herbs and grass and trees; but they
are words so that God threatens and promises and does not speak to an
unreasonable but understanding nature.

For this reason he calls the serpent, but deals especially with Satan,
who had power over the serpent and deceived man through it. Just as the
animals and trees perished in the flood because of the sin of man, who
is lord over the creatures, and the common people are often also
punished because of the sin of the rulers, so it also happened to the
serpent that he was punished because of the sin of the devil, who had
such great power over him.

The one who abused the serpent has been punished, and yet this
punishment of the serpent means and is understood to mean Satan\'s
punishment.

This obscurity has perhaps been the cause that this text, which should
be most familiar to everyone, has not been diligently and properly
interpreted by anyone that I know of. And I often wonder at myself what
the fathers and bishops have done that they have not pondered and
explained such a text with more diligence, when the regiment of the
church was on their necks and they always had to fight against the
heretics. I say nothing of our bishops, for they have nothing more to
them than the name, and would more cheaply be called devastators of the
church than guards and overseers. But of the old ones I speak, who have
distinguished themselves by a holy life and doctrine; among them there
is none who would have interpreted this text as it is well worth, and
perhaps the business and affairs that are commonly incumbent upon
regiments may have prevented them from doing so.

The new teachers are known to have falsified this text and made the word
\"the same\" into a feminine, \"the same\", and with obvious wickedness
and sin have interpreted this text as referring to the Virgin Mary. To
Lyra I think it too good; for he has been, as it seems, a pious man, but
has thought too much of the fathers. Therefore he lets Augustine lead
him out of a very foolish allegory, which Gregorius also follows in his
Moralibus, namely, that by the woman one should understand the lowest
reason, but by her seed its good effect, but by the seed of the devil
his evil input. That now God speaks: \"I will put enmity between you and
her seed,\" this is to be understood of the battle, so that the devil,
by means of evil input, attacks the lower reason, which is signified by
the woman, so that if she consents to lust, the devil may also overthrow
the man through her, which is the upper reason; and this is for the
serpent to bite the heel; for Satan does not attack in any other way
than from below, in that he pretends to the senses what arouses lust.

**[\
226 L I\> 23\"-r3g. Interpretation of Genesis 3:14. W. I, S4V-34Z.
227]{.underline}**

Now, dear reader, in such a bright light, what need is there of such
dark and clumsy allegories? Let reason be divided into two parts, the
upper and the lower; but would it not be more convenient to call the
lower reason the one that is capable of governing the household and the
police, and not such a beastly lust; and the upper reason the one by
which we contemplate the things that are outside the police and the
household government and belong to the religion that is indicated in the
word of God, in which we neither create nor work anything, but only
contemplate and learn? But if one were to speak of it in this way, what
would it do to this text? Is it not true that such talk obscures and
suppresses the right understanding of the text, and gives in its place a
false one that is not only useless but also harmful? For what can reason
do or see in matters of religion?

According to this, it is also clumsy and inconvenient to make Eve the
lower part of reason, when it is known that Eve was neither less nor
inferior in any part, that is, neither in body nor soul, than her
husband, Adam. From such a clumsy interpretation came afterwards the
pagan and godless disputations about free will; item, that reason is
inclined to the best, until the whole theology has become a philosophy
and sophistical gibberish.

Therefore, let us abandon such harmful and clumsy foolishness and go a
new way, regardless of the fact that the footsteps of the previous
teachers lead us to a different path. For we have a predecessor, the
Holy Spirit, who through Moses does not pretend to be clumsy allegories,
but teaches us about the most important things that have happened
between God, your man who is a sinner, and the devil, the author of sin.

First, let us consider that this serpent was a true natural serpent, but
the devil attacked and possessed it and spoke through it. Secondly, we
also want to believe that the serpent, as an unreasonable animal, did
not understand the words that God spoke to it.

but the devil understood it, whom God meant most here. So we simply
stick to history and the literal understanding, which agrees with the
text; and thus, according to this opinion, the serpent remains a
serpent, but possessed by the devil; the woman remains a woman; Adam
remains Adam; as this proves, which follows. For the lower and upper
reason beget not Cain and Abel, but Adam and Eve, that is, the first
men, who through sin fell into death and were put under Satan\'s
kingdom.

The fact that God says to the serpent, \"Cursed be thou before all
cattle, and before all beasts of the field, upon thy belly shalt thou
go,\" is not according to the opinion, which Augustine and others after
him follow, that by the belly is understood tutelage; but because Satan
has misused the serpent for sin, the serpent must also bear a part of
the punishment, and is thus cursed, that one is most hostile to it among
all beasts. But it was not like that from the beginning, but through the
curse something happens to its nature, namely that it is now more
horrible and more hated than all other animals, since it was the most
lovely little animal before the curse. For we experience this in
ourselves, that we are naturally afraid of snakes and that snakes also
flee us by their nature, so that the snake must also take a part of the
curse and punishment upon itself.

But this is not said about the serpent alone, but God has to do with
Satan, who is hidden in the serpent. The last judgment is pronounced
upon him here, and he must stand before God\'s judgment here. For God
speaks much differently to the serpent than to Adam and Eve, to whom he
calls kindly: \"Where are you? Who told you that you are naked?\" These
words indicate the love of God towards the whole human race, that even
after sin man is sought and called, and God speaks to him and hears him,
which is a certain sign of grace. For though these are the words and
judgments of the law that God speaks to Adam, they do not bring him into
the world.

**[228L .r, 23\"-rss. Interpretation of Genesis 3:14. W. i, sts-sie.
229]{.underline}**

But they carry with them a clear hope that they will not be eternally
damned.

But God deals much less kindly with the serpent and Satan. He does not
call him, nor does he say: Why have you done this? but rather pronounces
a serious and harsh judgment: \"Because you have done this\" 2c. As if
to say: You Satan had already sinned before and were condemned when you
fell from heaven; now you have sinned more, abused the serpent and
thereby also put man into sin. Therefore, the serpent must first bear
this punishment, because having previously shared in the blessings that
the other animals have, he must now be under the curse alone.

From this it clearly follows that the serpent before the sin was the
most beautiful little animal and was dear and pleasant to man; as now
are deer, sheep, little dogs 2c., item, that it went straight and erect.
But that she now crawls on the earth does not come from her nature, but
from the curse; as from this curse it is also customary that a woman
conceives with special pleasure and shame, gives birth with pain, and
must bring up the child with toil and labor. For if childbearing and
child rearing were without the curse, it would be the most honest work,
childbearing would be easy, and child rearing would be the greatest
pleasure. Therefore, sin has not only disguised the whole nature in the
most disgraceful way, but has also corrupted and maddened it.
Nevertheless, our sophists may say that the natural powers remained
intact and unchanged after sin, even in the devils.

If the serpent, which the devil had misused for sin, has to bear this
punishment for the sake of sin, that it had been the most beautiful
before, and now it suddenly has to drag an adder\'s tail before Adam\'s
eyes, crawl on the earth and become horrible: what do we doubt about the
punishment of man, who himself has sinned and even drunk the poison of
sin, which was poured into him by the devil? As the Egyptians saw, 2
Mos. 7, 10, not without great astonishment, that after Moses threw his
rod there

In the same way, in paradise, after the word of the curse was spoken,
the serpent was transformed from the most beautiful and lovely form into
the most horrible and shameful.

150 To this curse also belongs that he says: \"You shall eat dust\",
which the allegorists interpret in such a way that Satan would take in
the people, who love earthly things, and seduce them. But I have said
that God speaks here with the serpent and curses it. There are other
animals that eat dust and earth: but the serpent eats dust, so that
since it had previously had the advantage over other animals with
cunning, beautiful form and loveliness, also with the food that it had
in common with man, it must now bear this punishment, that its food and
nourishment is also changed.

It is an honor that sheep, cows and other animals eat herbs and fruits
of the trees, and after that produce that which also serves man for his
food, as butter, milk, meat 2c. This honor the snake had in common with
the other animals at first; but now it is cast out from this society and
from the common table and life for the sake of sin, that it may not eat
even the smallest herb, must not eat apples, pears, nuts, which the mice
eat, but raw earth and dust. These are not my words, but Moses\', and
teach that the serpent\'s nature has been completely transformed and
changed.

Although I have said, and it is true, that God speaks to the serpent in
this way, and that these words primarily concern Satan, as will follow
more clearly, I do not like it that one wants to draw what is
appropriate to the serpent\'s nature to Satan through allegories, as
Augustine does, whom Lyra follows. For the serpent and Satan sin with
each other at the same time; although Satan primarily plays the game,
the serpent serves as a tool for it. For this reason, God also unites
them, since he punishes them; although the serpent only receives a
bodily punishment, Satan receives a bodily punishment.

**[230 1, sss-rtv. Interpretation of Genesis 3:14, 15, W. I, S4S-34S.
231]{.underline}**

But another judgment has been appointed for the one who started the
game, of which Christ says John 16:11: \"The prince of this world has
been judged. This judgment will follow.

It is true that they say that the devil no longer walks erect, as does
the serpent, but has lost his former form and gesture, but it actually
belongs to the meaning of this text. But that I have said that the
serpent, before it was cursed, walked straight, is not to be understood
as if it walked erect, like a man, but like a deer or peacock. This is
now the judgment of the serpent. What follows actually belongs to Satan,
and these words depict his judgment and sentence much better than the
foolish and uncomfortable allegories. They also give and confirm this
certain comfort that the devil has been brought to the point where he
cannot rage and do harm as freely as he would like; he would do so even
if this seed of the woman were not on his neck.

**II.**

V. 15. **I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your
seed and her seed.**

These are the words that actually concern Satan\'s judgment and
punishment, and in which the Christians are given a strong consolation.
The previous words, as I said, belong to history and concern the
serpent, which, because Satan abused it for sin, bears the punishment of
being excluded from the community and society of other animals and no
longer has food in common with them, but must feed itself in another
way.

And even though this could be interpreted secretly, it does not really
belong here, nor does it hold the sting when it has come to a fight. For
as far as this matter is concerned, the devil has been cast out of
heaven and condemned for sin\'s sake, and no longer walks straight like
an ox or a deer, but creeps or slithers, that is, he may not touch the
ground.

He does not continue to attack Christians with public force, but uses
deceit and secretly pursues them; which the Christians understand when
they look at the word, and see how abominable he is, and have an
abhorrence of him. And this gesture, that he thus crawls and does not
walk upright, shows that his tyranny is broken and that he cannot harm
the church as much as he would like. This can be said according to the
secret interpretation: but it does not explain Moses\' opinion,
therefore it does not really belong here.

156\) Therefore, if we want to speak of Satan, we should follow other
testimonies of the Scriptures, which are real, certain and firm, such as
John 8:44: \"The devil is a murderer and the father of lies\"; item:
\"He is not established in the truth\"; item 1 Peter 5:8: \"He goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour\"; item John
16:11: \"The prince of this world is judged.

157 And in the end, who would not see that this testimony actually
concerns Satan, because the Son of God is set against him, so that he
cannot subject himself to anything by public authority, as if he had a
core that fights against him. Therefore, the church is half safe and at
peace with this protection, and not only can Satan not touch the church
with public force, but his tyranny and eager will to do harm is also
broken in others, otherwise he would not let a tree grow up, he would
prevent, even strangle and dampen everything that grows on earth, and
would not only prevent in a moment that no man, but also that no cattle
nor animal would be born and remain healthy. Such a will and intention
to harm shows sufficiently that he cannot rage and take hold of himself
with public authority, but what he does, he does with cunning and
deceit.

158\] It should also be noted that this is not said by God for the sake
of the devil, for God does not consider him worthy of condemnation, but
it is enough that his own conscience condemns him: but for the sake of
Adam and Eve it is done.

**[232 L 1, 240-\^2. interpretation of I Moses 3, 15. w. i. Zis-ni.
233]{.underline}**

says that those who hear Satan\'s judgment should be comforted because
they see that God is hostile and contrary to his nature, because he has
caused man such harm and sorrow. For here, in the midst of the wrath
that sin and disobedience have aroused, God\'s grace and mercy begin to
shine forth, and in the midst of the most severe threat, the Father\'s
heart breaks forth, who is not so angry as to reject the Son for sin\'s
sake, but he shows help, yes, he promises victory against the enemy who
has deceived and overcome human nature.

For Satan and man are not judged in the same way, even though man fell
into sin through Satan. God also does not combine them in punishment, as
he could have done by right, but separates them from each other as far
as possible. For although He is angry with man for having obeyed God\'s
enemy against His will, His wrath against Satan is much greater. For he
simply condemns him and punishes him, so that Adam and Eve see and hear
it, and are also refreshed by the condemnation of their enemy, and
realize that their condition is better. Therefore, the first piece of
comfort is that the serpent, and with him Satan, is accused and cursed
for the sake of Adam and Eve.

In this the consolation, which before was darkened with dark clouds,
becomes a bright sun, which rises above the clouds and shines with a
lovely radiance into the frightened hearts, that Adam and Eve not only
do not hear such a curse upon them, like the serpent, but that they are
immediately put in the lead and in a battle against the damned enemy,
and that with the hope of help, which God would do in the seed of the
woman. Therefore, Adam and Eve are shown here the forgiveness of sins
and that they are fully accepted to grace, as they are now absolved from
guilt and redeemed from death, from hell and this terror and fear, since
God\'s face had strangled them to death before. And if this comfort
comes

God does not curse Adam and Eve like the serpent, but it happens that
they are left together with the serpent in camps, so that they are not
idle. Therefore, this is also for the good of man.

This is the main part of this consolation, that although this enemy
fights with cunning and deceit, yet a seed shall be born that shall
bruise the serpent\'s head; for here the final destruction of Satan\'s
tyranny is indicated, although it cannot come off without a fierce
battle, which man must fight and struggle. But behold, how unequally it
happens in this battle: Man\'s heel is in danger, but the head remains
unharmed and unconquered. Again, by the seed of the woman, not the tail
nor the belly, but the head of the serpent shall be trodden down and
crushed. And such victory is also given to us; as Christ Luc. 11, 22.
clearly says that after the strong one has overcome, the spoil will be
distributed. For a Christian by faith overcomes sin, the law and death,
so that even the gates of hell cannot overwhelm him.

This first consolation, the source and origin of all mercy and all
promises, the fathers and their descendants learned with all diligence.
For they have seen that if they were without this promise, the human
race would indeed multiply and beget like other animals, but it would be
a multiplication and birth to death. Therefore, the same gift of
fertility and procreation, which is given to nature by God, is increased
here, even sanctified with the promise of such a procreation, by which
Satan\'s head is to be crushed, so that not only his tyranny is to be
destroyed and lifted up, but also this nature, which was ordained to
death for the sake of sin, is to receive eternal life.

For Moses no longer speaks of the natural serpent, but of the devil, who
is the head of death and sin; as Christ says John 8:44 that he is a
murderer and the father of lies. Because

**[234 L.i, ,\"-\"\"4. interpretation of Genesis 3:18.
235]{.underline}**

now that his power has been trampled underfoot, that is, sin and death
have been abolished by Christ, what is left but that we, as the children
of God, should be saved? In this way Adam and Eve understood this text,
and comforted themselves against sin and despair with the hope of this
atonement, which was to take place through Christ; and in the hope of
this promise they will rise to eternal life on the last day.

**The same shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.**

Who would not be surprised, who would not curse the poisonous and evil
counsel of Satan, that he has drawn this text, in which there is so much
comfort from the Son of God, to Mary, the virgin, through clumsy
interpreters? For in all Latin Bibles the pronoun is in the feminine
gender: \"and the same shall be trodden down.\" And Lyra, who was not
inexperienced in the Hebrew language, is carried away by this error, as
by a water that runs strong and with all its force, to an ungodly mind,
that he understands this saying, regardless of the fact that the text is
against it, about Mary, through whom the power of the devil was broken
and destroyed, but that the Son was the means. And draws on this a
saying in the Song of Songs Cap 6, 3: \"Thou art terrible, as the heads
of armies.\" Although he refers to this saying as if he had heard it
from others, he commits a great sin by not refuting it. The next and new
teachers all followed this and misused this very comforting and holy
saying for idolatry, and yet no one opposed it or resisted it.

This happened either because of the ignorance or carelessness of the
church rulers. Because they did not stand up against idolatry, the pure,
righteous doctrine was lost over time and died out altogether. But now,
because by God\'s help and grace it has been brought forth again, these
shameful gluttonous bellies publicly let it be known that they do not
ask much about religion, but about their sinecures and interest. And
because they have the ab

If people are pious and serve godliness, they can ill suffer people to
be taught rightly. But blind men do not see that the gospel is such a
doctrine that whoever accepts it loses nothing but his sin and eternal
death, but gains by being delivered from all idolatry and the devil\'s
kingdom.

166 Therefore, let us thank God that we have also restored this saying
completely and again; not that Mary is thereby deprived of her due
honor, but that we are rid of idolatry. For when they say that Mary
trampled on all the power of the devil by giving birth to Christ, cannot
the same honor be due to all other women who were in one line and line
before Mary, if they say the former with truth? Yes, such praise and
honor will also belong in part to men and to all the ancestors of the
Virgin Mary. For where she was not, she would not have been. For she was
born in wedlock according to the common course of nature: if then she
has trampled Satan by giving birth to Christ, this honor must be
ascribed not only to her, but to all her ancestors.

The Scripture teaches us differently, and says Rom. 4, 25, that \"Christ
was given up for our sins and raised for our righteousness\"; item Joh.
1, 29: \"Behold, this is the Lamb of God who bears the sin of the world.
Therefore, let the Virgin Mary have this honor, that among all women God
has graced and adorned her with this privilege, that she should be and
remain a virgin and bear God\'s Son. This, however, should not be taken
to mean that the honor of our salvation and blessedness should be taken
away from the Son.

168\. to which we are to preserve and keep with all diligence and care
the right and proper understanding of the holy Scriptures and this
marvelous light, which opens and shows us the causeless goodness of God,
as we are taught of the enmity between the serpent and the woman, about
which there is such a figure that the seed of the woman shall crush the
serpent with all her might. And has

**[236 L. 1, 244-24\". Interpretation of I Genesis 3, 15. W. I, SS4-ÄS7.
237]{.underline}**

The devil understood such a threat well, therefore he still rages and
rages with such hatred and enmity against human nature. But Adam and Eve
were so encouraged and awakened by this promise that they wholeheartedly
accepted the hope that everything they had lost through sin would be
restored to them, and they saw with full and strong faith that God would
take care of their salvation, because He clearly and in few words
promised that the seed of the woman, which would be in the likeness of a
man, would defeat and chase away this enemy. For these words are
excellent, important and very powerfully set one after the other.

**III.**

I will put enmity,\" says God, \"between your seed and her seed. As if
to say: \"You Satan have taken hold of the woman and seduced the man, so
that you may be her head and master for the sake of sin: I will pursue
you again in the same way by this very means and instrument that you
have used. I will take the woman and raise up from her a seed that shall
bruise thy head. You have corrupted human nature and subjected it to
death because of sin; but I will bring forth such a man from the same
flesh, who shall trample on you again, and all your power and strength,
and put you down.

So this promise and threat is very bright and light, but it is also very
dark: for it leaves the devil in this suspicion, that he suspects all
women who give birth, that they would give birth to this seed, when only
one woman should be the mother of this given seed. But because he thus
threatens in general, since he says: \"her seed\", or \"the seed of the
woman\", he thereby mocks Satan, that he must fear all women.

In this way, all men are assured of their faith, that from that hour,
when the promise was made, they waited for this seed and took comfort
against the devil. That is why Eve, when she gave birth to her first
son, hoped that she would now have the serpent. And whether this

Although she lacked hope, she knew that this seed would have to be born
from her lineage one day, even if it happened when she wanted it to.
Therefore, this promise, as far as the people are concerned, was at the
same time very clear and also dark.

Isaiah, Cap. 7, v. 14, explained this saying and made it a little
clearer when he said that a virgin should conceive. For at that time it
was certain that this seed should not be born of the mixture of a man
and a woman. But he adds something more, in which he implicates this
prophecy, so to speak: that this clear promise remained dark and
implicated until Mary gave birth, and witnesses to this birth were the
angels, and after them the shepherds and wise men, until this birth was
preached and proclaimed through the apostles into the whole world.

Therefore this darkness caused Satan much concern, because it is said
here, \"I will put enmity between you and the woman,\" he became hostile
to all women in childbirth from that time on, until Christ was revealed,
and kept them under suspicion. Again, this darkness in man increased and
strengthened faith; so that although every woman easily saw that she was
not the one who should bear this seed, yet they hoped and certainly
concluded that it must be born of another.

The fact that God speaks of a woman in an individual way, that I call it
that, is primarily so that Satan may be mocked, but the pious may be
comforted and awakened to faith. Women gave birth to children until the
Flood and later until Mary, but their seed could not really be called
the seed of a woman, but rather the seed of a man. But that which is
born of Mary was conceived by the Holy Spirit and is truly Mary\'s seed,
as evidenced by other promises God made to Abraham and David, according
to which Christ was called the Son of Abraham and the Son of David.

175 This understanding was first indicated by Isaiah Cap. 7, 14, who
says that a virgin shall conceive. According to this

**[238 L. 1, 240-\^. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 15. W. 1, 387-3\".
239]{.underline}**

In the New Testament this is clearly interpreted by the angel. Therefore
I do not doubt that this mystery is not understood by many saints, who
waited for Christ to be born of a woman into this world and redeem the
human race, but did not know the ways and means of this birth, but were
satisfied with this common knowledge and became blessed, even though
they did not know how he was to be conceived and born. For this had to
be reserved for the New Testament as a brighter light, and the first
world had to be shown something dark for the sake of Satan, whom God
wanted to mock and practice so that he would have all the less rest and
would have to fear everything.

176\. But when this promise, which had been made in general, had been a
little retracted and limited, and was bound by Abraham first to a
certain people, then by the patriarch Jacob to the tribe of Judah, then
the devil of other peoples and families was secure and satisfied, and
with great deceit and cruelty set himself against this certain line and
tribe, until about the time Christ was to come he was completely
impoverished, and lay there like a withered stump, from which no one
could hope for either leaves or fruit; as also the scripture Isa. 11,
v. 1. therefore calls it the root of Jesse, as a rotten and dead trunk.

177\. God looks at such anger and resentment of the devil here, when he
says about the enmity between the serpent and the woman 2c. For the
devil first sought out the seed of the woman with venomous and swift
hatred among all the peoples of the whole world; and when the promise
then came to the lineage of Abraham, we see how many ways he sought and
subjected himself to hinder it; How cruelly he also meant the tribe of
Judah, to which God had ultimately turned the promise, and inflicted all
kinds of misery and suffering on it, until it was finally seen as if it
had been turned back and cut off. For at the time when Christ was to be
born, poor Mary dwelt far from Jerusalem in

a small and despised town in Nazareth, but in Jerusalem the wicked ruled
and were mighty. Therefore, this tribe is likened to a withered vine.
But because God cannot lie, the same withered root sprouts again and
grows green.

From such cruelty, hatred and enmity against this seed of the woman the
devil does not rest and does not leave yet. For as Christ lies in the
cradle, he seeks him through Herod, so that he must live in Egypt among
the Gentiles. After that he tries and subdues everything against him,
until he, finally delivered to the Jews in the garden, has him seized
and brought to the cross. Yes, now that he is already dead, his
exuberant hatred and resentment cannot be sated, but still fears him as
he lies in the grave, and has him guarded. Such a fierce enmity he leads
against the Son of God. But because he now sees that he sits at the
right hand of God and has escaped far from all his shots and blows, he
lies down with all fury and tyranny against his limbs and the poor
church. Such danger and all kinds of trouble from the devil are
foreshadowed and prophesied in this saying, but we should be firm and
strong in the faith and trust of the Son of God, who tramples Satan.

Now I come back to the text. This promise is, as we have heard, very
clear and dark at the same time. For God says in general \"the seed of
the woman\", so that he makes all women suspicious to the devil and
plagues him with eternal worry and sorrow. Therefore it is a strange
synecdoche. \"The seed of the woman,\" he says. This reads as if it were
said of every woman in general: and yet God speaks of only one, namely
of the seed of Mary, who is a mother without the union with a man. As
the first part, \"I will put enmity between you and the woman,\" reads
as if it were said in general of all women; for God wanted to make all
women suspicious to Satan: again, he wanted to leave the pious a certain
hope and to show that they would be assured of their salvation and
redemption from all women who give birth, until

**[240 D. l, s4s-L\"\>. Interpretation of Genesis 3:15. W. i, ssv-sss.
241]{.underline}**

to give birth to the one who was to be. So this piece, \"between her
seed\", speaks very individualiter (that I speak thus) of the seed,
which alone was born of Mary, who was of the tribe of Judah and trusted
to Joseph.

180\) So this is the text that made Adam and Eve alive and brought them
back to life from death, which they had lost through sin; but so that
they have it more in hope than in possession. As Paul also often saith,
\"I die,\" saith he 1 Cor. 15:31:, \"daily.\" For even if we do not want
to call this life, which we have here temporally, a death, it is truly
nothing else than a constant walk to death. For just as one whom
pestilence has poisoned begins to die as soon as he is poisoned, so this
life, after it has been poisoned by sin, cannot really be called a life
for the sake of sin and punishment for sin, which is death. For
immediately from the womb we begin to die.

But through baptism we are brought back to the life of hope, or rather
to the hope of life, for that is the very first true life by which we
live before God. And before we come to the same, we are in the midst of
death, dying and rotting in the earth like other bodies, as if there
were no life left anywhere. But we who believe in Christ have this hope
that we will be awakened to eternal life on the last day. So Adam was
also awakened by this sermon of the Lord, but not completely; for he has
not yet regained the life he lost, but he has received the hope of it,
since he heard that Satan\'s tyranny was to be trampled underfoot and
destroyed.

For this reason, this saying includes redemption from the law, sin and
death, and shows a clear and certain hope of resurrection and renewal in
the other life after this one. For if the head of the serpent is to be
trampled underfoot, then death must also be lifted up and eradicated. If
then death is to be eradicated, then that by which death is earned must
also be abolished, that is, sin. Now if sin is also to be

[the law]{.underline} must also cease to exist. And not only does this
happen, but at the same time the obedience that has been lost is also
restored.

Since all these things are promised in and through this seed, it is
clear and evident that human nature, after the fall, was not able by its
own power and strength to take away sin, nor the punishment for sin, nor
to escape death, nor to return to lost obedience; for this requires
greater power and greater strength than men have. Therefore, the Son of
God had to become a sacrifice, so that He could perform and obtain such
things for us, so that He could take away sin, take away death, and
bring back the lost obedience.

184 We are mighty and possess such treasures in Christ, but in hope. And
so by hope Adam, Eve and all believers live and overcome until the last
day. Death is terrible and an insurmountable tyrant, but God\'s power
and authority make nothing out of what is everything, just as it makes
everything out of what is nothing. For behold Adam and Eve, full of sin
and death; yet, hearing the promise of the seed of the woman, which
should bruise the serpent\'s head, they hope the very things which we
hope, that death shall be abolished, sin destroyed, and righteousness,
life, peace 2c. Will be restored. In this hope the first parents live
and die and are truly holy and righteous also for the sake of this hope.

So we also live in this hope, and when we die, we keep this hope of life
for Christ\'s sake, to which the word points us, because it tells us to
trust and believe in the merit and good deed of the Lord Christ. For we
wait in vain in this life for such perfection, that we may be wholly
righteous, loving God fully and our neighbor as ourselves. We may come a
little closer, but sin, which stirs in all our limbs and clings to us
everywhere, either corrupts or hinders this obedience. How therefore
this life of ours, because it has death before it, may well be

**[242 L. I, sso-rsL. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 15. 16. W. 1,
3SL-3SS. 243]{.underline}**

death: so also is righteousness covered and laden with sins.

\(186\) Therefore in hope we keep both life and righteousness, which are
things hidden from our eyes and reason, but which shall be revealed in
their time. However, our life is a life in the midst of death, and yet
remains the hope of life even in the midst of death, because the Word
teaches us this, means this, and promises us this; as in Psalm 68, v.
21, there is a glorious consolation: \"We have a God who helps, and the
Lord God who saves from death. Let us give this title to God, that he
does not help in this temporal life alone; just as the devil also helps
and assists those who serve him at times, as the examples of the
Gentiles show: but that he is a Lord who helps from death, that is, who
redeems those who are overcome by death, and brings them into eternal
life. He does this, as Moses shows, by crushing the head of the serpent.

187 So now we have how Adam and Eve were brought back, not to the life
they had lost, but to the hope of the same life; by which hope they
escaped not the firstfruits, but the tithes of death. That is, although
the flesh must die temporally, yet for the sake of the Son of God, who
was promised to them to bruise the serpent\'s head, after the temporal
death of the flesh they hope for a resurrection and eternal life; as do
we. Now follows the other part of this sermon, in which God also
threatens with bodily punishment, first to the woman and then also to
the man.

> **Fifth part.**

**From the punishment, so is implied to the first parents.**

**I.**

**V.16. And to the woman he said, I will cause thee much pain when thou
art with child; thou shalt bring forth children with pain; and thy will
shall be subject unto thy husband, and he shall be thy lord.**

This is the punishment that God has inflicted upon the woman, but it is
truly a merciful and happy punishment, and it is in accordance with the
sentence that has been pronounced against Satan. For if it remains that
the serpent\'s head is to be crushed, then there is certain hope of
resurrection from death, and because this hope remains firm and certain,
everything that is imposed on man is bearable.

This is also the reason why the holy scripture is so careful not to say
anything about the punishment of the woman that is contrary to the
serpent\'s previous judgment. It imposes a punishment on the woman, but
nevertheless leaves the hope of resurrection and eternal life. But the
death that she deserved by sin she puts on the other and ignoble part of
man, namely on the flesh, so that the spirit may live in righteousness
for the sake of faith.

\(190\) So woman is subject to death as far as the flesh is concerned,
but as far as hope is concerned, she is free from death. For the
judgment that God threatens the devil with, that his head should be
crushed, remains certain. Therefore the natural life here has its cross
and its death; as Paul also says in 1 Cor. 15:44 that the natural body
will die, but a spiritual body will rise again. So in this natural life
marriage remains, and the woman must experience the punishment that God
has laid on her for sin, namely, that from the time she conceives,
afterwards in childbirth, and in the whole of her life, because she
bears and brings forth children, she must stand in various dangers. But
all this only applies to the natural life or the flesh, and nevertheless
the hope of a spiritual and eternal life remains after this.

Therefore, this is certainly a happy and kind punishment, if we want to
consider it rightly. For although the punishment and burden laid upon
the flesh is burdensome, yet in the same burden or . The hope of a
better life is affirmed in this punishment, because Eve hears that she
will not be rejected by God. In addition, she also hears that in this
punishment she will not be deprived of a better life.

**[244 D 1. 262-254. interpretation of Genesis 3:16. W. I, SSS-S7I. 24
5]{.underline}**

She sees that she retains her gender and remains a woman; she also sees
that she is not divorced or separated from Adam and lives alone without
her husband. She sees that she retains her gender and remains a woman;
she also sees that she is not divorced or separated from Adam to live
alone and without her husband; she sees that her motherly honor remains
with her. Such gifts all come to the hope of eternal life and will no
doubt have been very comforting to Eve. Yes, it also remains to her the
greatest and righteous honor that she not only retains the blessing of
fertility and remains trusting her husband, but also has a certain
promise that from her shall come the seed that will crush the serpent\'s
head.

Therefore, no doubt, even in this sad affair, which seems to be due to
the punishment, Eve\'s heart was full of joy, and she may have comforted
her Adam, saying: \"It is true, I have sinned; but behold, how gracious
God we have, how much he gives us sinners both temporal and spiritual
gifts! Therefore we women will gladly bear this anguish, toil and labor,
to bear and bear children, and to be subject to you men; for this is a
fatherly wrath, because it remains that our enemy\'s head shall be
crushed, and that after the death of our flesh we shall be raised again
by our Savior and Redeemer to a new and eternal life: such great and
infinite benefits far surpass all the curses and punishments laid upon
us by our Father. Adam and Eve will undoubtedly have had such
conversations with each other many times and will have soothed and
comforted themselves with all temporal accidents and misfortunes.

Just as we should often contemplate the unspeakable treasures of the
life to come, and with such thoughts make all temporal hardships and
burdens of the flesh gentle and easy; as we see Paul doing 2 Cor. 4:17,
18.: \"Our affliction,\" saith he, \"is temporal and light: for it
worketh for us an everlasting glory, which is above all things: who look
not to the things which are seen, but to the things which are not seen:
for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not
seen are eternal.\"

Now tell me if they should not bear all temporal misfortunes gently and
patiently, and say that this is the wrath of a father and not of a
severe judge or tyrant, who thus take hold of the hope of eternal life
and believe God\'s promise; then also look at the temporal blessing that
God has granted us this whole world, that we should use it, has given us
wife, children, house and farm, also maintains and increases all this
with abundant blessings. But in the serpent, on the other hand, the
wrath of a severe judge can be seen, for not only will he not promise
help or salvation, but he is also threatened that his head will be
crushed. The devil has felt this wrath and still feels it; therefore he
rages and rages before the last day with such fury and violence against
the church and the Son of God.

This is indeed a threat that God will punish Eve, but in the midst of
the punishment, an unspeakable mercy shines forth, which so upholds and
comforts Eve that even in her misfortune she is of good cheer and joy.
Now we ourselves also feel how necessary the punishment is for us to
tame the flesh. For how could we be humbled if this nature were not
pressed and chastened with such a burden of punishment? Therefore Eve
and every woman in her profession and office must certainly bear their
own cross and experience much sorrow, fear and hardship and conceive and
give birth with pain.

Here is the word rab, which means greatness and multiplicity, so that
one understands not only great, but also many and various sorrows and
pains, which Eve would never have experienced if she had not fallen into
sin. And God especially threatens conception and birth. But conception
is called the same whole time in which the conceived fruit is carried in
the womb and various severe impulses and diseases strike. For as soon as
there is great pain, dizziness and a strange disgust for food and drink,
constant and difficult vomiting, toothache, and discomfort in the
stomach, from which the desire comes,

**[246 L i- rs4-257. interpretation of I Moses 3, 16. W. i, 372-371.
247]{.underline}**

which nmn calls Kitta or Pica, if one desires such things, before which
one has a shyness, if one is healthy. But if the fruit is formed in the
womb and the birth is present, then follows the most miserable misery
that the mother must give birth to the child with the greatest danger
and almost with mortal fear and hardship.

When the pagans see this, who neither understand nor know anything about
God and His works, they are so angered that they conclude that a wise
man should not take a wife for the sake of such misery and suffering.
For the female sex is greatly humiliated and afflicted and must bear
much heavier and harsher punishment than men. For what does a man suffer
in his body like a woman? But because through the marriage state the man
participates to some extent in such punishments of the woman (for a
pious man cannot see such misery in his wife without pain and
compassion), it has come about that godless people often prefer to live
in fornication rather than become married men.

But against this opinion of the wicked, pious Christians should know how
to comfort themselves, and (which is the right wisdom) also hold against
this accident and misfortune the benefit, which is certain and much
greater in marriage. For as Pindar chastises foolish people against
Hiero, that because God distributes the good in such a way that he
always leaves some evil with it, they do not know how to alleviate the
evil with the good that they also have; whereas the pious and wise adorn
their good and cover with it the evil with which they are occupied,
placing the good, as it were, in such a place that it can be seen by
everyone: so it should be done here also. Let it be true that the
punishment to which women are subjected for sin is great; but is it not
much greater, and far surpasses all punishment and plague, that in the
midst of their distress and misery they have some hope of an immortal
and eternal life?

199 Secondly, the cross, sorrow and hardship is not without fruit: for
it serves to humble nature.

and humiliated, which otherwise could not be tamed without the cross.

Thirdly, even in the temporal and bodily accident there remains the
excellent honor of the mother and the blessing of the womb, about which
even the pagans, who were a little more understanding and wiser, were
astonished and greatly praised. So there remain other gifts as well,
that we are all conceived, carried and nourished in our mother\'s womb,
suckle our mother\'s breasts and are sustained by our mother\'s
maintenance, care and diligence. This means to turn the good against the
evil and not only to look at the evil, but also to draw pleasure from
God\'s gifts and blessings, and to throw and cover with them the
punishment, the bad, the pain and the fear. But only pious Christians
know and do this; they give honor to women as the weak vessel, because
they see that they also have a share in eternal life and are joint heirs
of the kingdom of heaven. Then they also see that they are adorned and
graced with God\'s blessing and motherly honor, and that we are all
conceived, born, nourished and educated by them.

I myself often take great pleasure and wonder in seeing how the whole
body of a woman is made and prepared to nurture and raise children. How
fine it is also for little maidens when they carry children? How do
mothers play and joke with fine, comfortable gestures when they nurse a
crying child or put it in the cradle? Let a man do such things, and you
will have to say that he stands to it like a camel to the dance; it is
so bad for him, even if he has to touch the child with one finger. Not
to mention the other services and maintenance that cannot be provided to
children other than by their mothers. Whoever wants to look at and
consider all this properly will have to recognize it as a special
footprint and indication of the blessing of the Lord, by which God shows
that he takes care of the female sex and lets it be loved, even if it is
severely punished because of sin. And this is enough of the first part
of the curse.

The other part is in witnessing. For if Eve had not sinned, she would
not alone have had children without all pain and suffering.

**[248 L. I, SS7-AW. Interpretation of Genesis 3:16, 17. E. I, S74-S77.
249]{.underline}**

The marriage union would have been as honest as it is now for a man to
sit at table with his wife, eat with her or talk with her. In this way,
the rearing of children would have been quite easy and full of pleasure
and joy. These goods have now been lost through sin, and in their place
have come the well-known misfortunes and evils, namely. Pain and toil
and labor in childbearing, childbearing and childrearing. For just as a
beautiful maiden wears a beautiful wreath of flowers on her head without
difficulty, even with great pleasure and hope, so Eve, if she had not
sinned, would have borne fruit in her womb without any difficulty and
with all pleasure.

Now, in addition to the pain of bearing and giving birth to children,
Eve is under the authority of the man, who was previously completely
free and in no way inferior to the man, but was a partaker of all God\'s
gifts. And this punishment also grew out of original sin, which a woman
bears as unwillingly as the other pains and burdens laid upon the flesh.
Therefore, the regiment and the rule remains with the man, to whom the
woman must be obedient and subject out of God\'s commandment: he rules
over Han and police, wars, defends his own, plows, sows, builds, plants
2c. On the other hand, a woman must sit at home and be bound to the
house; as Paul Tit. 2, 5. therefore calls it \"domestic\". And the
pagans painted Venus as standing on a snail, so that just as she carries
her house with her, so the woman must always be at home and wait for the
domestic business, as she, deprived of the common offices and government
of things that are outside and public, must remain only with the
domestic offices.

But if Eve had existed in truth and innocence, not only would she not
have been allowed to be under man\'s power and rule, but she would also
have been a helpmate to the rule that is now only of men. But women are
generally unhappy with this burden and impatient about it, and strive by
nature for that which they have lost through sin. And if they cannot do
more

they show their impatience with grumbling, since they are not able to
appoint male offices, to teach and to govern: but they can bear
children, nourish and raise them and are masters in this. Thus Eve is
punished, but, as said above, it is a cheerful punishment, if one wants
to see the hope of eternal life and motherly honor that God has left
her.

**II.**

**V. 17 And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the
voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree which I commanded thee,
saying, Thou shalt not eat of it; cursed be the field for thy sake, and
thou shalt eat of it with sorrow all the days of thy life.**

The man has sinned last, therefore also the punishment is laid on him
last. But from childbearing or from pain in childbearing nothing
threatens him: God. Therefore also in the man the rutting air, by the
poison of the devil to the body, is without pain. But his office is
burdened with special punishment, because after it is his duty to feed
his wife, children and servants, to govern them, to teach and instruct
them, he cannot do it without special difficulty and great effort and
work. The wife is commanded to be obedient to the husband, but how hard
is it to get it? I do not even know how to govern others who do not
belong to the house.

For this reason the philosophers wondered where this disorder in nature
came from, that it was much easier to govern an unreasonable animal than
a man; as Xenophon says: \"It is easier to command all other animals
than men. It is indeed a glorious work to be a man, to build the earth
or do other works, to feed wife and child, to rule the house, land and
cities, to teach and instruct one\'s household and others in godliness
and good manners: but still these glorious works all have their
punishment in themselves, that they cannot be done without
unwillingness, toil and labor, as the examples before us show.

207\. and first of all, for Adam\'s sake

**[250 i, 25S-2N. Interpretation of Genesis 3:17. \" i, 377-sso.
251]{.underline}**

curses the earth. For that the Latin text has: In opere tuo, is in
Hebrew baaburecha, that is for your sake, and has perhaps misled the
interpreter the other word, so yours is almost the same and is written
baabudecha; because abad means to build the land. Here we see what
sorrow followed sin, because the earth, which is innocent and has not
sinned, nevertheless bears the curse over itself and, as Paul says in
Romans 8:20, 21, \"must be subject to vanity,\" from which it will be
saved and set free at the last day, for which it is waiting. Pliny calls
her a kind, gracious and mild mother; item, an eternal servant for the
benefit of men. But, as Paul indicates, she feels her curse, first in
that she does not now bear the goods that she would have borne if man
had not fallen; then also in that she must bear many harmful things that
she would not otherwise have borne, such as all kinds of weeds, wild
oats, thistles, nettles, thorns, thistles, poisonous plants and harmful
animals and the like, all of which are introduced by sin.

And I do not doubt that before the fall the air will have been much
purer and healthier, the water much richer, and even the light of the
sun much more beautiful and brighter. So that the whole creature reminds
us everywhere of the curse that has passed over us because of sin. But
something has remained of the previous blessing, that nevertheless the
earth, forced by constant labor, bears what is necessary for our need,
although this is mixed and disguised with thorns and thistles, that is,
with useless and also harmful trees, bushes and herbs, which God\'s
wrath makes grow. And this curse was subsequently increased by the
Flood, by which all good trees were laid waste and corrupted, sand and
barren earth increased, and harmful herbs and animals became abundant:
so that since Adam before the Fall walked among fruitful trees, in
pleasant meadows, in flowers and roses, now nettles, thorns and other
harmful and corrupting plants grow in such abundance that they almost
cover and overgrow the good things that are underneath.

For behold a plowed field, now prepared to be sown. As soon as it is
sown, from hour to hour more weeds and vines come out than good and
useful fruit; and if they are not eradicated by the farmer\'s constant
and diligent work, they daily invade the field more and more, so that at
last the good seed is choked. The earth is innocent and would much
rather bear the best; but it is prevented by the curse that has passed
over man for sin\'s sake.

\(210\) Just as the woman must bear the punishment of sin in her body,
which is very merciful, so that she must bear children with sorrow, pain
and fear, so the man also bears his punishment in the household, because
he must rule his house with hard toil and labor, and feed his children
and his servants. For for his sake the field was cursed, since before
the sin no place on the whole earth was barren or unfit, but everything
was quite fresh and fertile. Now, however, not only is the earth barren
in many places, but since the land is also fertile and cultivated, it is
covered with weeds, thorns and thistles. This is a great sorrow, which
should drive Adam and us to impatience and despair, but it is alleviated
by the promise of the seed, by which the punishment of eternal death,
which is far greater, is cancelled and taken away.

211 It is easy to understand that it says, \"With sorrow you shall feed
on it all your life. For who does not know how poor and laborious it is
for a husbandman? It is not enough that the field is plowed and prepared
for seed, on which much and various work must be done; but when the seed
has sprouted and become seed, new toil and work are found almost every
day. Not to mention the trouble caused by lust and thunderstorms, of
which there are innumerable; item, harmful animals and the like, all of
which increase this grief and sorrow. But before sin, not only was there
none of these mischiefs, but the earth would have borne them all,
unplowed and unseeded, before we knew it, if Adam had not sinned.

**[252 L.I. s \"l-L\". Interpretation of Genesis 3, 17. W. 1, 380- 383.
253]{.underline}**

Nevertheless, this harm and misery, which sin has introduced, has been
much less severe and more bearable than that which followed the Flood.
For here only the thorns, thistles and work are thought of; but we learn
and now find that other innumerable things have come in addition. For
how many things are there that harm the seed, the grain, the trees, and
all the plants? How much accident does the herb fall from harmful worms?
After it also the frosts, thunderstorms, harmful dew, winds, waters,
splitting of the earth, earthquakes do damage 2c. These things Moses
does not think of here. Therefore I consider it completely that the
punishments and such misery became [more]{.underline} and to the former
Vermaledeiung of the earth came, after the sins increased.

But since it seems to one that Moses understood all this when he said
that the earth was cursed, I will not greatly dispute it. But no one
will deny that such afflictions have increased since the sins have
multiplied; just as we are now experiencing that the plants are
suffering more often and more damage than they did years ago. For the
world decreases and becomes worse from day to day.

It is therefore evident that such misfortune was cast upon Adam for the
teaching and warning of the first world, so that the people would be all
the more obedient and disciplined. But such discipline soon weakened
around the time of Noah, and people began to live more freely and
safely, until at last the whole world became full of injustice and
tyranny, since God also had to inflict harsher and more frequent
punishments, just as in the physical world severe infirmities demand a
sharp remedy.

Since the whole world was devastated by the Flood, and everything that
lived on earth, except for a few people, was destroyed, the people who
first came after Noah undoubtedly lived in the fear of God, but in time
they also became evil and were corrupted by the devil. Therefore the
world had to have a serious example of punishment, as the destruction of
Sodom and the cities around it.

1 Mos. 19, 24, and the scripture says Cap. 15, 16, that the iniquity of
the Amorites must be full and complete. Finally the whole synagogue,
after it had fallen into pagan and public idolatry, was destroyed and
devastated. Thus, because Rome was kept in check, the city increased
greatly; but since the vices increased and took over, God had to come
closer with the punishment.

When the gospel first went out among us, the time was still bearable
enough; but because now there is almost no more fear of God, and shame
and vice increase daily, so that false teachers are also added, there is
nothing more certain to be provided for, than that it will come about
that after our sins have ripened, either the world will go over
completely, or Germany will be punished in another way. That it is true
that when sins increase, punishments also increase.

217 As I have said about the damage of the plants, so I also consider it
entirely true that the people were healthier than they are now; as also
proves the incredibly long life of the people before the Flood. For here
God does not threaten Adam with the blow, with leprosy, with the holy
disease and other gruesome and dangerous ills. For when I was a boy,
Germany did not yet know of the French disease, which only began to be
known around my fifteenth year; now even children in the cradle are
afflicted with this plague. That is why at that time people were very
afraid of this disease; now, however, it is so little respected that
even one friend curses another in jest.

The English sweat has been a country plague, as the doctors call it,
until this my age. For just as every country has its own special
blessings, so it must also be burdened and plagued with special plagues
if the blessings are abused against God. Now, however, it has become
common in many countries, so that it has also come to the midday places
of German land, which are located far from the sea. Yes, that is also
terrible to hear, finds

**[254 D I\' S6S\--SSS. Interpretation of Genesis 3:17, 18. w. 1,
383-88s. 255]{.underline}**

There are people who have snakes in their bodies and worms in their
brains, of which diseases the old physicians, as I respect it, did not
know anything, who count four hundred kinds of diseases. Now if such
diseases had all been in the first world, how could Adam and his
descendants have lived so long until Noah? Therefore Moses speaks only
of the barrenness of the earth and of the hard toil and labor to feed on
it.

But if someone were to speak expansively and rhetorically, if he were to
count here one by one all the misfortunes and miseries of the whole
human race, he would find such a terrible heap of misery and adversity
that he would ask God for fear of this one thing, not to let him live
one hour in such danger. For what do we say of the diseases alone? Are
all creatures against us and almost directed and prepared for our
downfall. How many perish by fire and water? How dangerous are wild and
poisonous animals, which not only harm our bodies but also those that
are grown for our nourishment? Not to mention that we ourselves fall on
each other and strangle, as if there were no other plague and misfortune
creeping up on us. And what is the whole life but a daily quarrel,
deceit, robbery and murder, if one looks at the people\'s nobility and
trade among themselves, above all the plagues that are directed at us
from outside. All of which I consider not to have been before the Flood,
or indeed not to have been as much or as severe as they are now. But, as
I said, because the sins are many, the plagues are also many.

For this reason, the sorrow inflicted on Adam was small compared to
ours. For as the world draws near to its end, it is burdened and
afflicted with many punishments and plagues. And this makes all misery
greater and heavier, so that the more the world is beaten and plagued,
the more stiff-necked and obstinate it becomes to its own misfortune; as
in the Proverbs of Solomon Cap. 23, 35. it says: \"They beat

me, but it does not hurt me; they knock me, but I do not feel it.\" This
blindness is above all other misfortunes and plagues.

For is it not a strange and miserable thing that we first see in our
bodies the footprints of divine wrath, which our sins have earned?
Nevertheless, it is also seen in the earth and in all creatures, and yet
all these things are despised by us with a calm and sure heart. For what
are thorns, thistles, water, fire, caterpillars, flies, fleas, lice,
bugs, 2c. but messengers preaching to us about sin and the wrath of God?
For before sin, they either did not exist at all, or were not so harmful
and disastrous. Therefore we live knowingly and with seeing eyes in a
more than Egyptian darkness. And even though we are reminded of the
wrath of God everywhere and by all creatures, and it is almost put into
our eyes, we do not pay attention to it, but love this temporal life and
cling to it as if it were the only pleasure.

222\. As sin increases, and security grows, and men are hardened in
their own calamities: so also shall there be much mourning and calamity,
not only in this life, but also in that. I am talking about the wicked.
For if one only felt the torment and anguish in hell, but did not
understand that it was a just punishment, the torment would be more
bearable; just as we do not want to recognize our punishment and
misfortune, and do not let it hurt us anymore. But what a stubbornness,
which prevents us from seeing our misery, will take hold of us there,
and all our senses will be opened, so that we will not only feel the
punishment in our bodies, but also God\'s wrath in our hearts and
consciences, and will have to confess that we have earned it with our
wickedness and sins. This will sharpen the torment and torture of the
wicked and make it infinitely greater.

V. 18. **He shall bear thee domes and thistles.**

Here we are told once again that the earth of things is not one of
itself.

**[256 \" l, \",-s\". Interpretation of Genesis 3:18, 19. W. I. zss-388.
257]{.underline}**

but because of Adam\'s sin; as he clearly said above: \"for your sake.
Therefore, as often as we see thistles and thorns, weeds and the like in
the field and in gardens, we are to remember, as from certain signs, the
sins and God\'s wrath. And so it is not only in the church that we hear
from God\'s Word that we are sinners; but the whole country, indeed the
whole creation, is full of such preachers, who reproach us with our sins
and with the wrath of God aroused by our sins. Therefore, we should
diligently pray that God would take such a great hardening out of our
eyes, minds and hearts, that after so many reminders of our sins, we
would once lay aside our security and live in the fear of God. For that
is why we are pressed and burdened with malediction in so many ways. As
Moses will explain further.

**You shall eat the herb in the field.**

This is a new plague. For above God gave man the most beautiful and
lovely gifts, that he should eat of all the trees in Paradise, but not
of two. He also gave him dominion over fish, and over all that the whole
earth had of animals and fruits: now all these things are taken away
from him for the sake of an apple, which he had eaten, leaving nothing
but the herbs. And from this, I think, one could prove strongly enough
that Adam ate neither butter, nor milk, nor cheese, nor eggs, nor flesh,
nor apples, nor pears, but seeds and seeds; as there are peas, beans,
fennel, millet, rice, grain 2c. How well would the guests have lived if
he had given out a daughter, or had been at the weddings of his
children, because nothing but herbs was allowed to him to eat?

This is certainly the moderation of the first world, namely, the very
least and simplest food with water. Now the world lives in terrible
abundance and gluttony, and is not content to have all kinds of meat to
its liking, but mixes fish and flesh together, does not eat water, and
does not eat water.

spice it, and change and pervert it, which is contrary to nature, in
various ways; so that what is sweet by nature becomes hot by spicing,
and what is hot becomes sweet. How many different drinks are there after
that? And who would not consider it a mockery if he saw that an
innkeeper put out water for drink? For we are not content with our beer
and the wine that grows here, but our desire also extends across the
sea, so that foreign drinks are brought from far away. Do you not think,
however, that if our father Adam were to return, he would be astonished
at such senseless pleasure in eating and drinking in his children, and
would shun and beware of such things as we eat and drink with pleasure,
as of poison, and prefer either turnips or pearl barley and cold water
to all our glory?

For this reason, temperance in eating and drinking is praised and
reproached to us here, because we hear from our first parents that they
were deprived of all other food and fare and were allowed to eat nothing
but food from herbs. For such simple food makes the body healthy, and
preserves it from diseases, which arise either from wanton eating and
drinking, or gluttony and excess.

This should not only inspire us to moderation, but also to patience,
when we see that others are showered with all kinds of pleasure, but we
hardly have bread, salt and water. For we should remember that this
punishment was inflicted on Adam, that after God had willed in paradise
and given him such freedom that he might eat of all kinds of fruit and
be lord of the whole earth, he must now, for the sake of his
disobedience, be content with a small herb along with all his
descendants.

**V. 19: In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread.**

How in many ways God makes man\'s work hard and sour, that he must be
burdened with all care and toil to nourish, protect and govern his own!
All this is still for our

**[258 n i, rss-rvo. Interpretation of Genesis 3:19, s. i, sss-svi.
259]{.underline}**

For the sake of the wickedness of the people, these times are much more
difficult and laborious than they were at first. For we see and
experience, if one can already have certain hope and be assured for the
sake of food, what effort and work it takes before one can keep the
servants and make them able to do what they are supposed to do. Adam was
not free from this evil either. For even though he was well and holy to
his house and his servants, he had to see that Cain slew his brother.
That I am silent about other misery and misery, which he had to see and
experience in his children and descendants through his long life.

Therefore this care is laid on the man, that he must have work on his
neck, in which he has neither special pleasure nor happiness. Nor should
there be any man who does not want to feel this sweat. And the more
dangerous is the life of the papists, who abuse for their pleasure and
idleness all that is acquired and collected from others.

But here a question arises: whether we should all be tillers of the
soil, or whether we should at least work with our hands? as in the
beginning of the Gospel some foolishly pretended, who misused this and
other texts, in which manual labor is commanded, so that the youth
abandoned their studies and learned handicrafts. How Carlstadt, their
head, left his profession, bought a field and dug and built it himself.
But surely, if I were to leave my office with a clear conscience,
walking around in the garden, hoeing and digging would be much easier
and more fun than having such trouble on my neck as I have now. For
peasant work is not at all comparable with this sweat of ours.

Therefore, do not listen to those who fight and pretend that manual
labor alone can be called work. For Christ clearly commands that those
who teach should enjoy what others have worked for. \"Wherever you enter
a house,\" he says in Luc. 10:5, 6, 7, \"first say, \'Peace be in this
house. And there eat and drink what they have. For a laborer is

worthy of his reward.\" Here Christ takes bread from the table for those
who hear the word of God and gives it to those who teach; as Paul also
says in 1 Cor. 9:14: \"Thus the Lord commanded that they which preach
the gospel should feed on the gospel.\" And on this opinion he draws the
law, v. 9. \"Thou shalt not bind the mouth of the ox that threshes.\"
Why was it commanded even to him that tilleth and worketh the field,
that he should give tithes, when the ministers of the word should feed
on the work of their hands?

232 Such and such sayings clearly indicate that the sweat of the face is
of many kinds. The first, of the peasants or household fathers; the
second, of the authorities; the third, of the church teachers. But among
these, the peasantry is the best, as the poet also says:

> Felices nimium, sua si bona norint Agricolae.

(The country people are all too happy when they know their beautiful
lot).

For although they have to do hard work, there is a special pleasure in
the fact that they see new and marvelous creatures before their eyes
every day; on the other hand, because of the daily danger, both in the
temporal and spiritual government, there are also innumerable burdens
and discomforts, if one only wants to wait faithfully for his office.
For I am not speaking here of idle people who do not recognize such
punishment of sins, but seek only how they may satiate and fill their
pleasure. Such epicureans may see how it suits them. But of those I
speak who do with earnestness that which they ought to do, who work and
sweat one day more than a peasant man in four weeks, if you will
consider the greatness of the work and many a danger.

This is also the reason why lords and princes are given wards, pensions,
interest and similar fees by their subjects. But who does not see how
little thanks and reward they receive for such toil and labor when they
perform their duties faithfully and diligently? But if some of them are
negligent, they should not leave the lawful order.

**[260L .r, rvo-\"\". Interpretation of Genesis 3:19. W. r. sn-ss4.
261]{.underline}**

234 I have heard of the Emperor Maximilian that he is said to have been
so burdened with business that he could not have leisure to eat;
therefore, at times he had to withdraw from work and business and hide
in the wood, where he hunted. At times he also disguised himself and
joined common people, with whom he held conversations for pleasure. And
although hunting has been reproached and misinterpreted, many who knew
about his toil and way of life have noticed and understood that he did
it more out of necessity than out of pleasure.

Tell me, then, what plowing, digging, and peasant labor compare with
this toil that belongs to such a regiment to administer? Such regents
are called kings and princes, but in truth they are the most miserable
of all servants. And it is the monks and the whole swarm of the pope
alone who live princely lives; for they leave to others the toil and
labor, the business, the haggling and the danger, but they are idle and
have good days.

236 I also say this about the care of a pastor, which should be
considered so much greater, as his office, over which he presides, is
greater and heavier. For who would think that Augustine lived in peace
and cultivated his ministry as he pleased among so many enemies and
adversaries with whom he had to fight daily, so that they would not
suppress the Christian doctrine; as there were the Pelagians, Donatists,
Manichaeans, and others of the like, who distressed the church and made
it restless? By God\'s grace, we have so much to do with ours that I
hope there will be no one who will begrudge us such leisure, which is
full of work. That is why it is the greatest folly that the enthusiasts
insist so much on manual labor, which is useful and beneficial to the
health of the body; whereas regimental and church work, which is the
greatest, weaken the body and consume strength and power, marrow and
legs.

Therefore, let us distinguish the sweat according to the right measure.
The sweat and labor in the home regiment is great, in the

In the church office, however, it is the greatest of all. For just look
at Paul, and you will soon understand how he sweated in his office. And
how can we say that there is no toil, no sweat in the church, which is
at all times contested by devils and plagued by heresies, aversions,
sins, injustice and violence of tyrants, and other all kinds of
accidents? Shall we then say that those who preside over the church are
not worthy of their bread?

238 We can say it of the pope, cardinals and the whole godless bunch,
who do not work and only take care of their belly, strive for good days
and consume great goods. For it is they of whom it should be said, \"He
that worketh not, neither shall he eat,\" as Paul says 2 Thess. 3:10.
For in the church, work means teaching and preaching, administering the
sacraments, fighting against heretics and falsehoods, lifting up
ailments, improving and edifying the pious 2c. Of those who do these
things, Christ says in Luc. 10:7 that \"a laborer is worthy of his
wages.

If we are to consider Adam\'s work, from which sin came, much worse was
it for him than for us. For since among us each one must work and sweat
in his own position, Adam had to sweat the sweat of the household, the
government and the church at the same time. For he alone, as long as he
lived, had to take over all these offices in his descendants; he had to
nourish his household, govern them and bring them to the fear of God; he
was therefore a father, king and priest at the same time. But what kind
of flourishing, work and danger is in each of these offices, experience
shows.

\(240\) Therefore we must comfort ourselves against this and accustom
our hearts to patience, because we see that such misfortune is also laid
upon the elect, who nevertheless have hope of the resurrection and of
eternal life. Since all poor and troublesome people have hope in this,
we should be confident and overcome all misfortune with this hope. For
we shall

**262 K i, rrr-rv.\" Interpretation of Genesis 3, id. W. i, s \"4-ssv.
263**

will not stay here forever. Just as one who wanders and at times comes
to an evil inn consoles himself that it is for an evil night that he
suffers hunger or lies hard, so we should also think in the midst of
this misery of ours. For what are two or three years, which we spend
almost sleeping, compared to eternity?

Therefore, let misfortune and adversity come, as God has provided for
everyone, be it in the home regiment, police or church office; we do not
want to be moved to impatience because of it or throw away the care for
the home, police or church from us because of it. For such a soft and
fine heart is not praised in any man of war that he would soon throw
down his arms in the first storm and take flight. Thus we are not
ordained and created for pleasure or good lazy days, but for work and
business. The poet says that we should not give way to misfortune, but
meet it all the more boldly and undauntedly. But we will be able to do
this when we hold out the hope of resurrection and eternal life against
this temporal misery and misfortune.

But as no one would like to lose it, so let each one consider that it is
not his place to leave the profession and position in which he has been
placed by God. Whoever is called to teach in the church, let him do it
boldly and confidently, and do not ask for any danger or laziness on the
part of the popes and bishops who preach the gospel, govern the church,
hear spiritual matters, and hear disputes. But they do not do so, but
blame such high works on unskilled monks: but they go for it to collect
money and to cause all kinds of pleasure. And because they avoid the
sweat and flee, they will also lack comfort and refreshment; and because
they do not want to suffer with them, they will also not rule with them.
Again, we who must bear the sweat, each in his own state, should
remember that though we may have to bite into many a sour bite and have
to suffer hardship, yet let all the jam

The end of toil and labor, as Moses appends this consolation, though he
speaks of great distress.

**Until you return to the earth from which you were taken. For thou art
earth, and shalt become earth.**

We see that godless people often endure innumerable and great
misfortunes for the hope of a short pleasure, which they think they will
get through it. For how much danger does a merchant on land and sea
endure for the hope of gain? And for how little money does a man of war
bargain for his life and limb? A whore must bear much more hardship and
misfortune in the whorehouse than a pious wife in the home. That is why
the Germans call such people of the devil martyrs in their proverb, who
voluntarily put themselves into misery and unhappiness, which they could
well be spared if they wanted to live piously and in the fear of God.
For how much pain and bodily harm do many a drunkard inflict on himself
through intemperate drinking, which he could well be spared if he drank
more moderately.

244 For this reason, one might reasonably doubt how people who are so
hardened by Satan can be advised, so that they do not feel their own
harm and misfortune, but still wantonly listen to it and grasp at it.
For do you not think that if they felt it, they would guard against it?
But now the hearts of men are so hardened that they take pleasure in
their misfortune, as can be seen in them. Because the majority of people
are in such a wrong mind that they put themselves into certain
misfortunes for the sake of foolish and small pleasures, it is to be
wondered at that this is not considered by the pious in the good cause,
that they think that even if one has to live here in various hardships
and misfortunes, it will nevertheless have an [end]{.underline} and all
hardships, miseries and misfortunes will be repaid with a better life.

245 This text points to this consolation: for it certainly promises that
this sorrow shall all come to an end, after the serpent\'s head is
crushed and contrite, saying, \"Until thou be restored,\" elha-.

**[364 \"- r. \"71-178. interpretation of Genesis 3, 19. W. 1,
3\"6-SS\". 365]{.underline}**

adamah, \"to the earth.\" For this word generally means earth or field;
as it says in the fourth chapter: \"Cain became a tiller. But the word
aphar actually means an earth or earthen clod, freshly thrown up. Our
translation has pulverem, so that it indicates that a loose earth is
meant here. For Adam was made a living man from a lump of earth. Now
when the same work shall come apart again and be dissolved, then shall
it come to pass, saith the Lord, that Adam shall again become the earth
or dust.

246 And here we are shown once again how the punishment has always
increased, since sin has increased and become greater. For the burial of
the dead corpses in the ground and their cutting into ashes or dust was
a gentle and not gruesome decomposition; but after that this custom
arose almost everywhere in the countries, that the dead were burned. How
often it happens that people are eaten alive by wild animals and have
the animals to their graves. As the prophets also put wild animals,
snakes and other poisonous worms among the four land punishments. For
the more we are hardened and hardened against punishment, the more
severe and severe punishment God inflicts, so that our hearts are broken
and softened; as Deut. 26:18, 19 is written: \"If you still do not obey
me over this, I will punish you seven times more for your sin, and I
will break your pride and stubbornness\" 2c.

Thus Adam\'s fall was from life to death, from health of the body to
sickness, and yet the same time was a golden time compared to ours: for
all things have gradually turned and become worse; as is also indicated
by the image in Daniel, chap. 2, vv. 32, 33. 2. v. 32. 33. For the
nearer the world comes to its end, the angrier the people become;
therefore it also follows that God takes us into more severe punishment.
How stiff-necked and obdurate the papists are now, fighting against the
bright and clear truth, and how cruelly and mercilessly they deal with
those who confess the truth! that I have become a victim of their
devilish avarice, fornication, infidelity, violence and injustice.

without any measure, let alone. How far can the punishment be from them?

248 And Moses has told so far what punishment God inflicted on Adam and
his descendants because of sin; which, although they are great
punishments, at first they were more merciful and gentle than now. For
what was then already bad has now become the very worst. But before we
proceed to what follows, we must say something more about the text we
touched on above, where it is said to the woman: \"I will cause you much
pain when you\" have conceived, or \"are with child. For there it is
written heronech, which is almost meant to refer to all the burden and
anguish that women have to bear from the time they conceive until the
time they give birth.

Therefore one asks: Because a woman becomes pregnant and gives birth
only once a year, is it also a punishment to become pregnant only once?
Item: Why does God say here that He wants to increase her conception? As
far as this last is concerned, I think it should be understood
correctly: I want to increase your conception, that is, I want to
increase the pains and troubles that follow the conception. That it is
therefore a punishment that a woman receives only one fruit in the year
and yet must suffer so much sorrow and pain with it. For if man had
remained in innocence, the women would have been much more fertile; as
at times one sees many signs of this, when twins, often three and at
times four children are born at once.

There are also examples of such fertility in other animals. For birds
and fish multiply in large clusters; dogs, cats and pigs also give birth
in clusters. Although some large animals bear and give birth to only one
fruit at a time, I have no doubt that the women would have borne much
more fruit if the sin had not occurred. For those who are most fertile
generally bear only a single fruit every year, and yet they do so with
vile and shameful lust. All this shows us the greatness of sin.

**[266 L. i, 27S-S7S. Interpretation of I Genesis 3, 19. A. i, 3\"-E.
267]{.underline}**

251\) But here we come across the little sin of the Jews, who say: If
the seed of the woman should be understood as natural seed, which is
born from her womb, as we have it interpreted, then it would follow that
also the seed of the serpent must be that which is born from the
serpent\'s womb; for otherwise there would be no contrast here, which
Moses indicates when he says: \"I will put enmity between your seed and
her seed. Many inconsistent things would follow from this little
sentence: first, that God alone spoke with the natural serpent and
punished it; second, that Christ was nothing; nothing could be proven
about Christ from this text either. This little finding may have some
appearance, but in truth it is nothing.

252 And this is first my answer, Revelation 22:11: \"If any man be
ignorant, let him be ignorant: if any man be unclean, let him be
unclean. For he that believeth not the open bright gospel is worthy that
he should not understand such hidden and dark sayings, neither believe
them. So we do not intend to base or explain the gospel on this text,
but we consider the gospel to be a bright light from which what is dark
and obscure in it can be illuminated. Therefore it is no wonder that he
who does not believe the bright light of the gospel does not believe
such dark sayings of the prophets, but draws in new and clumsy thoughts
and delusions. First of all, the promise of the gospel was revealed by
God from heaven, and then it was preserved under so many tyrants and
cruel plagues and tortures. But because the Jews are still so
stiff-necked and obstinate against it and do not want to believe, they
should be let go. But we want to deal here with those who believe and
obediently surrender to the gospel.

253 Jn 8:44 Christ says that Satan is a father of lies and a murderer
and does not exist in the truth. This is the light of the gospel, making
bright and clear what is dark in the Old Testament. For if Satan is a
murderer from the beginning, tell me, whom or which one did he

murders? Is it not true that he put Adam and Eve to death through sin?
Now where did he strangle them? Is it not true, in paradise? But when?
Is it not true that he did it at that time when he reduced the power of
divine commandment and promised them that they would be like God if they
ate from the forbidden tree? So both are true, that in paradise there
was a natural serpent and the old serpent, the devil, deceived and
murdered man through this serpent. Now the most noble understanding of
this text is that you understand that the devil has done this damage;
just as one, when one has committed a death blow, may well say of the
same death-slayer\'s sword or knife: this knife has strangled him. But
it was not the knife alone and for itself that did it, but the man who
wielded and used it; as this figure is common, that by the instrument
and tool one understands the master himself. For this reason, one should
reject this Jewish little bundle altogether.

Secondly, it is also true that it is not always necessary for two or
more things that are contrary to each other to also be contrary to each
other. For there are various opposites, as the dialecticians teach. Some
things are, as they say, relative to one another, some private, some
contrary. Natural fathers, from whom we are begotten, and the father of
lies are opposites. Therefore, if we now admit the Jews\' understanding,
namely, that Moses speaks of the natural serpent, the text nevertheless
brings with it a synecdoche, by which we must understand one from the
other, if we want to hold it against the words of Christ. For the text
says: \"God said to the serpent, \'Because you have done these things,
you are cursed\'\" 2c. Now what did she do? She deceived Eve and thus
strangled her.

Now hold against these words the bright text in the Gospel John 8:44:
\"The devil is a murderer from the beginning\"; now is it not clear,
since God thus speaks to the natural serpent, that he understands the
devil, who is in the natural serpent and leads man into sin, death and
the wrath of God?

268 L. l, 278-280. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 19. 20. W. l, 402-107.
269

has brought? Therefore, the seed of the serpent must not be understood
as the natural seed of a natural serpent, but as the seed of the devil;
as Christ also calls it in the Gospel Matt. 13:25: \"The enemy came and
sowed tares,\" or evil seed. This seed is contrary to the spiritual
seed, as flesh and spirit are contrary to each other.

\(256\) Nor is it necessary that the opposites should correspond to each
other in all respects, even as what is similar to each other does not
correspond to each other in all respects. Adam is a figure of Christ,
for in him he compares himself to Christ, so that just as through Adam
sin came upon all, so also the righteousness of the Lord Christ comes
upon all who believe in him. This rhymes together: but all the rest does
not rhyme. Therefore let the Jews have their error; but we who believe
know that this serpent is the devil, because Christ interprets it thus.

**Sixth part.**

**About the name that Adam gave to his wife and how God reminds man of
the various ways of the fall. To this comes an appendix of
interpretation of the first three chapters. Item, of the heavenly
hierarchies, cherubim and seraphim.**

**I.**

V.20. **And Adam called his wife Heva, because she is a mother of all
the living.**

257 We have heard above that this punishment was also imposed on the
woman, that she should be under her husband\'s power. Such power is
indicated here. For God does not give a name to the woman, but to Adam,
as her lord. As he also gave names to the animals above, as to the
creatures that are subordinate. For no animal has thought up a name for
itself, but they have all received their names and the same honor and
glory from their lord, Adam. So even today the woman, when she frees,
loses the name of her sex and friendship, and is called after the

It would be an unheard-of thing for a man to be called after his wife.
Therefore, this is a confirmation of the punishment or servitude that
the woman has earned by sinning. And so the woman must follow the man as
her master when he moves from one place to another. Thus we have many
signs and footprints in nature, all of which remind us of sin and our
sorrow.

But the name which Adam gives to his wife is a very happy and sweet
name. For what is more delicious, better, or more lovely than life? As
it is said in a common verse, that to save and preserve life one spares
neither fire nor iron (ut vitam redimas, ferrum patieris et ignes). For
with life there is neither money nor precious stone, neither goods nor
honor to compare with the whole world; as Christ also says Matth. 16,
26. The Jews commonly give their children names of roses, flowers or
precious stones, but Eve\'s name is not taken from precious things, but
from life itself, which surpasses all other things.

And Moses adds the cause: \"For she is,\" he says, \"a mother of all
living. It seems from this text that Adam received the Holy Spirit and
was wonderfully enlightened, believed and understood the promise of the
seed of the woman, which was to crush the serpent\'s head; he also
wanted to seal and adorn this faith with the name of his wife, which he
therefore did not give to any other creature, so that he thereby
received the hope of the future seed, strengthened and assured his
faith, and comforted himself that there was life to hope for and believe
in, even though the whole nature was already subject to death.

For if he had not felt and believed in a future life, his heart could
not have been comforted, nor would he have put such a joyful name on his
wife. But because he has put this name on her, he sufficiently indicates
that his heart has been comforted by the Holy Spirit through faith in
the forgiveness of sins through the seed of the woman, which he has
presented to him.

**[270 \". 1. 280-282. interpretation of I Moses 3, 20. 21. W. 1,
4N-\"w. 271]{.underline}**

He called her Eve so that he would have a memorial sign of the promise
by which he himself had come back to life and that this hope of eternal
life would also be passed on to his descendants. This hope and faith he
painted with this name as with a paint on the forehead of his wife, like
those who are saved from enemies. Set up banners and other signs of
joyful victory.

But someone might say here: Why is she called \"mother\", because she is
still a virgin and has not yet given birth? Answer: He does this also as
a testimony to his faith in the promise, because he believes that God
does not want to reject or destroy the human race, but to preserve it.
Therefore, this name at the same time contains a prophecy of the future
grace and shows a necessary comfort in the constant sorrow of this life
against Satan\'s temptation. It is also possible that this joyful name
(which is a beautiful testimony to the faith and refreshed joyful spirit
in Adam) gave cause that afterwards the holy fathers kept the day on
which a child was circumcised and received the name more solemnly and
joyfully than the day in which it was born; that therefore the laying on
of this first name was solemnly celebrated. Now follows another
commemoration of the sadness that is contrary to the first.

V. 21. **And God the Lord made Adam and his wife skirts of skins, and
put them on them.**

This is not so happy and sweet as that Adam gave the name to his wife.
For although the Lord said in Genesis 2:17: \"The day you eat from this
tree, you will die\", Adam consoled himself with the name of his wife,
that through the promised seed life would be restored, which would crush
the serpent\'s head and strangle the strangler again.

**II.**

But here Adam and Eve are clothed by the Lord Himself, so that they have
a memorial sign and remember them.

Whenever they look at these clothes, they should remember their
miserable fall from the highest bliss into the deepest misery and
wretchedness. So that they will fear sins forever, repent constantly,
and sigh and long for the forgiveness of sins through the promised Seed.
And therefore it belongs that he does not clothe them with green
branches, or leaves, or wool that grows on trees, but puts on them skins
of slaughtered animals as a sign that they are mortal and live in
certain death. Just as the name Eve is a happy sign of life, so the
skins are a memorial sign not only of past and future sins, but also of
the present misery and misfortune that sins deserve. -

But such reminders and reminders of nature are necessary. For we very
easily forget both good and evil when they have passed away; as Peter 2
Epist. 1:9 also says, \"He that hath not these things is blind, and
gropeth with his hand, and forgetteth the purifying of his former
sins.\" \"But I will not therefore,\" saith he v. 12, \"leave you always
to remember these things, though ye know them, and be strengthened in
the present truth.\" This is truly a terrible word of the apostle, that
some forget the forgiveness of sins, and even though they have finely
believed, they depart from the faith again and do not adorn themselves
with this most beautiful chain of Christian virtue, but hang on to their
avarice, pride, envy, fornication 2c. And such an admonition is of great
need to us now, who have tried and experienced such burdens of hardships
under the papacy, that we should not be so ungrateful to a gracious God,
as, alas, most of the world is.

Therefore, in order to prevent this forgetfulness, Adam and Eve had a
skin put on them like a memorial sign, a jewel, or a court color, so
that they and all their descendants would remember this miserable fall.
But after that the world became foolish and foolish also in this sign of
misery and wretchedness. For who could

**[272 L. 1, 282-284. . Interpretation of Genesis 3, 21. 22. W. 1,
410-41!\',. 273]{.underline}**

How much effort and expense do people put into their clothing?
Therefore, it should no longer be called a desire or a want, but rather
a nonsense, that they, like asses born to lead gold, take more care how
they load themselves with clothes and ornaments than how they adorn
themselves. That is why proper, honest clothing is praised, especially
in high persons, and the disorderly manner of clothing and adornment
that is currently in vogue must greatly annoy pious people. Therefore,
if Adam were to come again and see such nonsense in all classes, I truly
believe that he would stand there like a stone and freeze in horror. For
his daily dress and clothing has been his coat, which he should have
remembered, what a blessedness he would have lost. But we clothe
ourselves splendidly, and are excessively splendid, so that we ourselves
bear witness to everyone that we have forgotten not only the evil from
which we have been delivered, but also the good which we have received.
And what God reminded Adam of with the sign of his garments, He also
reminds him of with the word, as follows.

V. 22. **And God the Lord said, Behold, Adam is become as one of us, and
knows what is good and what is evil. But now lest he put forth his hand,
and break also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever 2c.**

This is a mockery and very hard bitter mockery. For this reason it is
asked here: Why does God deal so harshly and violently with poor Adam,
who, having been deprived of all honor and fallen into sin and death,
has to hear such a great reproach from his Creator and be punished? And
is not enough of visible signs, so that he reminds him of present sorrow
and lost honor, but also adds a word that rings in his ears. Answer:
Adam had the promise of grace and mercy, and he had to be satisfied with
it. But that he may be the more fearful of future sin, and be more
diligent in foreseeing it, this strong token is given him.

also given. For God sees how his descendants will turn out, so he puts
this word in his mouth, so that he may proclaim it to his descendants
and report that he has become like the devil, since he wanted to become
like God contrary to God\'s word; so that they may also take care and
not increase and heap up the sin of their parents with their sins, and
thus cede more and more to God.

267\. As he reminded him before with a skin of his past and future
misfortune, so he does it here with a word; not that he takes pleasure
in such a sad case, for then he would not remind Adam, but would remain
silent; But that he wants man to have a desire for the image of God,
which he had lost, again, and to become even more hostile to sin, as the
cause of such a great misfortune; item, that Adam should warn and inform
his descendants of what followed the sin, namely, that after he, having
been deceived by the devil, had meant to be like God, he had become like
the devil himself.

268\. Here it is also further asked: Why God, who is alone and one God,
speak in many persons\' names? Whether there are more gods than one? And
Nicolaus de Lyra and others are of the opinion that this is spoken in
the person of an angel or to angels. \"He has become as our one\", that
is, he has become an angel. But this gloss is all too stale. For God
does not call Himself an angel, nor does the power lie in the word
\"one,\" but in the word \"our.\" Therefore let us leave such a stale
gloss. For if this is said in the person of an angel, it is certain that
GOD did not say it. But now the text says: \"God the Lord spoke.\"

For this reason, we must once again look to the light of the gospel, as
I also said above. For the same makes light and bright what is dark and
gloomy in the Old Testament. Now if you understand this about angels, it
is not consistent with what is written above. For thus said Satan, \"Ye
shall be as God, knowing what is good and what is evil.\" Therefore,
Adam and Eve certainly tempted themselves, so that they would like to be
like God.

**[274 2-1. 284-287. interpretation of Genesis 3:22-24. w. 1:413-\^16.
275]{.underline}**

and this text should not be understood in any other way than from the
equality of God.

270 Therefore, here we must disregard the Jewish error that Lyra
assumes, and conclude according to the letter that in God there is a
plural; as he also said above Gen. 1, 26: \"Let us make man, an image
that is like us. Such sayings all point to the unity in the divine
essence; for it is always preceded by: \"God spoke.\" In addition, they
also indicate a plurality of persons or, as it is called, the Trinity,
and such mysteries are more certainly and clearly presented in the New
Testament; as Christ commands Matth. 28, 19 to \"baptize in the name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit\". Thus, three persons
in the divine essence were indicated at the beginning of the world and
understood by the prophets, but finally fully revealed through the
gospel.

Therefore, the opinion remains that Adam and Eve tempted themselves to
become God\'s image. But God\'s invisible image is the Son, through whom
everything exists. That is why Adam, through his sin, took offense at
the person of Christ, who is the true image of God. But this is shown
here recently and darkly. Adam, however, will no doubt have preached
about it an infinite number of times, just as one can see in the
prophets that they point to these mysteries in various ways and cover
them up in a strange way, which the gospel then clearly reveals.

272 And in this opinion of ours, the name of God Jehovah is appropriate
here, which cannot mean a creature, but is assigned to the Creator
alone. But what does the Creator say? He says: \"Adam was created as our
one. Truly our religion and faith will not suffer us to understand this
as if it were spoken to angels. For who would say that God is one of the
angels, or that an angel is one of God? Yes, God is above the angels and
above all creatures, so how could He compare Himself to the angels?

Therefore, we should understand and consider this text as a sure
testimony of our work.

This is darkly indicated in Adam\'s sin, that he did not want to become
like the angels, but like God. For if he had sinned against the angels
alone, he would not have been condemned to death; but since he had
directed his sin against the divine Majesty, who created all things,
wanting to be like her and do what she, the divine Majesty, does, such a
horrible punishment followed such a sin.

274\. Just as one is accustomed to reproach a scoundrel who is released
from the gallows with the danger he has been in, and admonishes him to
beware of it from now on: Thus, after Adam has been put off again by the
promise of the hope of life, God warns him with this bitter scorn and
mockery that he should not forget such a terrible fall, and that he
should not again demand the divine majesty in which he once tempted
himself to his great detriment; but that he should humble himself before
it, and henceforth beware and guard against such sin with his
descendants.

For not only is this said to Adam, but it also concerns us, that after
we have been baptized and renewed by the grace of God, we should take
the utmost care that we do not fall back into the previous ungodly
nature. Thus there is also a sarcasm and very bitter mockery in what he
says about the tree of life; as if God had not been able to prevent Adam
from touching it with a wave of his hand. Now follows how the garden is
guarded with terrifying signs.

**V. 23. 24. Then God the LORD sent him out of the husband of Eden to
build the field from which he was taken. And he drove out Adam, and
encamped before the husband of Eden the cherub with a naked slashing
sword, to keep the way to the tree of life.**

276 This also belongs to our discipline and warning; as St. Paul says
Romans 15:4, that everything that is written is written for our sake.
For there is great danger in forgetting our former sins and falling into
them again.

**[276 r. 287-SR. Interpretation of Genesis 3:23, 24. w. i. 4is-\"s.
277]{.underline}**

John 5:14 warns: \"Behold, thou art healed; sin no more, lest evil
befall thee\"; and Peter 2 Epist. 2, 22. says of the sow that rolls in
the dung after the flood, and of the dog that eats again what it has
eaten; item Cap. 1, 9. of those who forget their former sins. These and
similar sayings of Scripture are warnings to beware of sin after it is
gone, so that just as the disease is more dangerous and difficult to
heal if it is found again after it is healed, so Adam and all his
descendants are admonished in many ways that after they have received
the hope of life through the promise of the Seed, they should be careful
not to lose it again through sin; just as Christ Matth. 12, 45. teaches
this in the parable of the house that was turned upside down, out of
which the devil was driven, but afterward he returns to it, taking with
him seven spirits more wicked than he.

God uses this sharpness and bitterness especially for this, and wants to
say: I had forbidden Adam and Eve before, that they should not touch the
tree, which threatened them with death: nor has such presumption been in
them, that they have not abstained from their harm. Therefore I must
take care that they do not touch the tree of life, for perhaps they will
not abstain from it; therefore I will take care and at the same time
forbid them all the trees of paradise. Therefore go out and eat the herb
of the field and whatever else grows from the earth. For henceforth ye
shall not eat of the tree of life only, neither of all the other trees
of paradise. 2c.

And this text shows that the trees in paradise were not at all like the
other trees on earth. Therefore, the food and nourishment that Adam and
Eve had to eat reminded them of their sin and miserable condition, into
which they had fallen because of sin. And our misery and wretchedness is
depicted in so many ways that we are not only reminded of the lack and
misery of the earth.

Loss of spiritual gifts, but also the clothing and food and drink of the
same must remember.

Here it is asked: If God had allowed Adam to eat from the tree of life,
would he have overcome death through this food? as he was then subjected
to death, since he had eaten from the tree of death; for it seems as if
it were One Thing. The tree of death strangled Adam by the word that God
had said in Genesis 2:17: \"Whichever day thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt surely die\"; therefore, by the power of the word, the tree of
life preserves from death and makes alive. To this question Lyra and
others answer that this tree of life would have had the power to prolong
life, but not eternally; therefore it would not have restored the life
that Adam had lost through sin. For Adam was not created to remain
eternally in this bodily life; but was to pass from bodily life and
temporal eating and drinking into a spiritual life. As when a common
private person is elected mayor, death does not intervene, but simply
the common man is raised to more honors and dignities: so Adam would
have changed without the means of death, and for the mortal life put on
the immortal. Now this tree of life, says Lyra, served only the temporal
life; therefore interpret this text that he does not live forever, so
that he does not live long. This is Lyra\'s answer.

But I am of another opinion, and believe that if Adam had been admitted
to the tree of life, he would have returned to that life which he had
lost, and would not have died afterwards, but would simply have been
transferred from the bodily life to the spiritual: For the text, saith
both things very plainly: namely, that therefore the tree of life was
forbidden unto him, and that if he did eat thereof, he might live leolam
that is for ever. But I reject Lyra\'s opinion because he attributes the
power to make alive to the nature of the tree, when it is certain that
the tree does not get this power from its nature, but from power and
force.

**[278 L. n 288-M. Interpretation of Genesis 3:23, 24. w. i. ns-tsi.
279]{.underline}**

of the word. Just as the tree of knowledge did not kill gates and evil
because the fruit on it was poisonous and deadly, but because the word
was attached to it like a note, in which it was written: \"The day you
eat from this tree, you will die. Gen. 2:17.

Therefore, spiritual death, namely disobedience, is attached to the tree
of death. Since Adam and Eve broke this commandment through the sin that
was then strong in them, they thought, \"Behold, God has forbidden us
not to eat of this tree, but what is it to us? This contempt of divine
commandment has been the poisoned rod that killed Adam and Eve as soon
as it was pulled through their throats. Because the threat was attached
to the commandment, eating from the forbidden tree caused death because
of disobedience. And the tree was not poisoned, but as sufficiently said
above, it was a tree of God\'s service, that man by this obedience
should testify and prove that he recognized, honored and feared his God:
\"For God looked at all that he had made, and it was very good\", Gen.
1, 31. 1, 31. Such an opinion, I think, was also held of the tree of
life, namely, that it was not a life-giving tree because of its nature,
but because of the power of the Word. And because the word was still
attached to the same tree, Adam would have come back to his former life
if he had eaten from it.

Thus the serpent which Moses set up in the wilderness did not give life
by its very [nature,]{.underline} for it was cast of brass, as one might
do and make a serpent of brass: but the word which hung on the same
serpent of brass could give life, namely, that God had set it up hot,
and had hanged thereon a word, \"Whosoever shall look upon it shall be
healed. Such a word would not have been used if one wanted to cast a
serpent out of bronze. Neither did it make the image healthy, but it did
so because God wanted it to be healthy.

The rabbis had commanded to look at the serpent, and had added a promise
of health. Because the rabbis do not heed such a word, they shamefully
err and pretend that the nature of these trees was such that they could
make either dead or alive, not understanding that it is all because God
either promises or threatens.

Just as the sophists, when they discuss how baptism makes righteousness,
talk about it. For St. Thomas and St. Bonaventure understand it in this
way, that the water is given by God a special power to work, so that
when a child is baptized in it, it can create righteousness out of its
power. On the other hand, we say that the water in baptism is water, in
substance nothing better than what the cow drinks. But we say that a
word of divine promise is attached to this bad water; thus: \"He who
believes and is baptized will be saved,\" Marc. 16, 16; item, Joh. 3, 5:
\"Man must be born again of water and the Spirit.\" Now if anyone would
call this word or promise a power given to the water of baptism, I would
be satisfied. But the opinion of the sophists is different. For they do
not give this power to the word, but argue about the element, namely,
that it has a special power in itself. And I like Scotus better here,
who says that baptism is a divine covenant established with and by the
element.

Therefore, one should look at the word everywhere and honor it. For by
it, as it were, God takes hold of and clothes the creatures, and a
distinction is to be made between the word and the creature. For in the
sacrament of the altar there is bread and wine, in baptism there is
water; these are creatures, but they are clothed by the Word; and as
long as the creature is clothed by the Word, so long it creates and
works what is promised in the Word. But this is not to be understood as
if we want to fall in with the sacramentarians, because we combine
baptism and the sacrament of the altar. Baptism has this promise that it
is reborn with the Holy Spirit. But in the sacrament of the altar

**280 L 1. 291-293. interpretation of I Moses 3, 23. 24. w. 1, 421\^124.
281**

The promise of the forgiveness of sins also means that the body and
blood of Christ are truly given with the bread and wine. For so Christ
says Luc. 22, 19. 20.: \"This is my body, which is given for you. This
cup is the New Testament in my blood\" 2c.

Thus it could also be said that human nature in Christ does not redeem
us. But because human nature is bodily taken by the Godhead and Christ
is God and man in one person, redemption is powerful and Christ is
called the Son of Man and is also a Savior.

The pope has devised holy water, the last rites, and many other such
things, to which he attributes the forgiveness of sins. But in this,
always consider whether God has also given his commandment and promise.
If the promise and the commandment of God are not there, then soon
conclude that it is idolatry and misuse of the name of God. Yes, they
say, Christian and devout prayers are said for it, so one also has
examples of holy people, whom one follows in this. Ask neither about the
prayers, nor about the examples, nor about what is good, but ask only
whether God\'s commandment and promise are also present. For it is these
that endow creatures with a new power above that which they have by
nature.

Just as the tree of knowledge of good and evil was good by nature, but
for the sake of the word that was added, it had to be a poison to man\'s
spirit and not only to his body. Again, if the tree of life had the
power to sustain life for the sake of the word, it would also have
sustained Adam\'s life: but because God is angry, He will not allow him
to come to the tree after the fall. Not only because Adam should
remember the sin he had committed, but also because Adam already had a
better promise, namely, that the seed of the woman should crush the
serpent\'s head; so that, even though he had to be subject to natural
death, he might still have and keep the hope of the

Immortality through the Son of God; as an angry father nevertheless
punishes his son, pushes him out of the house 2c. whether he already
does not take away his right of inheritance.

God wants man to be satisfied with the promise of life, which is better
than that in which Adam was created. For even though Adam would have
eaten from the tree of life and returned to his former life, he would
not have been safe from Satan, who could have tempted him again and
deprived him of the same life once more. Therefore, God has provided man
with such a state in which we can be sure that, because we have this
given seed, we can never die of eternal death; although this temporal
life must be under the cross and various plagues and temptations. And
are therefore all these words: \"Behold, Adam has become\" 2c. God\'s
words, which he speaks in a laughing and angry spirit to Adam, who had
already become righteous again, that he should be more careful in the
future and not leave the past out of his memory.

And Moses turned back the words finely, so that he reminded the man of
what he had said before. For before he said Genesis 2:15: \"God the LORD
took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to build it and to keep
it.\" Here he says: \"Then God the LORD let man out of the Garden of
Eden to build the field.\" For He wants man to know that he was made of
earth and placed in the very best place; but because of sin it happened
that he was placed again out of the best place into the earth, out of
which he was created. And so Moses, by turning the words here especially
backwards, wants to remind Adam and all his descendants not only to
beware of future sins, but also to remember the previous ones.
Therefore, Adam, who previously had his special food and nourishment
provided and ordered in Paradise, a place set apart from other animals,
must now use food and nourishment together with the animals in a common
place.

**[282 n. I. AS. 2St. Interpretation of Genesis 3, 23. 24. W. 1,
424-t28. 283]{.underline}**

And not only is he cast out of Paradise, but God also puts a guard in
front of it, so that he cannot come to it at all: as one puts a guard in
front of castles and in front of armies or armies. By the broad
description Moses uses, he wants to indicate that this expulsion was
most necessary for the sake of our salvation, namely, that we should
beware of sins, live in the fear of God and diligently guard against the
devil, who had done such great damage to nature through sin.

I have said above about the word mikkedem, namely, that it means toward
the morning or the exit of the sun. And Moses indicates that the
paradise had a way or gate after the exit, through which one could come
to the garden. And is described in the prophet Ezekiel Cap. 44, 1. where
he describes the building of the temple, thought of the gate of the
sanctuary, which was also after the exit, perhaps for the reason that we
should understand that the temple was a figure of paradise, and that if
nature had remained innocent, paradise would have been a common temple
of the whole world. So now on the same road after the morning, which
leads to paradise alone, the cherubim or the angels are stored, so that
this road should be preserved, so that neither Adam, nor anyone from his
descendants, could come into paradise. So God did it here in a human way
to frighten Adam and his descendants and to have a noticeable memorial
sign of such a great and horrible fall.

292 Now the cherubim, who were on the way, did not carry swords or iron
to ward off those who wanted to come to the garden, but a shining sword
that is a gleam or flame of fire, as one stands in the lightning, which
shines around and blinds the eyes. But this flame or flashing was seen
like a sword, which always floats and is swung; as in the stories of the
apostles Cap. 2, 3, that in the apostles were seen cloven tongues, like
fire; and they have almost such a form in the apostles.

The flying dragons. So that the angels have always given fire from
themselves, which has divided itself into all places, so that no one
could come by.

293 I will abandon Origen\'s talk, and I do not like Lyra\'s
uncomfortable and foolish allegory, which says that the fiery sword
means that the sinner, as soon as he sins mortally, excludes himself
from the church through his own fault, whether he remains in the number
and is not publicly expelled from it. But a cutting and shining sword,
or one that turns from time to time, it is said that where righteous
repentance follows, man is restored to it by his own merit. For as I
have proved before that Paradise was a true and visible garden in a
special place of the earth, so here also I keep the history and
understand it thus, that this sword was a visible flame of fire in the
form of a sword, by which the cherubim or angels frightened and chased
Adam and his descendants, so that they should not have come near this
garden.

294 And the guard or custody of the angels was kept until the flood, so
that a certain memorial of such a miserable and wretched fall might
remain with the descendants throughout the ages; as the pool of Sodom,
item, the pillar of salt, remained throughout the ages. For we must have
such memorials because of our laziness and carelessness. After the
Flood, however, paradise disappeared with the angels and this sword. For
then the new world had to have new examples, which would be closer to it
and would move the saints more; even though little is accomplished with
the wicked.

**III.**

Thus in these three chapters we have the history of the creation of the
whole creature, how heaven and earth, the sea and all that is therein
were created. How God built Paradise to be the palace of man, whom He
had made Lord of the Earth. Just as God

**[284 L. 1, 294-M6. Interpretation of Gen. 3, 23. 24. w. 1, 426-\^29.
285]{.underline}**

erected a temple for man in paradise and ordained it for worship,
namely, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, on which Adam was to
practice and prove his obedience to God. Thus we have also heard the
story of man in Paradise, how miserably he fell and sinned against God,
losing all honor of his innocence and immortality.

All these things we have done simply, according to the gift that was
given us, and have interpreted them in the historical sense, which is
righteous and certain. For this is what one should do in the holy
Scriptures, so that one may have a certain and simple understanding of
them, especially since the teachers and interpreters in Latin, Greek and
Hebrew have been so many, and in many cases not of one mind. For almost
all of them together not only disregard history, but also make it
incorrect, dark and sinister with uncomfortable and unnecessary
allegories.

For how clumsy a thing Origen and Jerome have given in these three
chapters is known. For everywhere they depart from history and call it
the deadly letter and the flesh; but on the other hand they praise and
extol the spiritual understanding, which they themselves neither know
nor have. And in this case Jerome has followed Origen as his master, as
it has also happened in our time. For because those who either had a
good mind or were eloquent were most concerned that they could persuade
the audience that history was a dead thing that served nothing for the
edification and improvement of the church, it has come about that we
have resorted to allegories with the usual effort and have fallen for
them.

And this went particularly well with me, since I was young. For although
I may have thought up clumsy glosses and interpretations, it was because
such excellent teachers of the church as Jerome and Origen had at times
conceded and yielded much to their thoughts: therefore he who could best
write and spin allegories was a more learned theologian. And did this

This delusion moved Augustine, so that he often, especially in the
Psalms, abandons the histories and turns to the allegories. For everyone
thought that the allegories, especially in the histories of the Old
Testament, were the spiritual mind, but the histories or literal sense
were the carnal mind.

But tell me, dear reader, if this is not defiling the Holy Scriptures?
Origen makes heaven out of paradise, he makes angels out of the trees.
If this is so, where will the article of creation remain? Therefore it
is necessary that especially young theologians of the old teachers read
books with consideration and with the advice that they boldly reject
that which is not according to truth and right understanding, lest they
be deceived by the great name and reputation of the fathers and church
teachers, as I and all schools of theologians have been deceived and
seduced.

For my part, from the time that I began to pursue the historical
understanding, I have always had an abhorrence of allegories, and have
not needed any, unless the text itself had brought them with it or the
interpretation could have been drawn from the New Testament. Although it
was quite difficult for me to let go of the allegories, which I had long
been accustomed to, I saw that they were futile speculations and, as it
were, a froth of the Holy Scriptures.

For it is the historical mind alone that can teach something thorough
and true. When this has been properly conceived and acted upon,
allegories may then be used as ornaments and flowers to explain the
histories and decorate them as if with a painting. For mere allegories
that do not rhyme with any part of history, nor paint and decorate it,
should be rejected as useless dreams. But such allegories are those used
by Origen and those who followed him. For where can one prove from the
Scriptures that by the paradise the heaven and by the trees the angels
are signified? Are not these very foolish and useless thoughts?

**[286 1. 297-sss. Interpretation of Genesis 3:23, 24. w. 1, 429-432.
287]{.underline}**

If anyone wants to use allegories for this reason, he must get the
reason for them from history itself. For history is like a dialectic
that gives a thorough and truthful account of things. Again, allegories,
like rhetoric, should only decorate and paint the histories; for they
serve and are of no use as proofs. But this allegory is valid when we
say that heaven means the church, and earth means worldly life,
government and order. For Christ himself calls the church the kingdom of
heaven and the kingdom of God, but the earth is called the land of the
living, where kings and princes reign.

The same allegory is used by Paul, namely, that Adam and Eve, or the
marriage state, is a model of Christ and the church; which allegory is
excellent and very comforting. For what can be said more sweetly than
that the church is the bride and Christ her bridegroom? For by this is
signified the joyful company and fellowship of all the gifts which the
bridegroom has, and beside this are covered the sins and all miseries,
so that the poor bride is weighed down. Therefore it is a lovely word
that Paul uses 2 Cor. 11:2: \"I have entrusted you to one man, that I
might bring a pure virgin to Christ. He also says in Rom. 5, 14 that
Adam was an image of the one to come. How so? \"For if many died in one
sin, God\'s grace and gift abounded to many through the grace of the one
man, Jesus Christ. But does this allegory not agree finely with the
history on which it is based? Thus he makes both testaments out of Sarah
and Hagar. And in this way, those who introduce allegories should also
seek the same reason from history.

304 We have just heard about the seed of the woman and the serpent. On
this history Christ directs Matth. 13, 25. the simile of the enemy who
sowed evil seed, which is ungodly teaching and evil thoughts. Who would
not want to see that these are more convenient, clearer, more useful and
better allegories than those that Augustine, Lyra and others pretend
about the upper and lower part of reason?

So what does the closed paradise, and the cherubim with the swords,
which are placed in front of it as a guard, mean, but that man, as long
as he is outside the faith in Christ, can neither suffer the law nor the
gospel? as Paul says of the Jews 2 Cor. 3:7, \"who could not look at the
face of Moses for clarity,\" and Moses had to hang the ceiling in front
of his face. The tree of death is the law, but the tree of life is the
gospel or Christ. Those who do not believe in Christ cannot come to
these trees, for they are forbidden by the angel with the sword, who
cannot stand hypocrisy and false righteousness. But whoever recognizes
his sin and believes in Christ, paradise remains open to him, for he
does not bring his own righteousness, but Christ\'s, which the gospel
therefore proclaims and offers to all, so that we may all rely on it and
be saved.

306 But there is no need to deal with these allegories at length; but it
is enough to indicate that whoever wants to introduce allegories should
use those which the apostles have indicated and which have a certain
foundation in the letter or history; otherwise it will happen that we
build on the foundation chaff and stubble, but not gold.

But I must say about the cherubim, because they are often mentioned in
the Scriptures. But the Latin teachers write nothing about them without
saying that the word cherubim means perfect knowledge. Among the Greeks
is Dionysius, of whom they boast that he was a disciple of St. Paul: but
this is not true, for he is full of useless and foolish talk, since he
disputes about the heavenly and ecclesiastical hierarchy, in which he
makes nine choirs like spheres, and in the uppermost choir he places the
seraphim, after which the cherubim, thrones, dominions, powers,
authorities; then in the lower hierarchy he places powers, archangels
and angels. But who would not see here that these are nothing but idle
and useless thoughts of men? After that, in the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, he puts

**[288 N. I.NS\--AN. Interpretation of Gen. 3:23, 24, W. 1:432-\^35.
289]{.underline}**

be bishops, deacons, subdeacons, lecturers, exorcists 2c.

With such talk and fables a disciple of the chief of the apostles and
teacher of the Gentiles, as they say, has to do; and yet his authority
is so praised that the proud pompous hypocrites take almost everything
he says for divine sayings, when he says not a word anywhere of faith,
nor of useful teaching of the holy Scriptures. And who told him that
there were nine choirs? Why did the Franciscan monks subsequently add
the tenth as a palace where the Holy Mother Mary dwells? In sum, these
are petty things, worthy to be learned and magnified by the papists,
because they so stubbornly dispute the pure and righteous doctrine.

309 Therefore I will now give my opinion of the cherubim, as much as I
have been able to read and understand about them. And I think that
cherub means a blooming, full and beautiful face, as one sees in young
maidens and boys at the first age, as one also paints the angels, that
they look like young children. So that cherubim is understood to mean
angels who do not appear with a frowning or sad face, but with a joyful
countenance and full face, whether human or otherwise; and cherub is a
generic word that can be said of many. Therefore it cannot be a single
or special thing among the choirs or orders of angels, as Dionysius
dreams, but belongs to the appearance that the angels show themselves
and let themselves be seen by men in such a blooming and young face.
This opinion is also held by the Hebrews, who say that kerub is a
Chaldean word and k is a prefix; rub means a beautiful young fellow, who
is of a full and blooming countenance; and therefore the angels are
called kerubim, as they let themselves be seen in a young, cheerful and
lovely form, as they are also almost painted.

310 Thus seraphim is also a generic word and means the angels of fire or
radiance, therefore their form is like this; as the text 4 Mos. 21, 6.
indicates: \"The LORD

sent among the people\" hannechaschim, has-seraphim, that is, \"burning
or fiery serpents\". So that by this are to be understood the angels,
who are not only beautiful and of a full countenance, like the cherubim,
but also shining; as they are painted in the Gospel Matth. 28, 3. that
they sat by the grave of the Lord. \"His form,\" says the text, \"was
like lightning.\" Here belongs what is said in the 104th Psalm v. 4:
\"Thou makest thine angels winds, and thy servants flames of fire,\"
that is, gleaming and shining fire; as also Luc. 2, 9. says that the
angel came to the shepherds and shone around them the clarity of the
Lord. So also was Matth. 17, 2. the face of Christ on Mount Thabor. And
so shall our faces be, when we are raised up at the last day unto the
glory which Christ hath purchased for us.

311\) In the books of Kings (1 Kings 6:29) it is written about the walls
with cherubic figures, by which the full and fresh faces of the angels
are also understood together with the wings. Not that the angels have
wings, but that they cannot be painted in any other form; as Isa. 6, 6.
the angel is called seraphim, when he flies with a joyful and beautiful
face, as they are painted on the carpets. If there is also a radiance,
as the face of St. Stephen was, fresh and cheerful, from whose eyes
shone joy, then they are called seraphim, as we say in German: blooming
and glowing faces. So shall we be, and our faces shall shine as the sun
at noon, not having such wrinkles, not a shrunken brow, not dripping
eyes, as now, but as it is written in Revelation John 21:4, \"God shall
wipe away all tears from our eyes; and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain.\" Let
us have such hope and live in the fear of God until we, delivered from
this miserable life, come into an angelic and eternal life, amen, amen.

**[290 n. 1, 301-30\". Interpretation of Genesis 4, 1. W. I. 4W-tss.
291]{.underline}**

**The fourth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of the work of procreation and of the state of marriage. Item, from
Cain and Abel, concerning their birth and education.**

**I.**

We have now almost completed the greatest work and are through the most
difficult text, in which the teachers have all been very angry with each
other and we ourselves to some extent. Although it has not been so
difficult for us, we have left the secret interpretations or allegories
and have remained with the history and the actual literal sense. But
because the majority of the commentators did not respect the same
literal understanding, and held Origen, Dionysius and others in higher
esteem than Moses himself, they were wrong and erred by far. What now
follows does not have so much dispute and is easier; it also helps to
confirm our opinion that everyone can see from it that Moses did not
want to act and pretend allegories, but to describe the history of the
first world in a simple way.

V. 1. **And Adam knew his wife Heva, and she conceived, and bare Cain.**

\(2\) After Adam fell into death through sin, he received a promise, as
we have heard above, that out of his flesh, which was now subject to
death, a new plant of life would be born to him. Therefore he easily
understood that he had to beget children, especially because this
blessing, \"Grow and multiply,\" was not annulled, but confirmed with
this promise of the seed that was to crush the serpent\'s head.
Therefore, he did not create his Eve out of the lust and stimulation of
the flesh, as we consider it to be.

But he was urged to do so by necessity, because they could not come to
salvation in any other way than through the given seed.

\(3\) Therefore this saying, that Adam knew his wife, shall offend no
man. For although this divine work of begetting children is considered
dishonest for the sake of original sin, and pious, chastened ears are
also annoyed by it when they hear about it, yet spiritual people should
know how to distinguish between original sin and the creature. The work
of begetting children is a creature of God, good and holy, for it comes
from God who blessed it; and if man had not fallen, it would have been
the very purest and holiest work. For as no man is afraid to speak, eat,
and drink with his wife, for all these things are honest: so also the
begetting of children would have been a very honest work.

4 And although this work remained in nature, even after it was
corrupted, the devil\'s poison came into it, namely, the tickling of the
flesh and shameful fornication, from which many an evil and many sins
arise, all of which would not have been in perfect nature. But now we
experience inordinate lust and covetousness of the flesh, so that even
the marriage state cannot sufficiently defend many; otherwise there
would be no adultery, no fornication, which unfortunately is all too
common. This weakness of the flesh also occurs among the spouses
themselves. All these are not works of creation, nor of blessing, which
is of God, but of sin and corruption, which is of sin. Therefore they
are to be separated from the creature of God, which is good, and of
which the Holy Spirit was not afraid to speak.

Now it is not only no disgrace that Moses speaks here of the creation
and blessing of God, but it has also been necessary to teach and write
thus for the sake of the heretics.

**[292 \".I.WS-S\". Interpretation of Genesis 4, 1. W. 1 , 4R-442.
293]{.underline}**

for the sake of the Nicolaitans, Tatians 2c., but especially for the
sake of the papacy. For we see that the papists do not turn to that
which is written above: \"God created them male and female\"; for they
live thus, and thus they betroth and commit themselves, that they
consider themselves neither male nor female. So they also do not turn
back to the fact that above it is written: God the Lord brought Eve to
Adam, and he said: \"This is bone of my legs\" 2c. They also do not turn
back to the promise and blessing that God said, \"Grow and multiply.\"
Nor do they turn back to the toe commandments, \"You shall honor your
father and mother.\" Nor do they consider from whence they came, namely,
that they were born of the union of a man and a woman 2c. They ignore,
despise and reject all this, and force their priests, monks and nuns to
vow eternal chastity, as if the life of the husband and wife, of which
Moses speaks here, were condemned and rejected.

The Holy Spirit, however, has a purer mouth and purer eyes than the
pope, therefore he is not afraid to remember the union and conjugal
cohabitation of man and woman, which those saints condemn as shameful
and impure. And the Holy Spirit does not do this in one place, but the
whole of Scripture is full of such stories; so that even some have kept
the young monks and nuns from the Bible for this reason, and have
forbidden them to read it.

\(7\) And what shall I say? the devil has so fiercely and violently
opposed this creature of God and the holy matrimony that the papists
have forced people to conspire against marriage, have also established
orders in which one should lead an unmarried life, and have condemned
the married life altogether; therefore such ungodly beings have also had
their punishment. For the examples are before the eyes, what fruits have
followed from the impure celibate perennial; as one also finds in their
own books such examples of abominable sin and fornication.

8 For St. Udalricus, a bishop of Augsburg, writes that after Pope
Gregory had confirmed the priests\' celibacy

He also commanded those who had married before the decree of celibacy to
put away their wives, and he had them fish in a pond that he had in
Rome, and more than six thousand children\'s heads were found in it; at
which sight Gregory, as Udalricus writes, was very frightened and as
soon as the ungodly decree of priestly celibacy was repealed again.
However, Gregory\'s successors easily suppressed both this shameful
thing and the godly abolition of the decree of celibacy, because they
noticed that illegitimate life could not only gain money and property,
but also serve for honor and power.

9 Such an example has also occurred in our time. For after the nuns in a
small town in eastern Austria, called Kloster-Neuburg, had to vacate the
monastery for the sake of their shameful lives, and the same was given
to barefoot monks, who had to change several buildings for the sake of
convenience, twelve large pots were found in the new cellars, in each of
which a dead child had been placed. Such things have happened countless
times, and therefore Pope Gregory, as reported by Bishop Ulrich, changed
Paul\'s saying and said: Paul says, it is better to free than to burn;
but I add: it is better to be married than to give cause for death.

In Rome, for the sake of the many children who were found, monasteries
had to be erected, and the father of these children was called the pope,
and they also first went before him in public processions; that I should
be appalled by other innumerable things that my heart was afraid to say,
let alone by them.

\(11\) Therefore, beware of these doctrines of the devil, and learn to
honor the marriage state, even speaking honestly of it, because we see
that God instituted it and is praised in the Ten Commandments, where it
says, \"You shall honor your father and mother.\" So also the blessing
is included, \"Grow and multiply\"; and we hear here that the Holy
Spirit, whose mouth is chaste and pure, is not ashamed to speak of it.
The infirmities

**[294 L.I. R\"-A\>7. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 1. W. 1, 442-44P.
295]{.underline}**

but and the shame that has come to God\'s business through sin, we are
not to make a mockery of it, but rather to cover it; as we see that God
covers the naked Adam and Eve with clothes after the fall. For the
marriage state is to be spoken of and held honestly, since we all come
from it; and it is a nursery not only of the police, but also of the
church and of the kingdom of Christ until the end of the world.

\(12\) But such honor of the marriage state is not understood by the
pagans and other godless people, who only gather together the defects
that are in the marriage state and in the female sex at the same time,
but do not see the unclean from the clean, so that they keep the
unclean, but the clean they do not see. Just as some impudent jurists
judge this first book of Moses ungodly and say that it deals with
nothing else than the Jews\' bearing and begetting children. But would
such not be worthy of sodomitical disgrace and punishment, especially if
they also despise marriage itself and want to praise the unclean,
celibate life of the priests? but we let them go and continue to listen
to Moses.

\(13\) The Holy Spirit is not satisfied with saying that Adam knew Eve,
but he also says, \"his wife. For he does not want to hear about the
life of a whore, that one is held here to one and there to another, but
wants each one to be satisfied with his wife. And even though the same
community of married couples is not as pure as it would have been in the
state of innocence, God\'s blessing still exists and remains in the
midst of such disorderly lust and all other misery, as is said here;
not, however, for the sake of Adam and Eve, who had long ago become
ashes when Moses wrote this, but for our sake, so that whoever cannot
abstain may be content with his Eve and not touch other wives.

14 Now this way of speaking, \"Recognized his wife,\" is used only by
the Hebrews; for the Latins and Greeks do not speak in this way. Now it
is a beautiful way, not only because it is spoken chastely and honestly,
but also because it is something special.

interprets. For the Hebrew word jada has a much broader meaning than our
word \"to know\". For it does not mean to know with the mind alone, but
to feel and experience (that I speak thus). As when Job says of the
wicked. \"They will know what is there, act against God\", he wants to
say: they will feel and experience. So Psalm 51, 5: \"I know my
iniquity\", that is, I feel and experience it. Item, Gen. 22, 12: \"Now
I have known that thou fearest the Lord,\" that is, I have felt and
experienced it in action. Also Luc. 1, 34: \"Because I know no man,\" or
I know of no man. Mary has known many men, but she has not yet
experienced or felt one. So also here, Adam recognized his wife, that
is, he not only knew in his mind, but also found out in reality that his
Eve was a woman.

\(15\) The fact that it says, \"And she conceived, and bare Cain,\" is a
sure sign that nature was better then than it is now. For the conjugal
partnership was not so often without fruit as now, after the world was
old; but when Eve was once known by her Adam, she conceived.

**II.**

16 Here it is asked: why Moses says: \"She gave birth to Cain\", and not
rather as he says afterwards in the 4th Cap. V. 25: \"She bore a son and
named him Seth.\" If Cain and Abel were also Adam\'s and Eve\'s sons,
why are they not called sons? Answer: This happened for the sake of the
descendants. For Abel perished bodily and was slain by his brother, but
Cain perished spiritually and was lost because of sin; neither was the
garden of the church and the kingdom of Christ planted by him, but his
whole family perished in the flood. Therefore neither Abel, the blessed,
nor Cain, the cursed, has the name of a son; but Seth was the one from
whose lineage Christ, the promised seed, should come. Therefore, he is
the first to be called Son.

**[296 2-1. SV7-S0S- Interpretation of Genesis 4:1. 2. W. 1: ns-147.
297]{.underline}**

**And Heva said: I have overcome the man of the LORD.**

\(17\) From this another reason can be deduced why Eve did not call Cain
son, namely, that she did not want to call him son because of too much
joy and reverence, but thought he would be something greater, namely,
the man who would crush the serpent\'s head. That is why she does not
call him just a man, but a \"man of the Lord\", as the Lord would have
meant when he promised her: \"Your seed shall bruise the head of the
serpent.

\(18\) Although she lacked this hope, it appears from this that Eve was
a holy woman and believed the promise of the future salvation through
the blessed seed. And because she believes, she rejoices so much in her
son and thus speaks magnificently of him: \"I have come over the man of
the Lord\", who will keep himself better than I and my husband Adam kept
ourselves in paradise; therefore I will not call him my son, but he is
the man of God, promised and given by God. This, I say, may also have
been the cause why she did not call Cain son.

\(19\) Now that Eve is so attached and clings to the divine promise and
to the faith of the redemption that was to come through her seed, she
does right. For through this faith in the future seed all the saints are
justified and saved. But she is mistaken about her person and believes
that it will be Cain who will put an end to the misery into which the
devil had plunged her through sin. But she believes this out of her own
delusion, without a certain sign and a certain word. The promise was
certain and true, but there was nothing to indicate that either Cain or
Abel would be the serpent\'s tramp.

020 For this cause she infereth the person, and miscarrieth, and giveth
her son a glorious and joyful name in vain. For the text gives that Cain
is called by the word that means to possess or to overcome, so that by
this name she consoles herself against the harm she has received; and

She holds against this that she had lost life and blessedness through
sin and the devil, this again, that she has now come over the same life
and blessedness again through this seed. As if she wanted to say: I know
well what we have lost through sin, but now I hope and speak nothing
else, but that I have come to all this again: because I have come over
the man of God, who will help us again to all the honor and glory that
we have lost. Because Eve is all too sure of the promise, she hurries
and thinks that this first son will be the one of whom the Lord has made
the promise.

\(21\) But the poor woman deceives herself and does not yet see her
sorrow, namely, that nothing else but flesh can be born of the flesh,
that even through flesh and blood sin and death cannot be overcome. Nor
does it know the time and hour at which this blessed seed, conceived by
the Holy Spirit, would be born of a virgin into the womb; just as the
patriarchs did not know this time and hour, although the promise has
become ever clearer through the revelation of the Holy Spirit. So we
also know today that there will be a last judgment, but we do not know
the day and the hour; as also Christ says to His apostles Acts. 1, 7.

V. 2. **And she went on and gave birth to Habel his brother.**

\(22\) Whether Cain and Abel were twins cannot really be known, although
it seems sufficient from this text and is believable. Be that as it may,
Adam and Eve, when these two sons were born to them, had various
thoughts, and thought that their redemption was at the door. Without a
doubt Cain was the dearest child and was brought up wonderfully, but
Abel was not in such favor and hope, as even their names show. Cain has
a name from it, as the one who is to regain and acquire everything. But
Abel is called vain, or that which is nothing and rejected. Some have it
in our

**[298 \" i. sw-su. Interpretation of Genesis 4:2. w. i. \"o.
299]{.underline}**

Bibles translates: lamentation or sorrow; but that means Ebel, not Abel.
Furthermore, the word Abel is very common in the Scriptures and is
repeated several times in Ecclesiastes, Cap. 1, 2: \"Vanity of vanities!
All is vanity.\" And Psalm 78:33: \"Their days were all vanity,\" that
is, they did not obtain the promise of the land of Canaan.

23 So Abel is called: from whom nothing is to be hoped for, or in whom
one hopes in vain, but Cain is called: from whom one hopes for
everything. So that these two names sufficiently indicate the parents\'
thoughts and inclinations about these sons: namely, that after the
promise was from a seed, they thought it would be fulfilled through
Cain, and after he alone would bring about everything well and happily,
Abel would do nothing; therefore they call him Abel.

\(24\) And this hope was undoubtedly also the cause that these two
brothers were not brought up equally well and diligently; for Abel had
to wait for the cattle, but Cain was kept to his father\'s trade, that
is, to farming, as to better business. Abel is a shepherd, but Cain a
king and priest, as a firstborn, who was born to this hope of recovering
everything.

\(25\) Now consider how God is so strange in His counsels. From the
beginning of the world, the firstborn has been a great and glorious
thing, not only among the people to whom God Himself ordained and
commanded the right of the firstborn, but also among the Gentiles.
Nevertheless, the work and the experience show that especially in the
holy people of the parents hope was lacking in the firstborn, and those
who were born after came to the first place, office and honor.

\(26\) For did not the first parents miserably miss the hope of Cain
after he became a deadly slayer? Neither was Abraham the firstborn, but
Haran. So Esau is the firstborn, but the blessing falls out of his
brother Jacob. David was the youngest of his brothers, yet he was
anointed king. And so it is with others

gone. For although by divine right the firstborn had the privilege of
regiment and priesthood, yet they lost it and were preferred to them who
were born after. -

\(27\) But where did this contradiction and reversal come from? First,
from the fault of the parents (who brought up the firstborns tenderly
and wonderfully), then also from the firstborns\' own presumption. For
after they were thus spoiled and corrupted by their parents, they then
insisted on their right and despised and oppressed the other brothers.
Now God is a God of the humble, who gives grace to the humble and
resists the proud, 1 Peter 5:5. Because the firstborn are proud and
proud, they are rejected from their right; not that they do not have the
right of the firstborn, but that they exalt themselves of their gifts
and become proud, which God cannot suffer.

Thus, when the angels in heaven, who had the very best and most
beautiful gifts before the others, began to become proud and despised
the humility of the Son of God, they were cast down to hell and became
the very ugliest devils. For God does not like pride, and does not want
one to approach His majesty, but to honor it everywhere; as He says in
the prophet Isaiah Cap. 48, 11: \"I will not leave my honor to
another.\"

The people of Israel were God\'s property and the holy city of Jerusalem
was His dwelling place. But because they forsook the fear of God, and
defied and prided themselves on their gifts, they were destroyed and
their city laid waste by the heathen. And we are afflicted with this
common pestilence by nature, that we are not satisfied with God\'s
gifts, but misuse them to revile and mock the God who gave them to us.
Now God gives power, dominion, peace and other gifts, so that kings and
rulers should recognize Him, honor Him and thank Him for them; but kings
and rulers abuse them as if they were given to them so that they should
trample underfoot their Creator, who gifted them so mildly.

**[300 2- r- 311-313. Interpretation of I Genesis 4:2, 3. W. 1, 450-453.
301]{.underline}**

\(30\) This is how it is with the household: God gives us healthy
bodies, wives, children, food, etc., not that we should anger Him for
the sake of such gifts, but that we should recognize His goodness and
mercy and thank Him: therefore He has also allowed us to use and rule
over almost all creatures. But how many are we who do this? Do we not
almost all live with one another in shameful misuse of God\'s gifts?
Therefore, he must use such counsel as the Emperor Vespasianus used. He
was well pleased that his citizens and courtiers would become rich, and
said: \"A rich man would be like a sponge, which, when it has drawn full
of water and is squeezed hard, returns the water in heaps. So does God:
those whom he has fattened with his goods and made rich, he makes poor
again when they are ungrateful and abuse his kindness and, as Mary says
in her hymn Luc. 1, 53, \"he leaves the rich empty.

31 Therefore this is the reason why he did not spare Cain, the
firstborn, for he did not give him the firstborn to make him proud and
despise God, but graced and adorned him so that he would honor and fear
him. But because he does not do this, he must be rejected. And the sin
of the parents who cherish such hopes also helps, as the names
sufficiently show. For Adam and Eve have all their hope in the firstborn
alone, whom they call their treasure. They consider Abel to be nothing
and capable of nothing; but they adorn Cain as a king, because they
consider him to be the seed that was given. Therefore they take great
comfort in him, but he also becomes proud and Abel remains despised as a
useless man.

32\. But God reverses it all: He rejects Cain and makes Abel the angel
and first among all the saints. For when he is slain by his brother, he
is the first to be redeemed from the sin and misery of this world, and
shines through the whole church that followed like a beautiful star
because of the glorious testimony of righteousness that God and all
Scripture gives him.

Thus Abel, whom Adam, Eve and Cain despised as a useless man, becomes
the lord of heaven and earth before God; for after his death he is in a
much better state than if he had had a thousand worlds with all their
goods under him.

Thus it finally goes out with hopefulness and presumption against God.
Cain relied on the firstborn and despised his brother, and did not
believe the promise of Christ. But Abel, through faith, took hold of the
promise made to Adam his father of the seed. And this faith is also the
reason that he offered God a better and greater sacrifice than Cain; as
the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 11, 4 reports.

**And Havel became a shepherd, but Cain became a husbandman.**

\(34\) As the names show that the parents placed all their hope and
comfort in Cain, so it also shows in both of their occupations or
practices that their parents held them to. For although both of them are
honest, Abel\'s profession belongs only to housekeeping, but Cain\'s
belongs more to worldly rule. And because Adam is a husbandman, he keeps
Cain, because he prefers him to Abel, for his trade; but Abel he
relegates to the sheep, so that it should be seen that the latter would
be considered a servant, but Cain a master by his parents.

**V. 3. And it came to pass after certain days, that Cain offered
sacrifices unto the LORD of the fruits of the field.**

35\) \"After some days\", that is, after some years had passed. Here we
are told first of all that the dear pious parents, Adam and Eve,
preached often and much to their children about God\'s will and about
the service of God, because both Abel and Cain offer sacrifices to the
Lord. But someone might ask: What or of what did they preach to them?
They certainly had the most beautiful objects of holy sermons. They have
often commemorated their first estate and paradise, and will undoubtedly
preach to their children.

**[302 i, siÄ-siL. Interpretation of I Moses 4, 3, W. i, i5\>3-4Zs.
303]{.underline}**

The same place, which was kept by angels, often measured and reminded
them that they should beware of sin, by which they were miserably
deprived and stripped of so many goods and gifts, live in God\'s fear
and take comfort in His grace and goodness, then they would find a
better one after this life. But who could tell everything that was good
in the first life? The other part of the teaching will also have led
them to this, namely the promise of the seed and future redemption from
all misery and misfortune. The pious parents may have preached about
such things to their children in a certain place and especially on the
Sabbath. Therefore, through such preaching they were awakened and caused
to sacrifice and serve God.

**Second part.**

**Of the sacrifices in general, but especially of the first parents;
item, of Cain and Abel.**

**I.**

\(36\) And this is the first text in the Scriptures in which sacrifice
is mentioned. From this it can be seen that the habit of sacrifice is
not new, but has been from the beginning of the world. Therefore it is
no wonder that the way of sacrifice was propagated and handed down from
Adam to Moses, and after that it was put into a certain order and manner
by Moses, who undoubtedly abolished many useless things that were added
by superstitious people. As can be seen in the examples of the pagan
sacrifices in the poets Homer and Virgil, which the pagans undoubtedly
took from the fathers and followed them, and which they also increased
through superstition.

\(37\) Now this we are to consider especially in this text, that Adam
and Eve are not only parents, feeding and instructing their children how
to conduct themselves in this life, but also have a priestly office. For
since they are full of the Holy Spirit and enlightened with the
knowledge of the Lord, they are also priests.

Knowing the future Savior of Christ, they preach such hope of future
salvation to their children, and admonish them that they thus show
gratitude to a kind and gracious God. For it is certain that they have
made and kept their sacrifices in no other way.

38 Now behold, beloved, what disciples are won by such a godly and good
sermon. For here are two kinds of hearers: First, Cain, the firstborn,
who is considered holy and thought to be a lord, is godless and does not
believe the divine promise. Again Abel, of whom one thinks nothing and
who is driven into the field to tend sheep and to wait, is pious,
God-fearing and believing. And yet the godless Cain can hide his godless
heart and thoughts and keep them secret in such a way that he listens to
his parents\' teaching as if God\'s word were a great seriousness to
him, and also sacrifices, like his other brother, who is pious and
God-fearing. This is why this is an example of the two churches, namely
the right and the hypocritical one; as we will show more extensively in
another place.

39 Although only the sacrifice and not the preaching is considered here,
it should still be considered that they did not sacrifice without the
preaching of the word. For God cannot be served with a silent work, but
there must be a word that resounds in man\'s heart and in God\'s ears;
just as the invocation of God\'s name came to this sacrifice.

40 But one asks here: Whether Cain and Abel had any word or commandment
of God to sacrifice? Answer: Yes. For this is proven by all the
histories of the Holy Scriptures, that the kind, merciful God, through
His abundant grace, has always given and set up, in addition to the
Word, an outward and visible sign of grace, so that by such an outward
sign and work, as by a sacrament, men might be reminded and believe all
the more surely that God wanted to be favorable and gracious to them.
Thus, after the Flood, the rainbow appeared so that it could be a sure
sign that God would henceforth give such a sign.

**[304n I\> N5-A7. interpretation of I Genesis 4, 3. W. 1, 458-460.
305]{.underline}**

He did not want to let punishment pass over the world anymore. Abraham
was given circumcision, as we will hear, so that he would conclude and
be certain that God would be his God and give him a seed in which all
nations would be blessed. In the New Testament we have baptism and the
sacrament of the altar as visible signs of grace, that we should believe
and thereby conclude with certainty that our sins are canceled by
Christ\'s suffering and that we are redeemed by His death. Thus, the
Church has never been so devoid of external signs that one could not
have known where God actually and certainly wanted to be found and
encountered.

41 Although the world almost follows Cain and misuses such signs of
grace for hypocrisy, it is truly an unspeakable grace and mercy of God
that He shows Himself to us in so many ways. How then this grace and
gift is highly praised, Proverbs 8:30, 31: \"I had my delight daily, and
played before him always, and played upon his ground; and my delight is
with the children of men.\" But the Hebrew word sagak is not well
translated: to play; for this praises wisdom, that she had an eye on men
first of all and revealed herself to them. As if she wanted to say: \"I
have always given myself to men to see and to hear, so that they have
heard and found me present in sacrifices, in the circumcision, in the
smoke offerings, in the cloud, in the red sea, in the bread of heaven,
in the brazen serpent, in the tabernacle of Moses, in the temple of
Solomon, in the fog, 2c. and it has been my pleasure that I thus showed
and revealed myself to the children of men.

\(42\) And Adam took special comfort in the fact that after he had lost
paradise, the tree of life, and other comforts that were his signs of
grace, God had given him another sign, namely the sacrifice, by which he
could understand that he was not yet completely rejected by God, but
that He still took care of him and looked after him. For this is what
God indicates by lighting the sacrifices with fire from heaven and
consuming them; as

we read about the sacrifice of Moses and Elijah. For these were certain
signs of divine grace, which the poor people needed, so that they would
not be without some light and knowledge of the grace of God.

\(43\) So now our morning stars are the word, baptism, and supper of the
Lord, to which we look as to certain signs of the sun of grace. For we
may safely conclude and say that there is Christ, forgiveness of sins,
and eternal life, since there is the sacrament, baptism, and the Word.
Again, where these signs of grace are not there, or are despised by men,
not only is there no grace, but also abominable errors must follow, that
people devise other services and set up other signs. As the Greeks
worshipped Apollo, and other peoples other devils, as the Egyptians
worshipped Anubis, Serapis, the crocodile, garlic, onions; the Romans
Jupiter, Quirinus and the images of shame Priapus, Venus 2c.

44 As was the case in the papacy. For after these signs of grace had
become small and despised, idolatry could not rest, but sought other
signs, such as monastic vows, orders, pilgrimages, intercessions of the
saints, and others; all of which are full of error and wickedness, and
yet poor people accept them as if they were certain signs of divine
grace. There you will not hear a bishop, a high school, punishing such
blasphemy, or making people believe something better. For if the light
of the gospel and these signs of grace, given by God, are lost, there
can be no lack of them, people must run after them, to which their
heart\'s desire and lust drives them. As the Jews first despised the
tabernacle and the temple, and sacrificed in the woods and under the
trees, until at last the parents led them away, and out of
unmercifulness slaughtered their own children.

\(45\) Such strange and weird idolatry shows what a great gift it is to
have the word and the signs of grace that God has indicated and
commanded. Now if the Gentiles had followed in the footsteps of the
Jews\...

**[306 L. 1. 317-314. interpretation of Genesis 4, 3. 4. W. 1, 460-tW.
307]{.underline}**

they would never have fallen into such terrible and outrageous idolatry.
If they themselves, the Jews, had paid attention to the word, they would
never have undertaken such blasphemous sacrifices. If we had kept
baptism and the sacrament of the altar in the respect and dignity in
which we should have kept them, we would not have become monks; nor
would anything have been taught in the church about purgatory, the
sacrifice of the Mass, and other ungodly things. But since the light of
the Gospel has been extinguished by the godless popes, it has been easy
to persuade people to commit such abominations.

46 Therefore it is an unspeakable [gift that]{.underline} God not only
speaks to men through His word, but also gives visible signs of grace in
addition to the word; as in the New Testament are baptism, the sacrament
of the altar and absolution. Now those who despise such signs or
consider them worthless are worthy to buy the pope\'s filth for balm, to
worship and to praise: for why do they despise the goodness of the
divine majesty? And since they could have the most certain signs of
grace at home without all expense and effort, they despise them and run
to Rome, to St. James 2c., consume their money over it, wear out their
bodies and finally, how cheaply, lose their souls to it. Therefore,
praise be to God in eternity, who has helped us again through his word
from such terrible idolatry and various errors, and has gifted us with
his signs of grace so that we can have them at the door, even in our
home and bed.

\(47\) Thus, from the beginning of the world, when God wanted to confirm
and make certain the promise of our blessedness, He directed that men
should have certain signs to comfort them in their sins and to raise
them up by trusting in divine grace. For in the sacrifice, it is not the
work that counts, but God\'s grace and the power of divine promise that
God Himself arranges such a service and promises to accept it. That
which is now with us is baptism and the Lord\'s supper, which is with
the Lord.

Adam according to the promise had been the sacrifice. For God revealed
His grace in the sacrifices, and indicated by the kindling and consuming
by fire that He was pleased with them.

**II.**

\(48\) Adam instructs his sons in such worship that they give thanks to
God, praise God and have certain comfort and hope from His grace and
mercy. Cain, however, is ungodly, puffs himself up and exalts himself
over the firstborn, despises such beautiful preaching of his father, and
sacrifices as his father commands him, but has a hopeful delusion in
himself, as if he were holy, and thinks that God will put up with such
work for the sake of his person. But Abel, who according to his name
counts for nothing before him, also sacrifices, but in the faith of the
promise, as the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 11, 4. says.

**V. 4: Andabel also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of
their fat. And the LORD looked graciously on Habel and his sacrifice.**

\(49\) He who looks at the work in itself alone cannot prefer Abel to
Cain. For the Jews, as they are saints of works and always cling to
works, are pretending to foolish dreams here: Cain had not sacrificed
deliciously selected grain, but chaff, therefore he was rejected with
his sacrifice.

50 But the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 11, 4. judges differently and
says that Abel offered a better sacrifice to the Lord in faith;
therefore the defect was not in the sacrifice that they offered, but in
the person who offered. And the faith of the person was the weight that
made Abel\'s sacrifice delicious and pleasant, but Cain\'s unworthy and
wrong. For Abel believes that God is kind and gracious, therefore his
sacrifice pleases God; but Cain relies on the honor of being the
firstborn, and despises his brother as a useless and unfit person. But
how does God\'s judgment go against this? From the firstborn he makes a
secondborn, and again from a firstborn he makes a secondborn.

**[308 D. I, SIS-3W. Interpretation of I Moses 4, 4. W. 1, 4W-\"66.
309]{.underline}**

He makes a firstborn from a secondborn. For he looks at Abel\'s
sacrifice and indicates that this priest\'s sacrifice is pleasing to
him, but Cain is not pleasing to him and he is not a true priest.

51 The word shaah, \"God saw,\" is a broad word that I have diligently
explained and interpreted in a writing against Latomus. But this word is
used by Isaiah, as Cap. 17, 7: \"At that time a man shall cleave unto
him that made him\"; item, Cap. 66, 12: \"On your knees you shall be
held kindly.\" For this is what he means, that when a mother holds her
child on her lap, she shows him a cheerful and loving gesture. Such a
showing is indicated by this word, therefore it spreads much further
than the word \"see\". For when a mother looks at a child, she shows him
at the same time a laughing and friendly gesture, as if she loved the
child. In the German language, however, there is no word so that this
could be given properly and completely, so I know of none in the Latin
language either.

52\. Moses speaks almost thus, 2 Mos. 33, 15: \"Where your face does not
go, do not lead us up from there\", that is, create that we always have
your signs with us, in which you let yourself be seen that you are with
us and keep it with us. Such signs were, as also said above, the pillar
of fire, the cloud 2c. Although Moses does not actually say what kind of
sign it was that God was pleased with Abel\'s offerings and sacrifices,
it is nevertheless credible that it was a fire that fell from heaven and
took hold of the sacrifice and consumed it in the sight of all, and that
God was pleased with Abel\'s sacrifice. And thus God shows that he
examines the hearts and kidneys, as Jerome says, because he does not
look at the firstborn of Cain, but looks at the heart of the despised
Abel.

\(53\) And here we begin to separate and divide the church into two
churches; one, which is a church in name only, but in deed is nothing
but a hypocritical and bloodthirsty church. The other, which is barren,
desolate, and under the cross, and

Suffering, and against the hypocritical church before the world is
nothing else but Abel, which is a vain trifling. For Christ Matth. 23,
35. also calls Abel righteous, and makes him the beginning of the church
of the God-fearing, which will remain until the end of the world; just
as Cain is the beginning of the church of the wicked and bloodthirsty
until the end of the world; as Augustine also holds up this history in
the book de Civitate Dei.

\(54\) In this we are given a great lesson and comfort when we count
both churches from this origin and beginning, and consider how God has
always governed this with wonderful counsel, that the right church has
been great and strong at one time, but small and weak at another, and
yet has always been so, that the hypocritical and bloodthirsty church
has had glory before the world, and the right church, which God loved,
has been afflicted and martyred. For there it has already gone, as the
promise reads, that the serpent\'s seed should bite the seed of the
eunuch in the heel; as we learn even today. Therefore such a game and
misfortune should not frighten us; but it should comfort us that we
learn by experience that our adversaries do just such a thing against us
as the bloodthirsty Cain did against the righteous Abel.

\(55\) For we are not the first from whom the false church takes the
name of the church by force and calls us heretics, kills us, and boasts
that it alone is the right and true church; do not even dare to usurp
this name with sword, fire, and all abominable tyranny. For this also
happened to the pious Abel, yes, to the Lord Christ Himself, who was no
priest, no king in Jerusalem, but was brought to the cross by the
priests and rulers. \"But now we must,\" says Paul Rom. 8, 29, \"become
like the Lord Christ.\"

For this reason the true church is hidden, banished, considered heretics
and killed. Cain, however, has a great name and is the only one in whom
it is hoped and expected that he will accomplish the greatest things.
Therefore he also leads against his

**[310 2 Ws-W\". Interpretation of Genesis 4:4. W. i. \"s-ts\".
311]{.underline}**

Brother a hostile heart and strangles him. And this history does not
belong to the worldly or domestic regiment, but to the church. For Abel
is not killed for the sake of any worldly or domestic business, but for
the sake of the service of God. And Cain is not satisfied with being a
master of the house, but he also wants to be a son of God, a pope and
father of the church. Therefore he submits himself to the judgment of
the sacrifices, condemns his brother as a heretic and beats him to
death.

\(57\) Just as Christ prophesied in John 16:2 that His church would have
to be in many dangers, so that whoever kills the pious will think he is
doing God a service. Therefore, those who want to be the holiest are the
plague and persecutors of the church. Again, the true church is not
considered to be the church, but, after the name of Abel (who is not
only the figure but the beginning of the true church), it is considered
to be nothing; so also that when it is killed, those who kill it think
that God does not ask anything about it; for Cain is a lord and king who
does everything and is all-powerful.

\(58\) But here we find the offense against which we are to contend,
that we do not therefore think as if we were not the church, because our
adversaries so surely condemn us and cruelly persecute us in all manner
of ways, but that we hold the cross and such condemnation to be certain
and undeceiving signs of the right and true church; as also the 10th
Psalm, v. 1 ff. Psalm v. 1 ff., and Psalm 72:14: \"Their blood shall be
esteemed precious in his sight\"; and Psalm 116:15: \"The death of his
saints is esteemed worthy in the sight of the Lord.\" Here you hear that
those who are thus killed are by no means out of God\'s concern, but
that such deaths are counted precious and worthy in His sight.
Therefore, they are certainly God\'s people whom God takes care of.

\(59\) Therefore, let us tolerate the cruel raging of our adversaries
against us and thank God that we are not among those who kill, who
violently and cruelly attack other people\'s property and bodies for the
sake of the name of the church. For the histories of all times bear
witness to this,

that the right church has always been suffering, but the false and
hypocritical church has violently proved itself against the right one
and condemned it.

\(60\) Therefore we have no reason to doubt, but we can be sure that the
church of the pope is a Cain church, but we are the true church. For
just as Abel did no harm to Cain, so we not only do no harm or suffering
to the false church of the pope, but we also allow ourselves to be
plagued, condemned and killed by it. We do not tell lies about it, but
the whole world knows how often we have been banished, cursed and
condemned by them with various judgments. People have also been found
who have wanted to carry out such serious and cruel judgments almost in
all corners of Europe. Neither Spain, nor France, nor England, nor the
Netherlands, nor Bohemia, nor Poland, nor Hungary, nor Austria, nor
Bavaria, can be subjected to such tyranny and unjust rage. What else
have they persecuted but the true Christian, prophetic and apostolic
doctrine? And who can say further that the right church is not easily
and actually recognizable? Shall we say that the church is there, where
nothing pure nor righteous is taught, but where all unrighteous tyranny
is practiced and great good and violence is? or there, where the
consciences are served with right doctrine, where also for the sake of
doctrine there is the cross, contempt, poverty, disgrace and other
burdens, which the small group of the pious has always had to bear, as
one reads in the histories?

\(61\) Therefore it is not only useful, but also very sweet, that one
can so certainly and actually distinguish both churches and recognize
one before the other. One is the blasphemer and ungodly, namely the
harlot in the beautiful purple robe, which bears the name of the right
church; the other is not considered anything and must suffer, hunger,
thirst and be oppressed, as Christ says in Matth. 25, 35, that he must
suffer hunger and thirst in the world.

62\. but there will follow a judgment between the satiated and the
hungry, between the goats and the sheep, and between Abel and Cain, in
which

[**312I , 324-32\". Interpretation of** Genesis 4. 4. **W. I, 469-471.
313**]{.underline}

God will show and prove that He is pleased with the suffering and hungry
Church, but He rejects the hypocritical and bloodthirsty Church. This is
our comfort and, as it were, a sugar, so that we would and should
overcome our misery and persecution in the world. And all this belongs
to theology. Now let us return to the worldly and consider God\'s
judgment.

It truly amazes us why God allowed Adam\'s first son, to whom the
firstborn in the entire human race was due by birth, to fall so
horribly, so that his entire race perished and was destroyed in the
Flood. But this is the very cause for which, as said above, God mocks
Adam so bitterly and scornfully, since he says, \"that he should not
become like ours,\" and had the garden preserved by the cherubim. For he
wants to ward off and dampen the presumption and hopefulness that is, as
it were, implanted in man through sin: and we are so constituted that we
can bear nothing less than this dampening of hopefulness. We see what
pride and courtliness there is among the nobility for the mere name of
being noble, which is a vain and futile nobility, for they do not get it
by virtue or by helping the country and the people much.

It is said of Plato that he thanked God for three things: first, that he
was created a man and not an unreasonable animal; second, that he was a
Greek, born in Athens, and not a barbarian; and third, that he became a
man-person and not a woman. The same folly is heard of the Jews also,
who boast that they were born men and not wild beasts; Jews and not
Gentiles; men and not women. But tell me, what is it\> that one thus
boasts of his descent or birth? What is it that an ass adorned with
chains of gold and silver in court not only esteems himself better than
another common man, but also exalts himself against God? The Greeks
despised the people of all countries and called them barbarians; but the
Romans have

Finally, this disgrace, that they were not called barbarians, was
remedied by many excellent and honest deeds. In sum, the better each
nation has wanted to be before another, the more it has risen and become
proud. This is the nature of all men and the nature of sin.

But look here at God\'s judgment. Cain could justly and truly boast of
his highest nobility, for he was the first to be born of men: but as
much as his descent is more praiseworthy and glorious, so much is his
fall more dreadful. That is why experience has given rise to the saying,
\"The children of great lords seldom prosper. And such a shortcoming
applies not only to individuals, but also to entire great kingdoms. For
the Greeks were especially famous and had a great reputation before
other nations because of their honest deeds and good arts. But have they
not fallen into great disgrace because of it and finally been miserably
destroyed and devastated? You will see this in other nations as well.

For this reason God was well pleased to let Cain fall, so that the whole
world would be an example of him, and no one would have to boast of his
noble tribe or great lineage, just as the Jews boasted of their father
Abraham and the Greeks of their great wisdom. For God wants to be
feared, but he wants us to be humbled. But it is generally in vain; for
we turn little to such great wrath of God, that the first men were
corrupted, and the noblest nations laid waste and destroyed.

Therefore, experience testifies and proves that it is true, as the
Virgin Mary sings in her song Luc. 1, 52: \"He has cast down the mighty
from their seats. For what is most noble and best becomes most
unimportant and is rejected by God; not that the work itself is void and
reprehensible, but that it is counterfeited by diabolical presumption
and hopefulness. And that in the world it is thus customary to admit,
even the heathen have seen: as the saying of a philosopher indicates,
who, after being asked, What did God do in heaven? answered, He exalteth
the lowly, and exalteth the high.

**[314 D. 1, 326-328. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 4. 5. W. 1, 471-174.
315]{.underline}**

is, he humiliates. But they have not understood the reason why it
happens.

Our flesh and reason consider it a great honor that one is a man and not
a woman; yet we see that God has diligently arranged it so that man
would not be born of man; and Christ himself wanted to be called the
seed of a woman and not of a man. How could men have so greatly
exaggerated this honor if God had wanted Christ to be born of a man? But
this honor is entirely taken from men and given to women, who must be
subservient to men, so that men should not boast but humble themselves.
And since a woman cannot give birth without a man, God has also ordained
that women give birth not only to males but also to females. For human
nature cannot make proper use of honor, but always abuses it for the
sake of hope, and rebels against the one from whom it received the
gifts. This is the reason why Cain falls so hard and loses the right of
the firstborn, namely, that we should fear God, thank Him, and be
careful not to abuse His gifts for the sake of hope.

V. 4. 5. **And the Lord graciously looked upon Havel and his sacrifice.
But Cain and his sacrifice he did not look upon graciously.**

This is an excellent text, which should therefore be diligently noted,
thoroughly understood and properly practiced, so that it would be enough
that in the New Testament faith and trust in God\'s mercy against trust
in works is praised and commended with such a clear testimony; as it is
soon commended in the beginning of the world with very clear and bright
words. For does not Moses, in saying, \"God graciously looked upon the
sacrifice of Habel\", clearly indicate that before the work, God looks
at the person, what kind of person it is? If the person is good, his
work is pleasing to him; but if the person is not good, his work is not
pleasing to him.

70 Now this is the summa of our doctrine, that we teach and confess that
GOD accepts the person rather than the work, and

that the person does not become righteous or just by his good or right
work, but that the work becomes good and just by the person who is
righteous and just; as the text proves here. For because God holds to
Abel, he also holds to his sacrifice; and because he does not hold to
Cain, he also does not hold to his sacrifice. This opinion is clearly
stated in the text, and our opponents cannot deny it. And from these
words follows a very clear and good conclusion, namely, that Abel was
righteous before his work, and that the work pleases God for the sake of
the person, not the person for the sake of the work; as our adversaries
fight and pretend that man becomes righteous from works and not from
faith alone.

71\) So the master of the epistle to the Hebrews looked at this text
with pure and clear eyes, when he says Cap. 11, 4: \"By faith Habil
offered a greater sacrifice than Cain, by whom he received testimony
that he was righteous, since God bore witness to his offering. Cain also
sacrifices and does so sooner than Abel. But he sacrifices puffed up by
the honor of his birth, and hopes that God will be pleased with the
sacrifice because it is done by a firstborn, so he comes without faith,
without confession of his sin, does not ask for mercy and forgiveness of
sin, does not trust in God\'s mercy, but hopes that his sacrifice cannot
please God for any other reason than that he is the firstborn. Just as
all saints of works do, whose thoughts, mind and spirit are directed
solely to works, for the sake of which they hope and think to be
pleasing to God, but do not trust in God\'s mercy, nor do they hope that
God will forgive sin for the sake of Christ. Cain was also such a man.
For it would have been impossible for him not to please God if he had
had faith.

\(72\) On the other hand, Abel realizes that he is an unworthy and poor
sinner, so he takes refuge in God\'s mercy and believes that God is
merciful and wants to have mercy on him. So God, who sees into hearts,
judges between these two brothers who sacrifice to Him at the same time,
and does not reject Cain for the sake of Cain.

**[316 \^. 1, 328-330. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 4. 5. W. 1,
471-\^78. 317]{.underline}**

Abel\'s sacrifice was not good (for if he had offered a nutshell to God
in faith, it would have been pleasing to God), but that the person was
evil and without faith and full of pride and hope. Again, he holds
himself to Abel\'s sacrifice, because he is pleased with the person; as
the text clearly adds, God first looked at Abel and then at his
sacrifice. For if one is pleased with a person, he will put up with
anything he does; since, again, anything done by one\'s enemy is
contrary and repugnant to him.

Therefore, this is an excellent text, so that it is clearly proven that
God does not look at how great, how much, nor how delicious the work is,
but simply looks at the faith of the person; just as He does not despise
the work, no matter how small, unworthy and rejected it is, but only
despises the unbelief of the person. What is it then that the Jews
praise Jer. 7:4, \"the temple of the Lord\", \"the temple of the Lord\"?
What is it that the papists boast so much about the mass, about the
woolen shirt, about great work, about great, many and delicious works,
because God does not ask about the works, not even about those that he
himself has commanded, if they are not done in faith? as the now
reported saying of Jeremiah also indicates. Much less, however, does he
inquire about the works that men devise and invent without God\'s word;
but he looks to and inquires only about faith, that is, that one may
take comfort in it and rely on it for Christ\'s sake; for there the
person first begins to please God, after which his works also please
him. Thus, God does not like Cain\'s sacrifice because he, as an
unbeliever, does not please Him. Again, Abel\'s sacrifice is pleasing
because he pleased God first for the sake of faith, not relying on his
worthiness, nor on his sacrifice or work, but only on the promise of the
seed of the woman.

74 And so this text goes to our doctrine of justification, that a man
must be righteous above all his works, and be accepted of God without
all works through grace alone, which faith takes hold of and considers
certain. For faith does not make a person righteous as a work, but as a

He makes us righteous by taking hold of God\'s grace and mercy, shown in
Christ. In this faith and trust in God\'s mercy, the church lives and
floats with a humble confession of her sins and unworthiness, hoping
that God will forgive her for Christ\'s sake.

The works that follow are, as it were, testimonies of this faith, which
God also accepts, not for themselves, but for the sake of faith or for
the sake of the believing person. Not only does the other church, namely
the Cain church, not have such faith, but it also pursues it and
believes, as Cain does here, that it will please God for the sake of
works. But this hope is hostile to God, for he cannot suffer the
contempt of his grace 2c. This text is certainly worthy of careful
consideration.

**Third part.**

**How Cain did not behave properly in rejecting his sacrifice and how he
is punished over it.**

**I.**

**V. 5 Then Cain was very angry, and his mind became distorted.**

This following text will give us some trouble for the sake of grammar,
but I hope we will get through these difficulties easily and well. We
have now heard that Cain missed his hope after he despised his brother
and thought that he wanted to have preference with God and be the most
distinguished for the sake of the firstborn, as he was with his parents.
But God\'s judgment is different from the judgment of men. For He
indicates that He is pleased with Abel, but Cain does not please Him and
is rejected. This is why Cain is furiously angry with his brother, for
he cannot be satisfied that he is banished and deprived of both his rule
and his priesthood, as we will learn later that kings and princes can
tolerate nothing less than the punishment of the church. For they are
not satisfied with this,

**[318 \" l. Wv-Ws. Interpretation of I Moses 4, 5. W. i. 478-481.
319]{.underline}**

that they are kings and princes, but they also want to be righteous and
holy before God and rob themselves of the title of the church. So Cain
also becomes angry when he sees that the glory of righteousness and
grace before God is taken away from him. For what is that but to be cast
out of the church and banished? But he is so much more satisfied with
this, so much better than his brother. For now he thinks: Behold, now
your brother will want to be lord, after he sees that I am despised and
cast out by God. Therefore Moses adds the word \"very\", because he
wants to indicate that Cain will be very and violently angered, that he
will be publicly disgraced, even though he wanted to be the most
distinguished.

We also see such a Cainian anger in the Cainian church of the pope: for
what offends the pope, cardinals, kings and princes more than that I, a
poor beggar, teach that one must prefer the reputation of God to their
reputation, and punish in the name of the Lord what is worth punishing?
They themselves recognize that there are many things among them that
need a good and sharp reformation, but that a poor beggar of low
standing and sex should appear and do this, they cannot stand at all.
Therefore they oppose it with their force and want to dampen us with it.

There is no wrath on earth more cruel than that of the bloodthirsty
church and hypocrites. For in the worldly authorities\' wrath there is
still a little kindness; as we see that no such cruel murderer is led to
punishment, with whom the people would not have a little compassion. But
when this false and bloodthirsty church comes upon one who is of the
right church, it is not enough for it to shed his blood, but it also
blasphemes, curses and curses him and practices cruelty on the poor dead
body. Just as the Jews were not satisfied with the fact that they had
put Christ on the cross, from which they could take no more than a dead
corpse; but because he was thirsty, they soaked him with vinegar and
gall, and as his soul is now running out, they blaspheme him. There is
no such fury in political or worldly anger.

\(79\) Therefore the wrath and anger of the false church is a devilish
wrath and anger, which began with Cain and continues with all the
Cainites. And we can truly boast that we also have such a wrath, like
the pious Abel, on our necks. For who would doubt that the bishops and
some fierce princes could strangle us all in a moment, and, as that
Roman tyrant said, if we had all one neck, they would not with all
pleasure strangle and murder us? For behold, what some years therefore
have gone by for assaults, thou wilt say that I speak the truth.

80 But that Moses further says: \"And his spirit was disguised\", is
spoken in a Hebrew way, and thereby not only the work is meant, but also
such an angry heart, which could not rest; but because it cannot do
harm, it must let its anger see its spirit. And it is to be believed
that Cain will never again have looked cheerfully, nor will he have
spoken kindly to his parents as before; if he should have answered them,
he will rather have grumbled than spoken words. When he will have looked
at his brother, he will have turned pale, will have shown a hostile
face, and will have let a fierce and vengeful heart be heard from all
his gestures.

\(81\) Moses means all these things when he says that his gestures were
disguised. For he does not speak of one gift or one part of it, but of
all gifts and movements. As Paul also said in 1 Cor. 13, 5, according to
this Hebrew way: \"Love does not behave in an inappropriate way\", that
is, it does not frown, does not look sour, does not threaten with its
mouth, but shows a fine, sincere, friendly and cheerful face 2c. For
such a gesture stands well, but those stand badly and are blasphemous.
Therefore this word also describes the hypocritical anger, that Cain
could neither see nor hear his brother, nor talk with him, nor eat nor
drink with him 2c.

82\) If anyone wants to see an example of such Cainian wrath, let him
join a papist who either follows his doctrine and his teachings, or is a
papist who is a papist and a papist.

**[320 k. 1, 3. 32-334. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 5-7. W.r, 4S1-4S4.
321]{.underline}**

If a man wants to be praised for his faith or his piety, he will find a
devilish anger and resentment in him; so that a judge\'s anger against
him does not seem to be anger, but the greatest kindness and sincerity.
For with him nothing is angry but the hand, and is displeased with the
vice alone, not with the person. But the Cainite\'s anger uses the eyes,
frowns, opens the mouth, arms the fist for revenge. In sum, anger and
revengefulness looks out of all limbs and gestures and that without
ceasing. For the anger does not deteriorate with time or pass over, like
a worldly or domestic anger. Now follows a fatherly and very serious
admonition of his father Adam, who would have gladly advised and helped
his son; but such anger suffers no counsel, and hears Cain and such
Cainites neither father nor mother nor God Himself.

V. 6 **Then the Lord said to Cain, \"Why are you angry, and why are your
words disguised?**

These words prove enough that Cain was not only grieved once in this
sacrifice, but that from that very hour he went along grieved, sad and
grim, not looking rightly at either father or mother. As we have said of
Pharisaic anger, that it used to disguise the whole offering. For Cain
considered it a great mockery that Abel, whom he had always despised and
of whom even his parents had thought nothing, was preferred to him in
the sacrifice, that is, in the presence of his father and his mother,
and that God allowed himself to be heard and told that he was worthy of
the regency and priesthood.

**II.**

\(84\) Now, as he is sufficiently aware that he has an estranged mind
toward his brother, he is admonished by his father Adam. For I believe
that these words were spoken by Adam himself, and Moses said that the
Lord had spoken them, so that Adam was already justified and enlightened
and graced with the Holy Spirit. What he therefore received according to
God\'s word from the Holy

When the Holy Spirit says it, it is rightly attributed to God, as if he
had spoken it. Just as those who now preach the gospel are not only
teachers and preachers, but Christ speaks and teaches in them. And such
words were undoubtedly spoken with great earnestness. For he saw that
his son could not bear the scorn, and was grieved and sorrowful because
he had lost his firstborn and priesthood. So he also understands well
what the tempter could do to a corrupt nature, because he had done so
much harm to man while he was still perfect. Therefore, he is careful,
begins and preaches a serious sermon, which, although none of the
fathers has yet interpreted it worthily, because perhaps the fathers did
not have time for other church business, let us nevertheless try it, not
without fear and improvement, as I hope.

**V. 7. Is it not so? if thou art godly, thou art pleasant; but if thou
art not godly, sin rests at the door.**

I cannot be sufficiently surprised that Moses was able to wrap and force
such great and excellent things into so few words. Our translation has
not really given the words sufficiently; and although Augustine was not
at all inexperienced in the Hebrew language, he nevertheless did not
know it thoroughly. For thus he gives this text: \"If you sacrifice
rightly and do not share rightly, you have already sinned, therefore
refrain from it. What sin means here is known to those who have been
taught Hebrew, although Augustine\'s opinion, which he deduces from
these words, is theological and good. It can also be seen that the
seventy interpreters were not sufficiently equipped and skilled for the
great work they undertook. Therefore let us leave aside how others have
translated and interpreted it, and follow the Hebrew text, which is
certain and thus holds: \"If thou be devout, thy sin shall be forgiven
thee, or lifted up; but if thou be not devout, sin resteth at the door\"
2c.

Now it is ordered by nature so that the words, as also Aristotle says,
to the work,

**[322 \" i. sst-s\". Interpretation of Genesis 4:7. W. i, \"si-t\".
323]{.underline}**

and not the work or trade should serve the words. And Hilarius has a
saying, which is well known and is also cited by Peter Lombardus, that
words should be understood according to the action that is put into the
words and presented in them. Therefore, when one wants to explain a
thing, one should always first consider what the subject is that is
being discussed. And when this has been done, one should then direct the
words, if grammar will suffer it, to the thing, and not the thing to the
words. And because the rabbis and others who follow them do not keep
this rule (for they have lost the things and stick only to words), they
often get into the habit of giving very uncomfortable and clumsy
interpretations to many things. Because they do not have such thoughts
as one should have of spiritual things, of which the Scriptures speak,
they get completely away from the matter and direct the words to carnal
and futile thoughts.

Now it is certain that the Jews have lost Christ altogether; how then
can they rightly understand either the gospel or the law? For they know
neither sin, nor grace, nor righteousness; how then can they rightly
explain such passages? Our sophists are almost the same. For what do
they have that is pure and righteous about these important things?
Because they do not understand the matter correctly, it is impossible
for them to understand the words correctly. For although knowledge of
language, that is, that one understands the manner of speech and the
words, must first be, knowledge of facts, that is, that one sees and
understands the whole matter correctly, is the most important thing. For
if the things themselves are confused, the words also come to a
different understanding and thus become entirely a new grammar.

Gerundensis has a very beautiful knowledge of the language (as there are
many now who are far ahead of me in Hebrew grammar). But because he does
not understand things correctly, he has done this text wrong. For thus
he gives it: \"If thou be godly, thy sacrifice shall be more acceptable
than thy brother\'s; for thou art the firstborn.

Here you hear that he understands and knows the words, but he does not
know the matter. For God deals with this trade to indicate that He does
not respect the firstborn. How then can the sacrifice for the sake of
the firstborn be better?

But the master of the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 11, 4 understands what
the matter is, therefore he speaks differently of this trade, namely,
that Abel did a pleasing sacrifice in faith. Thus Jerome\'s translation
is also better, since he gives it thus: \"If you are pious, you will
enjoy it; but if you are not pious, sin\" (he has added the little word
\"your\") \"will rest at the door. But this does not yet mean that the
matter has been explained correctly. For the word seeth[,]{.underline}
which means to alleviate (levare), he takes for accipere, which in my
opinion no one can praise. But he has this from the Jews, who are under
the delusion and understand it in this way, that where Cain would have
sacrificed well and mildly, God would have repaid him. Therefore, I will
now explain what my simple mind and opinion is of this text.

90 First of all, it is necessary, as I said, to understand the matter
correctly and to have a firm foundation that cannot be lacking. Now this
is the one reason, that God does not like anything that does not come
from faith, according to the common and well-known saying of Paul, Rom.
14, 23: \"What does not come from faith is sin\"; and Solomon, Proverbs
15, 8: \"God has an abhorrence of the sacrifice of the wicked. The other
reason is that sin is such an abominably great and grievous thing that
it cannot be wiped out by any sacrifices, by any works, but only by
grace and mercy, which must be taken by faith; as is also indicated and
proved by the first promise of the seed of the woman, without which
there is no redemption. The rabbis do not have these foundations, for
such understanding comes only from the Spirit of Christ, who, like the
sun at noon, enlightens what is dark. Therefore, whatever goes against
these foundations and is not in accordance with them, we may boldly
reject as ungodly and false.

**[324 2. 1. 336-338. Interpretation of Genesis 4:7. W. I, 4\"-t8p.
325]{.underline}**

\(91\) Although I am not opposed to the word \"sin\" being understood
either of past or future sin, it seems to me to be more convenient that
it should be understood generally for sin, and all power lies in the
word seeth, which comes from nasa and means: to alleviate, to raise. But
here is a clear example of what a great difference there is between the
knowledge of words and of things. For if you want to apply the word
\"alleviate,\" \"elevate,\" to a bodily thing, it means to raise up or
set on high; as Isa. 6:1: \"I saw the Lord sitting on a high and lofty
throne.\" This is much different from what is written in Psalm 32:1,
\"Blessed is he whose transgressions are forgiven,\" or \"are
abolished,\" and yet in both places it is only one word. This, in
Isaiah, a grammarian understands, but this he does not understand, for
he does not know what the thing is that is spoken of here. For to lift
up a chair is another thing; so also to lift up sin is another thing,
namely, to forgive, to cancel, and to take away sin.

Therefore, this is the opinion: If you were pious, that is, if you
believed, you would have a gracious God. And this would be a right
lifting, that is, forgiveness of sin. But since I see that God has not
kept to your sacrifice, it certainly follows that you are not pious; nor
is your sin yet lifted, but it remains.

This is especially fine, that by the word \"lift\" he compares the sin
to a great burden that lies on Cain and presses him so that he cannot
breathe unless it is taken away from him. But the epistle to the Hebrews
indicates the way in which we are relieved of such a burden, since it
says in Cap. 11:4 that Abel made a better sacrifice in faith. So the
words or grammar and the matter are consistent, namely, that God regards
faith and considers only those who believe to be righteous. For these
words: \"If you were pious,\" are serious words, so that Adam punishes
Cain severely and thus wants to say: \"Your pride and hope has corrupted
you, for you are evil.

And thou didst defy thy firstborn, and thoughtest that thou wouldest be
acceptable unto God for the same: but I see that because God doth so
judge and condemn thee, thou art without faith: for God doth not condemn
any but the unbelieving.

94 No rabbi interprets this text in this way. For they do not see that
Adam, as Paul also does, is presenting the gospel to his son and
reproaching him: \"He who believes will be saved,\" Marc. 16, 16. item
Rom. 3, 28: \"Faith alone makes one righteous. For what else is said
here, but that God is gracious to those who believe in the Seed of the
Gospel and cast away all trust in works and their own merit? If you
would do this, says Adam, your sin would not weigh you down, but you
would be relieved of this burden and would not look so grim and angry;
for God has promised that He will not impute sin to anyone who believes
2c.

95 If these words are to be applied to past sin, they are also a
fatherly and serious admonition, saying, \"You have not believed until
now, and now you are rejected; if you continue in this way, you will be
cast out altogether; but if you do good or are righteous, that is, if
you believe in the seed that has given, I promise you that it will yet
come to pass that you will be purged of your sin, so that, as the 32nd
Psalm says, your sin will not be imputed to you. Psalm v. 2, your sin
will not be imputed to you.

The fact that it says, \"Sin lies or rests at the door,\" is a
rhetorical description of sin, which I would like to see used for a
proverb. For this is actually the nature of sin, that it lies or rests
like a wild animal that has fallen asleep, because it is at work, that
is, because it does not bite, does not frighten nor offend, but rather
flatters and tickles. So when first Eve and then Adam ate the forbidden
apple in paradise, they never thought that God would pay attention to
it, much less that they would fall into such severe punishment. For just
as one can better deal with evil and wild animals

[**326 L i,M\"-s4o. Interpretation of** Genesis **4:7. W. i, 439-\^92.
327**]{.underline}

when they are full and want to sleep: so **sin is** also sweet, because
it is at work, and its poison is not felt, but it lies and rests. For
who hath ever seen a miser look sour, when it goeth to him to great
gain? And who has ever seen an adulterer grieve when what he desires
happens to him? But if one were to lash his skin with a whip or break
his head with a hammer, the same affliction would leave him. But because
sin is at rest and punishment is not felt, the miser\'s greatest
pleasure is to touch gain, and the adulterer\'s greatest pleasure is to
have dealings with another\'s wife. It can also be seen as if there can
be no measure or end to such pleasure and joy.

Therefore Adam does not speak here only of Cain\'s sin, but he indicates
in general what kind and quality sin has in itself. For that which
befell Cain befell all. Before Cain sacrificed, he boasted of the
advantage of the firstborn, despised his brother and wanted to be the
most distinguished. At that time sin lay and rested, but at the door,
that is, in a place that was not quiet and not at rest. For through a
door one goes out and in, therefore it is not good to sleep there. And
this also belongs to the nature and characteristic of sin, that even
though it rests for a time, it still rests there, because it cannot rest
long; as Christ says Match. 10, 26: \"There is nothing hidden that will
not be revealed.\" For the wicked thinks that sin rests and is hidden;
but it cannot rest at the door, but is finally revealed and comes to
light. For door and sleep and rest are quite contrary to each other, or,
as it is called, opposita in adjecto. For as darkness is in the light,
so also rest is in a restless place, and such things are by nature
contrary to each other. So this can be understood of any sin, past or
present.

98\. but if anyone wants to understand it from future sin, it remains
one opinion, so: if you harm your brother, and hold the grudge you have
in your heart, I say to you that

Your sin will probably rest, but \"front door\", that is in a very
restless place, because it must finally wake up and catch you, like a
fierce wild animal. And so it went. For when Cain had committed the
fatal stroke and buried his brother alone, sin rested. But for how long?
No longer, for until the voice came upon him, \"Where is thy brother
Habel?\" Therefore this description of sin is right, and so it is with
every sin that it rests at the door. For such are the thoughts of men:
because no man knoweth their sin, they think it will remain secret and
hid. But it is revealed and awakens where one is not pious, that is,
believes that God wants to forgive it for Christ\'s sake.

So these short words, spoken in the manner of proverbs, contain an
excellent teaching, namely, that nothing remains hidden, but everything
is revealed; as Paul also says in 1 Tim. 5:24: \"The sins of some men
are revealed, that they may be judged beforehand. And especially we see
and experience that God\'s judgment goes especially over gross sins. For
many are murdered secretly, and yet through strange opportunities and
means the perpetrators of such murderous deeds come to light. Therefore
Adam admonishes his son not to dwell on his sin, for it will not remain
hidden; but one will be found who will bring it to light and punish it.
And it rhymes with this opinion that the poets paint Cupido (the desire)
bare and blind. Because we let ourselves think that sin is secret and
hidden, we think that other people do not see it either. But God reveals
in the end even the most secret and hidden.

100 And this I consider to be the right and simple understanding of this
text, namely, that Adam, as a father, admonishes his son to believe in
God and the promised Seed, and God will be gracious to him. But if, he
says, you indulge your lusts, your sin will rest, that is, it will seem
to you that it is secret and hidden; but it will rest at the door, that
is, in such a place that it will not rest long.

**[328 L.I.SW-S\". Interpretation of I Moses 4, 7. \". i. iss-t\".
329]{.underline}**

or hidden. For what lies outside the door is seen by everyone who goes
in or out.

\(101\) As I said above, we should not forget the most important
doctrine, how God has always let himself be seen and heard from the
beginning of the world, that he is a judge between your flesh and spirit
and does not look at the person. For Abel he regarded not for works, but
for faith only, that he might sacrifice unto him. But he did not look
upon Cain, nor did he hold to him, not because his work was not seemly
or good enough, but because he was without faith, and it did not help
him that he was the firstborn son.

102 And this is a strong argument against the Jews, who, as John 1:13
says, boasted of their blood, that they were Abraham\'s children. For if
they were to be preferred because of their blood or lineage, Cain would
have had much to boast about. For what is it that the Jews boast that
God spoke to them through Moses? Shall we then consider Adam, the first
teacher, to be a lesser teacher than Moses was? He was truly higher and
greater in many ways. For he did not teach, as Moses did, how to
circumcise people and perform other ceremonies, which were necessary for
the wild and naughty people to prevent idolatry; but he taught how to
believe in the promised seed, which would crush the serpent\'s head. But
Cain\'s firstborn nor other advantages did not help him; for God looks
only to faith in the promised Seed, as in the New Testament Paul clearly
says: \"Those who have faith are Abraham\'s children\"; and John 1:12,
13: \"To those He gave power to become children of God, who are not of
the blood, nor of the will of the man, nor of the will of the flesh, but
who believe in His name.\"

I consider this to be the right and proper meaning and opinion of this
text. For first of all it agrees with the reason of the holy scripture
and with the matter; secondly, against such an opinion is also the

Grammar does not, but it explains the thing still to be and some. But
because the rabbis do not know the matter, it does not help and promote
them anything that they know the words. For how foolish it is that some
of them take the word, \"It will be removed,\" as if Adam had meant to
say, \"You will be able to lift up the face that has now fallen and been
disguised. Now and then, even the new teachers paint such foolish
glances, although we should be grateful to them for their faithful work
in giving the text grammatically, even though theology is needed that
judges and teaches rightly about things alone.

**But do not let her have her way, but rule over her.**

Some have very foolishly tried to force this saying, as if free will
could be proven with it; although it is clear that Adam does not think
that Cain can do this, but only admonishes him and commands him to do
it. But it does not follow that we can immediately do what we are
commanded. The lust of sin, he says, is with you, that is, as Paul says
Rom. 7:5: \"Sin is in your members\"; item Gal. 5:17.\"The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit\": but thou shalt not be condemned because thou
feelest sin in thee: but if thy sin offend thee, be thou master of it by
faith, and let it not have dominion over thee, lest thou perish: as Paul
also commandeth Rom. 8:13, that the works of the flesh should be put to
death by the Spirit.

\(105\) Therefore this saying is for us to learn from it how the
Christian\'s life is in this flesh, namely, that it is an eternal battle
of the spirit against sin. Whoever is lazy and does not prepare himself
for this fight will easily be overcome. And it can be seen that Adam did
not want to preach this sermon only to warn his son to beware of future
sins, but also to comfort him with it; for he sees that the son has
become sorrowful, because he was rejected by God, and sin now lies
against him and wants to drive him to revenge. \"But be thou,\" he says,
\"of sins.

**[330L . I. RS. n. L 4.nterpretation of Genesis 4:7. 8. W. 1. 4\"-19g.
331]{.underline}**

Lord,\" you will find a gracious GOD who will forgive sin.

\(106\) And here is the word maschal, which the Lord also used above,
when he said to the woman, \"Let the man be thy master. For as he wills
there that the woman should be subject to the man, obeying him, and not
presuming to master all things, but since she will do so, the man should
have power to punish her, and forbid her such things: so also he says
here, Sin shall provoke thee, and bid thee revenge (for that is what is
said here, her lust shall be toward thee); but say thou, Sin, I will not
follow thee, and hold to thee, and be her lord. Therefore it is an
exceeding comforting admonition, that because we are no longer under sin
for the sake of the seed given, we shall be lord of sin. For Adam
combines both the fear of God and faith. Because sin is at the door, we
are to fear God, and because He is gracious and merciful, we are to
believe Him.

**Fourth Part.**

**How Cain murders his brother and is called to account for it, and how
he acts on this.**

**I.**

V. 8. **Then Cain talked with his brother Habel.**

Our translation holds that Cain said to his brother: Let us go out. But
the rabbis have also invented it, of whom I have said above how much
they are to be believed. Lyra says that Aben Ezra writes that Cain told
his brother how severely he was punished by the Lord. But who would
believe that which has no testimony from Scripture? Therefore we retain
the opinion that the Scriptures point to, namely, that now that Cain has
been rejected, he gives way to his anger, and over and above the fact
that he sinned before, he now also adds this and despises his parents
and God\'s word, thinking thus: \"To me, as a firstborn, the promised
seed should rightly belong; but the loose and despised Abel, the
firstborn, should have the promised seed.

is preferred to me by the divine prestige after the fire from heaven has
burned and consumed his sacrifice. What do you want me to do? I will
cover and conceal my anger until I see a convenient opportunity to take
revenge on him.

Therefore I understand these words: \"Cain talked with his brother\", so
that Cain did not let his anger against Abel be noticed, but behaved
towards him as a brother, talked with him, dealt with him, as he was
well satisfied with the divine judgment. As we have a similar example of
Saul, that he showed himself friendly to David, and said 1 Sam. 24, 21:
\"I know that you will become king after me\", but meanwhile he thinks
how David might be killed and how this might be prevented. In the same
way Cain may have spoken to Abel: I see that you are chosen by the Lord,
therefore I grant you such grace and blessing. For so do hypocrites,
giving good words and offering themselves for great friendship, until
they have occasion to do harm.

109 And that it has this opinion here, the circumstances prove. For do
you not think that if Adam and Eve could have had some suspicion of this
murder, they would have punished Cain and kept him from it; or would
have taken Abel away and helped him out of danger? But because they see
Cain behaving differently and talking to Abel in a friendly manner, as
if he were a brother, they think there is no danger and that their son
will comply with his father\'s admonition. And this pretense also
deceived Abel: for if he had worried about it before his brother, he
would have fled, as Jacob flees when he fears Esau\'s wrath. What makes
Jerome believe the rabbis and say that Cain quarreled with his brother?

Thus Cain is an image and figure of all murderers and hypocrites who
murder the pious under a godly and good pretense. That is why he is
possessed by the devil, keeps his anger secret, waits for the
opportunity and talks kindly to Abel, as his dear brother, so that he
can attack him the sooner without displeasure.

**[332 \" n.\"-\"-interpretation of I Moses 4, 8. W. i, 4ss-sos.
333]{.underline}**

\(111\) Therefore this text belongs to teach us how murderers and
hypocrites are accustomed to behave and to give confession. For this is
certainly how it is: every Cain speaks brotherly to Abel, as one brother
to another. Again, every Abel believes Cain as his brother, and is thus
beaten to death, and the pious parents are also deceived. So now the
pope and bishops speak and counsel much about the peace and unity of the
church; but whoever does not understand the contradiction in their
suggestions is truly deceived. For it is true, as the 28th Psalm v. 3.
says: \"The wicked and evil-doers speak kindly to their neighbor, and
have evil in their heart\"; for the nature of all hypocrites is this,
that they lead a good appearance, speak kindly, pretend to be humble,
patient, sweet, give alms, and yet their heart is full of murderous and
poisonous suggestions.

Therefore we should learn to know Cain, and be most careful of him when
he speaks in a friendly and brotherly manner, as with his brother; as
now our adversaries, pope and bishops, speak with us, because they act
as if they were serious about the unity of the church and seek
comparisons of doctrine. But if they could have a convenient opportunity
to fall upon us, to rave and rage, you would probably hear otherwise.
For in their little pot nothing boils so surely as death, and under
their kind and good words lies hidden all harmful poison.

**And it came to pass, as they were in the field, that Cain rose up
against his brother Habe, and slew him.**

Here is the gloss of such kind words. Cain was admonished by his father
in God\'s stead to beware of future sins and not to doubt that God would
be kind and merciful and forgive his past sins. But what does he do? He
despises both of these things and indulges in his sin, as all wicked
people do; for Solomon, Proverbs 18:3, rightly says: \"When the wicked
man comes to the depth of sin, he despises his sins.

but shame and scorn overtake him.\"

Nowadays our ministry cannot be accused. We teach, exhort, plead,
rebuke, and try in many ways to bring people from security to the fear
of God: but the world opposes it like a wild beast, continues in
security, and follows not God\'s word, but its lusts, which it wants to
disguise with a good appearance. And how it happened to the prophets and
apostles in this case, we have before our eyes and our own experience
teaches us. For although our adversaries are so often admonished and
convinced, and know themselves well that they are wrong, they
nevertheless do not desist from this murderous hatred against us.

Therefore learn here what a hypocrite is, namely, one who pretends to
serve God and his neighbor, yet does nothing less; but hinders and
destroys the service of God and strangles his brother. For all false
friendliness and dissimulation goes to the end that it may have the
better opportunity to do harm. For if Abel had been so hardened in his
wrath, and had been so devilishly angry, he would have thought for his
life, and would have fled. But because Cain does not notice any of them,
but speaks kindly to him, as he had done before, Abel is corrupted
before he has any danger.

No doubt Abel, seeing that Cain had pressed upon him in earnest, would
have pleaded with him and admonished him not to defile himself with such
a sin. But because Cain\'s heart was possessed by the devil, he did not
ask for his brother\'s plea or entreaty; but just as he had previously
despised his father\'s faithful admonition, so he also despised his
brother, even though he was already falling at his feet.

117 All of this teaches us what cruel tyranny the devil still practices
daily in human nature, which he has previously defiled and burdened
through sin; as Paul therefore calls us Ephesians 2:3, \"children of
wrath. 2, 3 \"children of wrath\". And 2 Tim. 2, 26. he says that we are
caught in the snares of the devil, to his will. For if we

**[334 \".n.\"-\".Interpretationof I Moses4, 8. S. D.i,sm-\"\".
335]{.underline}**

If we are nothing more than men, that is, if we do not keep faith with
the blessed seed, we are all like Cain and lack nothing more than
opportunity. For if our nature is left without the Holy Spirit, it is
led and driven by the evil spirit, so that Cain was driven. Now if there
should be in some men so much ability or free will that they could
withstand the power of the devil, then such gifts should certainly have
been in Cain, to whom the first-birth and the promise of the blessed
seed were especially due. But it is the same with all: where our nature
is not helped by the spirit of God, it cannot sustain itself. Why do we
praise so many futile things of free will? Now follows another peculiar
text:

**II.**

**V. 9 Then said the LORD unto Cain, Where is thy brother Habel? And he
said: I know not; shall I be my brother\'s keeper?**

Oh, dear God, how far poor human nature deteriorates when it is driven
by the devil! Cain has now committed a death stroke, and perhaps the
slain Abel has lain unburied for several days. Now when Cain comes home
to his parents at the usual time, but Abel is absent, they become
worried and say to Cain: \"You are here, but where is Abel? you come
home, but he is absent; the cattle go without their shepherd: therefore
say where he is? Here Cain becomes angry, and answers with little
reverence, \"I know not; am I then set over my brother as keeper?\"

119\] And it happens to him what happens to all the wicked, namely, that
they accuse and blame themselves the most when they want to excuse
themselves; as Christ also said in Luc. 19:22: \"From your words you
will be judged, you servant of a fool. Thus the heathen have a fine
saying: A liar must be careful, even though they have understood nothing
of God\'s judgment and conscience, but have relied solely on experience
in worldly affairs.

must judge and speak. For it is true that liars put themselves in much
danger, and often speak against themselves in such a way that they can
be proven to be lying in their own words. Therefore the Germans say in
the proverb that lies are a fruitful thing; for one lie gives birth to
seven others, so that one must feed and adorn the first one. Now it is
impossible that the conscience should not once come out and betray
itself, if not in words, then with gestures; as countless examples
prove. But I will only mention one here.

In Thuringia there is a small town on the Orla, called Neustadt, where a
whore strangled her own child, which she had given birth to secretly,
and threw it into a pond. Now the matter comes before the authorities,
who are simple-minded people and know no more convenient way to get to
the bottom of such a deed than this: They summoned all the virgins in
the town to the town hall and questioned each of them, since they could
easily sense and note from the speeches and gestures of the others that
they were innocent of it, except for one who had committed the deed.
Since the one who had committed this evil deed had been summoned, she
did not wait until she was asked, but soon came forward, made a great
noise and said that she was innocent of such a deed; from this she soon
became suspected by the authorities that she did not have to be so
innocent, because she had apologized so highly before all the others.
They therefore had her seized by the guards, whereupon she soon
confessed that she had strangled the child. Such examples happen a lot
every day, as people make themselves suspect with many excuses and
accuse and betray themselves. For it is true, as has been said above,
that sin rests, but at the door.

But Cain thinks he is excused because he says he was not appointed as
his brother\'s keeper. But what else does he do, because he calls his
brother, but that he is not his brother\'s keeper?

**[336 \". ii, s-ii. Interpretation of Genesis 4:9. w i, \"s-sos.
337]{.underline}**

he confesses that he should be his guardian? Doesn\'t he also accuse
himself of being a stranger against his brother, also gives the parents
this suspicion that they worry that there must have been a murder,
because Abel is nowhere to be found? In paradise Adam also apologized
and blamed Eve. But Cain\'s excuse is much more foolish here. For in
excusing his sin, he does nothing but make two sins out of one, whereas
a sincere confession of sins obtains grace and overcomes wrath.

In the history of St. Martin, we read that when he had absolved some
great and great sinners at one time, the devil punished him and asked,
\"Why is he doing this? Then St. Martin answered him: Why should he not
do it? He would have absolved him if he had said from his heart that he
was sorry and repented that he had sinned against the Son of God and
asked for mercy. But the devil does not do that, but he insists on his
sin and defends it.

This father of lies is followed by Cain and all hypocrites, who either
deny or excuse their sin; therefore they cannot come to forgiveness. For
we see at home in our houses that when one has sinned and still wants to
excuse and defend himself, the wrath becomes greater and greater. For if
the wife, children, or servants have done something and have sinned, and
still deny it, the father of the house becomes much more angry; but
since the sin is confessed, it is either forgiven, or some of the
punishment is lessened. Now this is really the way of hypocrites, that
they cover up or deny their sin and strangle the innocent under a holy
pretense.

Here let us see how the sins increase and follow one another. First,
Cain sins with his presumption and unbelief that he is superior to the
firstborn, thinking that God will be pleased with him because of his
merit. This hope and glory of his own righteousness is followed by envy
and hatred against his brother, after he has certain signs that he is
preferred to him. This envy and hatred is followed by hypocrisy.

and lies, that he promises his brother, whom he wants to have dead,
friendly, so that he makes him the more secure. Hypocrisy is followed by
death; death is followed by the fact that he still wants to excuse the
sin. The last degree, which soon follows, is despair, which is finally
the heavy fall from heaven into hell.

Although Adam and Eve do not deny their sin in paradise, they confess it
very weakly and coldly, and blame it one on the other, Adam on Eve, Eve
on the serpent. Cain, however, goes even further; for he not only does
not confess the death blow, but also lets himself be told that his
brother is none of his business, that he should look after him and take
care of him. Thus he sufficiently shows that his heart is turned away
from his brother. Because Adam and Eve therefore confess their sin, even
though coldly, they are forgiven and are punished more easily; Cain,
however, because he so stubbornly denies, is rejected and falls into
despair. Our Cainites, popes, bishops and cardinals also have to provide
themselves with such a judgment, who, although they strive day and night
for murder and death, still speak like their father Cain, they know
nothing about it.

In common parlance one says: What do the Romans care that the Greeks
die? For we think that no danger concerns us but our own. But how is
this consistent with God\'s command that we all live among ourselves as
brothers? Therefore Cain accuses himself harshly with this one, saying
that his brother is none of his business. If he had said to his father,
\"Alas, I have strangled him, and now I am sorry; punish me as you
will,\" counsel would have been found. But because he denies the sin and
does not want to accept his brother against God\'s commandment, his sin
is increased and there remains no hope of grace.

\(127\) And Moses has put these words with special diligence as a
testimony and memorial to all hypocrites, whom he describes masterfully
and shows how horribly they are seized by the devil and embittered
against God, his word and church. For this murderer, Cain, did not have
enough of it, that he

**[338 L ri. 11-1!?. Interpretation of Genesis 4:9. W. I, SVS-S1V.
339]{.underline}**

had slain his brother against God\'s commandment, but he continued in
sin, and when God asked him about his brother, he was also angry with
him. But I say, therefore, that God asked him, that though Adam spoke
thus to his son, yet he did it by divine authority and by the Holy
Spirit. But is this not a kind word in such an abominable sin: \"Where
is thy brother Habet?\" Nor does the hypocrite and murderer answer so
defiantly and arrogantly that he says he does not know, and is still
angry at being spoken to about it. For such is the word of a
stiff-necked spirit that is angry against God.

To this sin he adds a worse one. For when he is to be accused of the
murder he committed, he goes to accuse God and wrangles with Him,
saying, \"Am I set up as my brother\'s keeper? He also honors neither
God nor his father. For he does not say, \"Lord, I do not know;\" he
does not say, \"Father, have you made me a guardian over him?\" for that
would have been a sign of reverence toward God or his father; but he
answers defiantly, as if he were the Lord himself, and makes it publicly
known that it displeases him to be spoken to and asked by the one who
had the power to do it.

This is the right painting of all hypocrites, who are still very
stiff-necked and hopeful in public sins and yet want to be taken for the
holy of holies; they do not want to yield to God and His word when He
punishes, but oppose Him, quarrel with Him and excuse their sin; as the
51st Psalm v. 6 also says that God is judged by men, but in the end He
remains righteous. Such a stubbornness of the hypocrites Moses wanted to
depict here.

But what is the result of such presumption? Namely, that he accuses and
blames himself most severely by excusing himself too much; as Christ
Luc. 19, 22. also says: \"From your words I judge you, you rascal.\" For
the same servant, wishing to be esteemed holy and pious, said vv. 24,
25: \"Lord, I knew that thou art a hard man; thou reapest where thou
didst not sow; therefore thou art a hard man.

I have hidden my penny.\" How could this servant have accused himself
more harshly? Just as Christ turns these words against him. This is the
wisdom of the Holy Spirit.

131\. But these examples serve us not to fight against God; but if you
find in your conscience that you are guilty, beware of it with great
diligence, lest you quarrel either with God or man, excusing yourself
and defending your sin; but do thus to Him: If God holds and aims his
spear at you, do not turn away or run away from him, but rather have
recourse to him with humble confession of your sin and ask for mercy,
and he will stop and spare you. On the other hand, since he comes so
much closer to you and is so much more hostile to you, so much further
do you dare to flee from him by denying and excusing sin. Therefore,
nothing is better, nor more certain, than to come before God with
confession of sins; for in this way it happens that because God wins and
overcomes, we also overcome through Him.

This is not what Cain and the hypocrites do, but when God turns his
spear against them, not only do they not humble themselves and ask for
forgiveness, but they also hold a spear against God, as Cain does here.
He does not say, \"Lord, I confess that I have slain my brother, forgive
me for it;\" but regardless of the fact that he is to be blamed, he
blames God and says, \"Have I been set up as a guardian over my brother?
But what else does he accomplish with this defiance, but that he freely
confesses that he asks nothing according to this commandment Deut.
19:18: \"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself\"; item, according to
this Matt. 7:12: \"Do not do unto others as you would not have them do
unto you.\" For this law is not only written in the Ten Commandments,
but is also written in the hearts of all men; nor does Cain fight
against it, and testifies himself that he does not ask anything about
it, but despises it.

133 Therefore Cain is an image and an example of a man who is not of
simple wickedness, but of deep and great wickedness, namely, who is

**[3402 . n, IS-IS. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 9. W. 1. 810-61.\"
341]{.underline}**

is a bloodhound and yet a hypocrite and wants to be considered holy; he
also wants to accuse God himself rather than be considered the one to be
accused. This is what all hypocrites do, blaspheme God and crucify His
Son, and yet they want to be righteous. For when they have committed
death, blasphemy and all kinds of sins, they seek how they can excuse
and cover them up. But in this way they give themselves away and are
condemned by their own judgment.

Thus, because Cain wants to be too pure, he stains himself most ugly and
thinks he is doing well by saying, \"Shall I take care of my brother?
But with this very answer he accuses himself most shamefully. So that in
every way, as Hilarius says, ungodly nature and foolishness are
together. For if Cain had been as wise as he is wicked, he would have
excused himself much in another way. But now, because God so ordains
that ungodly and foolish must be with one another, he accuses himself.
And for this reason it is easy to defend the truth against the
adversaries. For just as Cain bears witness to himself with words and
actions that he does not respect his brother, but is an enemy to him, so
they also reveal their ungodly nature in many ways.

Therefore, great and important things, from which much can be learned,
are held up to us here, namely, that God does not allow hypocrites to
remain hidden for long, but forces them to make themselves known when
they think and deal with how they can cleverly conceal and cover their
hypocrisy and sin.

But Moses is not of so many words in describing such things as the
pagans, who often decorate and adorn an argument or argument in this and
that way. Thus we also learn that no human eloquence can paint or reach
the concerns and emotions of the heart, and it often happens that with
many words one makes an emotion that one wants to describe darker and
smaller than it is in itself. That is why Moses leads a different way
and shows whole heaps of arguments with few words.

137 For above (v. 8) he said: \"It happened while they were in the
field. With these words he indicates that the murderer Cain had seen on
this occasion how he could make himself over his brother if he were
alone; so the circumstances indicate sufficiently that Abel will not
have been idle at that time. For he was in the field, doing the work
that his father had given him to do. Here Moses also shows that the
parents did not worry about any danger. For though they feared at first
that Cain\'s anger might break out into greater sin, yet Cain, with his
good words and false kindness, had brought it about that they could have
no further evil suspicion of him. For if they had had some suspicion of
him, they would certainly not have let Abel go to the field alone, but
would have given him his sisters, of whom he would undoubtedly already
have had several; or the parents themselves would have stayed with him
and by their reputation would have encouraged such an atrocious deed. I
have also said above that Abel was therefore secure in his heart and
never thought about it; otherwise he would have fled if he had suspected
something bad about his brother. But when he hears that Cain is well
pleased with God\'s judgment and is pleased with his honor, he does his
work in the field without worry or fear.

138\. But which speaker could sufficiently state here that Moses says
with one word that Cain has rebelled against his brother? One finds
certainly now and then many horrible words, so that one expresses and
indicates cruel deeds; but how can Cain\'s misdeed be painted more
horrible and more terrible, than it stands here painted? \"He rose up,\"
says Moses, \"against his brother,\" as if he wanted to say: He was
Cain\'s brother, with whom he had also been brought up and had lived and
dealt with until then. But Cain not only forgets such friendship and
fellowship, but he also forgets that he and his brother Abel had lain
under one heart. So he also does not consider what a heartache he caused
to his parents with a

**[3422 ii. 15-17. Interpretation of Genesis 4:9. W. i, sis-si\".
343]{.underline}**

Nor should it be considered that this was his brother, who had never
done him any harm. For although Abel had received the praise that he had
made a pleasant sacrifice, Cain knew well that Abel had not sought it,
nor had he asked for it, but that it had been done by God. Finally, he
did not consider himself, that after he had been in the highest favor
and esteem of his parents, he would easily lose it with this misdeed and
fall into the greatest anger and displeasure.

One reads of a painter who had painted the history of Iphigenia, how she
was slaughtered and sacrificed. And after he had painted everyone who
stood by and watched, with such a gesture that one could see that such a
thing went to his heart and had compassion, he had covered up her
father\'s head, which had also been at this spectacle, to indicate that
in such a case, one could not show the parents\' great sorrow and
affect, nor paint it.

I think that Moses did the same here, because he reports the history of
how such an atrocious deed happened with only one word: \"Cain was
enraged. How much essence should Cicero or Livius make of it, who would
describe all circumstances in detail: namely, how Cain would have been
enraged, and his brother would have been frightened, lamented, wrung his
hands before him and begged for mercy? Nor would that be enough to say
about it. Therefore Moses is right to describe such a thing, of which
one cannot say enough, only a little, and with few words he gives
instructions to think about such things, which are obscured and obscured
with many vain words, like a beautiful face with painted color.

So also, when he goes on to say, \"He struck him dead,\" he is not
talking about a common death blow, as we see that people sometimes do
harm and murder for little cause. For such death-slayers are frightened
and grieved soon after the deed is done; they also feel sorry and see
how the devil has blinded them.

But Cain is not frightened, nor does he repent, but denies the deed.

Of such a devilish hatred of the hypocrites, which cannot be satisfied,
Christ speaks when he says John 16:2: \"Whoever kills you will think he
is doing God a service\": how the priests and kings flooded Jerusalem
and filled it with the blood of the prophets, and triumphed over it, as
if they had done it well, because they considered it a zeal for the law
and the temple of God.

143\) Such tyranny is now also practiced by the pope and bishops, who
are not satisfied by the fact that they have so often banished us and
shed our blood, but they also want to eradicate our name and destroy it
from the land of the living; just as the 137th Psalm v. 7. points to
such hatred and resentment: \"Those who say, \'Clean off, clean off,\'
even to their own soil. Such is a devilish and not human hatred and
resentment. For human anger and resentment diminishes with time, and at
least ceases when a man has avenged himself and cooled his temper: but
such Pharisaic resentment daily increases and grows stronger; for it is
cloaked with a good appearance of piety and godliness.

Therefore Cain is the father of all such murderers, who kill the saints,
and know not the measure nor the manner of their wrath, because there
remaineth a little hernia of them; as the Lord Christ\'s example also
showeth. For of this there is no doubt, Cain will have hoped to keep the
honor of the firstborn, if only Abel were suppressed and killed. In the
same way, the wicked think, they will also promote their tyranny; but
when they find that their hope has been in vain, they fall into despair.

What do we think now, what a miserable being, lamenting and sighing will
have been found, since such an atrocious deed will have come before the
parents? But I will keep silent about it, because it takes a man who is
eloquent and thoughtful. But it is a great wonder that they did not soon
die of grief. For this makes all harm greater and more dreadful, that
their firstborn son, who had been well behaved

**[344n . II, 17-19. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 9. W. 1, 516-SIS.
345]{.underline}**

and good hope was upon him, had committed such a miserable and atrocious
murder.

If Adam and Eve had not received special help and consolation from God,
they would not have been able to overcome this domestic misery, for it
is such a trade that no one knows of. That is why they did not have this
consolation, to which we commonly turn in sudden and unforeseen
accidents, namely, that the same thing had happened to others, and we
were not the only ones to whom it happened 2c. For Adam and Eve at that
time had no more than these two sons; although I believe they also had
daughters; therefore they had none of the examples of other people, of
which we have many in all kinds of accidents.

Who would doubt that Satan did not increase and increase the heartache
of the first parents with a new temptation? For so they will have
thought: Behold, this is the fault of our sins, that in paradise we
wished to be like God, and through sin we became like the devil: this
also happened to our son, whom alone we loved and held great, but the
other, who was pious, we regarded as nothing in comparison with him. We
also hoped that he would be the one to crush the serpent\'s head, and
behold, he himself was crushed by the serpent, yes, he also became like
the serpent, because he became a murderer. But where does this come
from? Is it not true that it comes from the fact that he is our son and
born of us, and we are also born of sin? Therefore, this misery has come
from our flesh and from our sin.

Therefore it is to be believed, and is also shown by the order and
number of years, that the afflicted parents will have been so frightened
and afflicted by this fall that they will have abstained from
childbearing for a long time. For it can be seen that Cain, at the time
he committed the murder, was at his thirty years, under or over; between
that time they may have had several daughters.

have. For when it is said that Cain took a wife, he undoubtedly took one
of his sisters. And he himself says afterwards v. 14, 15: \"Whoever
finds me will strike me dead, but the Lord made a sign on him that no
one should strike him dead. Therefore it is believable that Adam had
more children at that time. But that only these two, Cain and Abel, are
mentioned, is for the sake of this excellent and remarkable history;
item, because these were the first and foremost. For I fully believe
that Adam and Eve were very fruitful for the first thirty years and
begat many children. One also finds something of Adam\'s daughters
Calmana and Dibora; I do not know, however, whether those who write it
are also to be believed. Since one sees from Moses that Seth was born a
long time after this death blow, it seems to me to be quite credible
that the first parents, Adam and Eve, were so much frightened by this
house disaster and terrible misfortune and were grieved by it that they
abstained from childbearing for a long time. All this Moses does not
report at all, but only recently indicates that the reader should have
reason to further think about and contemplate this excellent history,
which he hardly sketches with very few words and indicates from afar.

Now I come back to the text. Cain is evil and a mischievous man, and yet
he is regarded and respected by his parents as a special gift of God. On
the other hand, Abel, according to his name, is not considered anything
by them, but before God he is a righteous, holy man; as Christ also told
him in Matth.

23, 35 and calls him the \"righteous Abel\". But Cain cannot stand this
divine judgment and not only thinks that he could satisfy and quench his
resentment if he had struck his brother dead, but also thinks of keeping
the firstborn in this way. But he is still far from these thoughts that
he sins by this death blow. Because he is the firstborn, he thinks he is
free to do so and is well justified in striking him to death, as I
consider it, not with iron weapons.

**[346u . i\"-\" Interpretation of Genesis 4:9. W. i. sis-sss.
347]{.underline}**

(for these were not yet in use at that time), but rather with a
shillelagh or stone.

After the deed is done, he is satisfied and thinks that it can remain
secret and concealed, because the body is hidden and out of sight; which
he either buried himself or threw into some water, so that he could be
all the more certain that it could not be found by the parents. Because
Abel stayed away a little longer than he was used to and did not come
home, the Holy Spirit instructed Adam to ask Cain in these words:
\"Where is your brother Habel? And here it comes to pass that Adam\'s
prophecy and preaching, of which we have just heard, comes true, that
sin rests at the door. But Cain thinks that he has put his sin to rest
and into a hidden place. And it is so: for sin resteth, but at the door.
But who opens the door? The Lord, who awakens this sin that is at rest
and hidden, and brings it to light.

This is how it must be with all. For if you do not come first by
repentance and confess your sin to God, God comes and reveals the sin,
for He cannot suffer anyone to deny his sin. As also the 32nd Psalm v.
3. 4. says: \"Since I wanted to conceal it, my bones faded away, and my
sap dried up, as it becomes dry in summer.\" For though sin has its rest
and quietness, yet it is a rest at the door that cannot long endure nor
be hidden.

I understand that Moses says that the Lord spoke in this way, as it was
said above that Adam spoke through the Holy Spirit, as in the person of
God, which he conducted as a father against his son; therefore, this
form of the Holy Spirit to speak boasts and affirms the parents\' office
and authority, namely, that the children hear God and are obedient to
God when they hear the parents and are obedient to them. And I believe
that Adam recognized and knew from the revelation of the Holy Spirit
that Abel had been slain. For he passes judgment on a death blow, when
Cain says nothing about it, but diligently conceals and hides it.

**Fifth part.**

**How Cain is punished because of his murder.**

**I.**

153\. How do you think that Eve will have been upset when she has heard
such things? Because it is actually such a heartache, which has not been
able to say. Now this sorrow hit Adam the closest. Because he is a
father, he must officially punish his son and banish him for his sin.
For though he does not strike him dead again (for the law that murderers
should be struck dead again is not given until after this, in the ninth
chapter, since the patriarchs saw that there was much strangling and
killing), but keeps him by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit with a
sign that no one should kill him: yet it is a great punishment that is
laid upon him and all his descendants. For by reason of the curse upon
his body, he must also be cast out of the house, and driven away from
his parents, brothers and sisters, who after him remained with the
parents, as with the church.

Now Adam could not have done this without great heartache, so Eve could
not have heard it; for father is father and son is son: therefore he
would much rather have spared him and kept him at home. As we see, the
slain are at times reconciled and made up with the friendship and
brothers of those who are slain. Here, however, there is no
reconciliation, but Cain has to be fugitive from the earth. Therefore
the parents have two kinds of sorrow and heartache. For they see that
one son is slain, but the other must be banished by God\'s judgment and
cast out from the community of the other brothers.

When I speak of the ban and the expulsion from the church, you do not
have to look at our church, which is large, wide and made of hewn
stones. For Adam\'s church or temple has been a tree or hill in the open
air, under which

**[348 N, A-W. Interpretation of Genesis 4:9, 10. \" l, WS-SA.
349]{.underline}**

they gathered together when they heard God\'s word and wanted to
sacrifice, for which they had erected and elevated altars: and God was
with them when they sacrificed or heard God\'s word, as Abel\'s example
shows. Other histories also show that the altars stood in the open air
and that sacrifices were made on them. How it would be good for many
reasons that people would still come together in a free place under
heaven, kneel there together, pray, worship, thank God, bless each other
2c.

From such a temple or church, which was not in a certain place, Cain is
cast out, and thus punished twice: first with a bodily punishment, that
the earth is \"cursed\", and the badge of a murderer is attached to him;
secondly with a spiritual punishment, that he is expelled by the ban,
just as from another paradise and church of God.

The jurists also use this text, and make great use of it, that the Lord
first inquires into the whole transaction before he passes judgment.
This means that no one is to be condemned unless the matter has been
thoroughly investigated beforehand, and the culprit has been summoned to
court and ordered to confess the crime. As it says above in Genesis 3:9
about Adam: \"And the Lord called Adam, and said, Where art thou? And
afterwards in the 11th Cap. V. 5: \"The Lord came down to see\" 2c.

But let us leave this worldly doctrine and look at the most beautiful
and theological doctrine and consolation, namely, that the Lord asks
about Abel who died. For here the resurrection of the dead is clearly
indicated; for God here testifies that He is a God of the dead Abel and
asks after the dead Abel. For from this we conclude that if there were
no one to take care of us after this life, then the slain Abel would not
have been inquired about. But now God asks about Abel as he is dead,
does not want him to be forgotten but remembered, and asks where he is.
Therefore God is a God of the dead, that is, therefore even the dead
live and have a God who provides for them and makes them blessed in one.

Another life, which is much different from this temporal life in which
the saints are troubled.

For this reason, this text should be noted, that God takes care of Abel,
who is dead, and for his sake rejects and condemns Cain, the firstborn
and the living. This is truly a great and important thing. The dead Abel
lives, and is canonized by God Himself in another life, better and more
glorious than all those whom the Pope has ever canonized. The living
Cain, however, is excommunicated and dies an eternal death. Abel\'s
death is indeed cruel and terrible, because he did not suffer death
without great agony and torture and without many tears; but nevertheless
it is in truth a salvific death, because he is now in a better life than
before. For in this temporal life we live in sins and are subject to
death; but that life is eternal and without all physical and spiritual
distress and affliction.

God does not ask about strangled sheep and dead cattle, but He asks
about dead people. Thus it follows that men have to hope for a
resurrection and have such a God who leads them out of bodily death into
eternal life and asks for their blood as a precious and valuable thing;
as the 116th Psalm v. 15 also says: \"The death of his saints is worthy
in the sight of the Lord.\"

161\. and this is the glory of the human race, acquired from the seed
that tramples the serpent\'s head. For this is the first example of this
promise, which happened to Adam and Eve, so that God would show that the
serpent does not harm Abel, even though it causes him to be strangled.
For this is it that it bites the seed of the woman in the heel, but in
biting it, its head is crushed. For God asks for the dead Abel\'s blood
for the sake of faith in the promised Seed, thus indicating that He is
His God, as the following words also indicate.

**V. 10 And he said, What hast thou done? The voice of your brother\'s
blood cried out to me from the earth.**

**\
[350 L. ii, W-W. Interpretation of Genesis 4:10. W. i, S2S-E\".
351]{.underline}**

Until now Cain\'s sin has rested at the door, and we have heard enough
how much he has tried to have rest. For when he is asked where Abel is,
he answers that he does not know, and becomes a liar in addition to
being a murderer. But the same answer shows sufficiently that these
words were said by Adam himself and not by the divine majesty. For he
thinks that his father, as a man, would not know about this sin, which
he could not think of the divine majesty. Therefore, if God had spoken
to him, he would have answered differently. But now he thinks that he is
dealing with a man alone, he denies the deed and says: \"I do not know.
For how many dangerous ways can a man perish? One is eaten by wild
animals, another drowns, the third perishes in another way.

Therefore Cain never thinks that his father should suspect him of having
slain his brother. But he cannot deceive the Holy Spirit who is in Adam.
Therefore he accuses him publicly in the person of God, saying, \"What
have you done?\" As if to say, \"Why should you deny the deed? You will
not be able to deceive God, who has revealed this to me. You think that
your brother\'s blood is now buried and covered in the earth, but it is
not covered and covered at all, but it calls out to God from the earth.
That is, I mean, to awaken and bring to light the sin that rests at the
door.

Therefore, this text is full of comfort against the murderers and
enemies of the Church. For it teaches us that our suffering, blood and
death, fills heaven and earth with their cry. That is why I believe that
Cain was so shocked and dismayed in his heart at the words of his
father, \"What have you done? For he must have thought: \"Since my
father knows about the death stroke I have committed, there is no doubt
that God, the angels, heaven and earth will also know. Where shall I
unhappy

What is the best place for me to go? Where should I go in or out?

And this still happens today to the murderers. As soon as they have
committed the deed, they are so frightened and troubled in their
conscience that they freeze and are dismayed and think that heaven and
earth have changed and do not know where to flee to; as the poets also
speak of Orestes, that he has become insane from fear. Such a terrible
thing is the calling of blood and evil conscience.

This also happens in other grievous sins, and those who are afflicted
with sadness of spirit feel that they are just as frightened, for they
make themselves believe that all creatures have changed. When they talk
to people they know and hear them, they think that their voices and
gestures have changed; wherever they turn their eyes, they think that
everything is black and horrible. Such a cruel and terrible beast is an
evil conscience. And where such people are not particularly comforted by
God and raised up again, they must take their own lives from despair,
fear and impatience over their pain.

But Moses speaks briefly here, as he is wont to do, but in such a way
that one could not speak of it more expansively. And this is first of
all a fine figure, that he assigns a \"voice\" to the blood, which fills
heaven and earth with its cry. For how can this be a small or little
voice that God hears from the earth above in heaven? Therefore, since
Abel was gentle and quiet before, when he was still alive and endured
violence, now, when he has died and is buried in the earth, he becomes
impatient about the injustice; and since he was not allowed to speak a
word against his brother before, now he cries out indignantly, and makes
God angry with his cry, so that he has to descend from heaven and
denounce and punish the murderer. Therefore Moses also needs a complete
word here. He does not say: \"The voice of your brother speaks\", but
\"shouts\"; like the crier does, who calls the people together with a
loud voice.

168 But all these things are written, as I have said above, that

**[Z52L . II, 25-27.interpretation of Genesis 4, 10. W. 1, 5S\"-S3I.
353]{.underline}**

We see that our God is merciful and loves his saints, takes care of them
and asks for them: but again he is angry with the murderers, is hostile
to them and wants to punish them. And such comfort is especially
necessary. For when we have to suffer, we think that God has forgotten
us and asks nothing more about us: for if he would take care of us, we
think, such suffering and misfortune would not befall us. And Abel might
also have thought: God does not ask anything about me, otherwise he
would not have let me be strangled so miserably by my brother.

But see what follows. Doesn\'t God take care of Abel more and more
diligently than he could have taken care of himself? For how could Abel
have avenged himself on his brother while he was alive, than God avenges
him now that he is dead? And how could he have held such terrible
judgment over his brother while he was alive, as God holds over him
here? For now the blood of Abel cries out, who was gentle and quiet
during his life; item, Abel now accuses his brother before God that he
is a killer, since he concealed and tolerated all his brother\'s
violence during his life. For who betrays Cain that he has strangled his
brother more than, as the text says, \"the blood\" of Abel, which fills
the ears of God and men with constant cries until they are displeased?

This, I say, is very comforting, especially to us who have to suffer all
kinds of persecution from the pope and godless princes for the sake of
doctrine; for they have exercised the highest power and tyranny over us:
thus, not in Germany alone, but also in other places throughout Europe,
they have raged against devout Christians: still the whole pabstry makes
a joke of such sin and despises it, yes, still considers it worship.
Therefore it still rests at their door, but will be revealed in its
time. For the blood of the fine martyr Leonhard Kayser, shed in Bavaria,
is not silent. The blood of Heinrich von Zütphen, shed in Dietmarn, is
also silent. Likewise, the blood of D. Antonius, an Englishman, whom the
English cruelly and unheard of strangled, is not silent. That I

Others, of whom there are many thousands, let alone those who were not
so famous because of their name, have also confessed their faith and
become martyrs. The blood of all such will not be silent, but God will
come down from heaven in his time and bring judgment on earth, which
will be so heavy and unbearable for the enemies of the gospel.

Therefore, we must not think that God will not respect our blood; nor
must we think that He will not take care of our suffering; but He will
also count our tears in His sackcloth, as the 56th Psalm v. 9 speaks of.
Thus the cry of the blood of the righteous pervades the heavens and the
clouds until it comes to the throne of God and drives him to avenge the
blood of the righteous, Ps. 79:10, 11.

172\. But as these things are written for our consolation, so they are
written for the terror of our adversaries. For what do you think is more
terrible for tyrants to hear than that the blood of those they have
slain should cry out and constantly accuse them before God? God is
long-suffering, especially now that the end of the world has come.
Therefore, sin rests for a long time and vengeance does not follow
immediately. But it is certainly true that this sin enrages God the
most, so it will never go unpunished.

I do not believe, however, that this judgment on Cain was passed soon
after the first day, but that it will have taken several days. For God
is long-suffering by nature, and waits to see if sinners will repent;
but for this reason He does not always remit punishment, for He is a
righteous judge of the dead and the living, as we confess in our faith.
We also see that he holds this judgment soon in the beginning of the
world over these two brothers. The living murderer he judges and
condemns, but the dead Abel he justifies. He expels Cain and drives him
into such fear that he thinks the whole world is too narrow for him; for
he feels that he is nowhere safe after he sees that God wants to avenge
such blood. But again he lets Abel be safe and have good space

**[354 L.H, 27-W. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 10. II. W. I, S31-SS4.
355]{.underline}**

not only on earth, but also in heaven.

How can we still doubt that God counts and considers the sufferings and
afflictions of His own in His heart? that He also misses our tears and
writes them on diamond tablets, from which the enemies of the church can
in no way erase them, unless they repent righteously. Manasseh was the
greatest tyrant and the most horrible persecutor of the pious, 2 Kings
21:1 ff; therefore he could not pay for such sins with his misery and
imprisonment; but since he recognizes his sin and repents righteously,
God shows him mercy, 2 Chronicles 33:12, 13. 33, 12. 13. Thus Paul, Acts
9, 6., so also popes and bishops have this one way before them, that
they recognize their sin and ask for forgiveness. If they do not do
this, God will demand the blood of the pious from their hands in wrath;
let no one doubt it.

Abel is strangled, but Cain is still alive. But, dear God, what a
miserable life this is! For he would well wish that he had never been
born, because he hears that he will not only be cast out, but must also
face the vengeance of sins and death every moment. And it will be the
same for our adversaries and persecutors of the church in his time.

II\.

**V.11. And now cursed be thou upon the earth, which hath opened her
mouth, and received thy brother\'s blood at thy hands.**

So far we have heard how Cain\'s sin was revealed through Abel\'s blood
and how he was convicted of it by his father Adam. Item, that God\'s
judgment was passed on these two brothers in such a way that the one was
not only justified, but also canonized and declared a saint, as a
firstborn of this given seed; but the other, who was the firstborn, was
condemned and cast out, as the following text indicates. Now Moses
continues and tells the punishment that followed this death blow.

177 And it is first of all particularly well to note

The diligence of the Holy Spirit. For since Adam is punished above
because of sin, Adam\'s person is not cursed, but only the earth; yet
not in a bad way, but as it were an excuse is added to the earth. For it
says above, \"Cursed be the ground for your sake\"; as Paul also says in
Romans 8:20 that the creature is subject to vanity without its will. For
because it has borne sinful man, it must also, as an instrument, bear
the curse; as the sword, gold, and such like things are often cursed,
because thereby men sin. This is the most beautiful dialectic, so that
the Holy Spirit thus makes a distinction between the earth and Adam. He
puts the curse on the earth, but he preserves the person.

But here the Holy Spirit speaks differently of Cain, for he curses the
person. Why? Did the death-slayer Cain commit a greater sin than Adam
and Eve? No, but because Adam was the root, and from his blood and flesh
Christ, the blessed seed, was to be born. Therefore this seed is spared,
and for the sake of this blessed fruit the curse is taken from Adam\'s
person and placed on the earth, so that Adam suffers the curse of the
earth, but not on his person, because from his lineage Christ was to be
born.

179 Because Cain fell from this honor through sin, his person is cursed,
and it is said to him, \"Cursed be you,\" so that we may understand that
he is set apart from the honor of the promised seed, and that he should
not have such a seed in his lineage, through which the blessing should
come. Therefore he is altogether cut off and excluded from this glorious
honor of the seed to come. For Abel was now killed, therefore he could
not have children, but Adam must serve God for the rearing of children,
and after Cain is rejected, the hope of the blessed seed remains on him
alone until Seth is born to him.

180\. they are short words, but well worthy of much and diligent
consideration, that it may be said to Cain, \"Cursed be thou\"; that is,
thou art not the one of whom

**[356 8. n, 2S-31. interpretation of I Genesis 4, 11. W.I. \"U-W7.
357]{.underline}**

the blessed seed is to be hoped for. With this word Cain was
excommunicated and cut off like a branch from the trunk, so that he
could no longer hope for the honor he desired. For he desired that the
honor of blessing might come from him, but the more he desired it, the
less he obtained it. As happens to all the wicked, the more they strive
and try to do their thing, the more they fall.

181 And here there are two churches which are most vehemently opposed to
each other. One is Adam\'s and all believers\', who have the hope and
promise of the blessed seed; the other is Cain\'s, who has lost this
hope and promise through sin and cannot come back to it. For Cain\'s
whole lineage perished in the flood, so that there was not a single
prophet, not a single saint, nor a single head of the true church from
his lineage. So even with this one word, that it is said to him:
\"Cursed be you\", everything is denied and taken away from him.

But it is written: \"on earth\", which word is as it were a relief of
this terrible anger. For if he had said \"in heaven,\" he would have
completely taken away all hope of happiness from his race. Because he
says that he will be cursed on earth, he threatens him that he will be
deprived of the hope and promise of the seed; but it still happened that
some individuals from Cain\'s lineage went to Adam by the inspiration of
the Holy Spirit and were saved, as happened afterwards. For although the
Jews alone had the honor and promise of this seed (as the 147th Psalm,
v. 20, says: \"He does not do this to a Gentile\"), the Gentiles, that I
may speak thus, had the right to beg, and out of God\'s mercy received
this very benefit, which the Jews had for the sake of the truth or
promise of God.

183 Thus the Moabites and Ammonites were denied the rule of the church;
and yet there were many individuals among them who followed the religion
of the Jews.

have accepted. Thus Cain and his family were deprived of the right to
sit at table in the church, but they were neither denied nor deprived of
the right to beg for this grace. For although Cain was forbidden the
right to sit at table because of his sin, he still had the right to pick
up the pieces with his dogs if he wanted to. This is what the word
minhaadamah means, \"on the earth\".

For this reason I wanted to indicate that it seems credible that many of
Cain\'s descendants went to the holy patriarchs. But there were private
persons in the church and outside of the office and regiment, as those
who had completely lost the promise of the aebenedeieten seed, which
should be born from their body. Now it is a great thing that one loses
the promise, but nevertheless this curse is so alleviated that the right
to beg is still left to them and heaven is not denied to them, if they
would only keep to the right church.

But Cain undoubtedly undertook to prevent this in many ways. For he
established new services and invented new ceremonies, so that one would
think he was also the church. Those who therefore fell away from him and
gathered to the true church have been saved, even though they had no
hope of the glory of Christ being born from their bodies. Now we come
back to the text.

This is a strange figure of speech, that Moses speaks of the earth as of
a beast that opened its mouth and drank Abel\'s innocent blood. But how
is it that he accuses the earth in such a horrible way, which did not
give its advice? Yes, that is even more, because the earth is a good
creature of God, this happened against its will and with reluctance; as
Paul says Rom. 8, 20, that \"the creature is subject to vanity against
its will\". Answer: This is done for the terror of Adam and all his
descendants, that they should live in the fear of God and beware of
death. For Adam wants to say: Behold, the earth has opened its mouth.

**[358n . \"i-\". Interpretation of Genesis 4:11, 12. W. i, 537-540.
359]{.underline}**

and your brother\'s blood devoured, which should have devoured you
murderer. The earth is good to the pious and godly, but to the wicked it
is full of clefts. Adam speaks such horrible words to frighten and
disgrace the slayers. And there is no doubt that when Cain heard such
angry words from his father, he, like Judas, would have been so startled
and dismayed within himself that he would not have known which way to
turn. For these words: \"Who has taken your brother\'s blood from your
hands\", are horrible words and express the cruel evil of the death
stroke more clearly and distinctly than one could paint them.

V. 13: **When you build the field, he will not give you his property.**

To Adam he said above, \"The earth shall bear thee thorns and
thistles,\" but here he speaks differently, saying, \"Thou hast watered
and fertilized the earth, not with a wholesome and fruitful rain, but
with the blood of thy brother; therefore it shall bear thee less than it
bears others, because the blood which thou hast shed thereon shall
hinder its strength and capacity. This is the other part of the
punishment, namely the bodily curse, that the same earth, built by Adam
and Cain at the same time, should be more fertile for Adam and bear more
according to his work than for Cain, to whom it will not give its
ability after his work because of the blood, which hinders the earth,
which nevertheless wanted to give its fruits gladly according to its
strength and ability.

But here we must also say something of the grammar that Moses calls the
earth haadamah in this place here; but in the following saying:
\"Inactive and transient you shall be on earth\", erez stands. Now
adamah is called according to the grammar such a place or place of the
earth, which one builds and on it trees are and other plants, which
serve for the food. Erez is the name of the whole earth, whether it is
built or unbuilt. Therefore this cursing goes especially to the earth or
field, which one builds for the need and food, that where Adam carries
an ear three hundred grains, Cain,

the death-slayer, who hardly gets ten of them, so that he sees evidence
everywhere that God is hostile to bloodshed and punishes it.

**[You shall be inactive and fleeting on earth.]{.underline}**

This is the third punishment, which is still seen and nourished in all
murderers. For where they are not tolerated, they have nowhere a certain
seat, nor a certain place, and here are two words, no vanod, \"inactive
and fleeting.\" I use to distinguish between these, that no means an
uncertainty or inactivity of the place where one is; as now and the Jews
are inactive, because they have no certain nor fixed place, and must
worry every hour that they are called to wander. Nod, however, signifies
an uncertainty of the place which one desires and brings up according to
it; that if one has no certain place where one can stay, this is added,
that if one must vacate such an unstable or uncertain place, one does
not know where to go further. So that there are two punishments in one,
namely, that one cannot stay, nor know where to go, if one is driven out
of an uncertain place. Thus it is written in the 109th Psalm, v. 10:
Venoa januu banav, \"His children must go astray\", that is, they must
not find a certain place anywhere, so that if they are in Greece one
year, they must wander the other year in Italy and so on.

\(190\) How miserable the Jews are now, for they have nowhere to put
themselves. But in addition to this misery, God also imposes another on
Cain, that when he is driven out of a place and expelled, he should not
know where he will go out; that he must therefore float between heaven
and earth and sit nowhere with certainty, nor have a certain place
either for a dwelling or for a refuge.

191 Thus one sin is avenged with three kinds of punishment. Firstly,
Cain is deprived of the spiritual honor or church government, because
the promise of the sacrilegious seed, which was to be born of his
lineage, is taken away from him. Secondly, he will be deprived of the
earth; this is the house punishment. Thirdly, he will have to live in
the

**[360 s. ii.\". Interpretation of Genesis 4:12, 13. w. i, \"\"-\"s.\"
361]{.underline}**

To go astray and have no lasting place is the worldly punishment.

And yet the way to the church remains open to him, but without promise.
For if, as I have said, some of his descendants have kept to the true
church and the holy patriarchs, they have been saved. So also the
housekeeping remains for him, but without blessing; item, the police
that he can build a city and live there, but must be uncertain how long.
Therefore he is a real beggar in the church, housekeeping and police.

193 But with this punishment is this mitigation, that he is not slain
again soon for the sake of the death stroke, as the law of the death
slayers is given afterwards; but that he is given as an example to
others, that they fear God and beware of death strokes. That is enough
about how Cain sinned and what his judgment and punishment for the sin
was.

But here it is argued that the pious must suffer such curses and
punishments, but the wicked are well off. For so Paul says in 1 Cor. 4,
11, that he is unfaithful or in error and has no certain place. And so
it is with us who preach the gospel and teach the people at this time.
For we have no certain place, and must either wander about in misery, or
be provided with it every hour. It is the same with Christ, the
apostles, prophets and patriarchs.

195\. The scripture says of Jacob Gen. 25, 23: \"The greater will serve
the lesser.\" But must not Jacob be a servant, since he goes into misery
out of fear of his brother? And when he returns, he falls at his
brother\'s feet and begs him. So Isaac is the poorest beggar, and
Abraham his father goes about among the nations, and has not a foot wide
on the earth, as Stephen says, Acts 7:5. But Ishmael is the right king,
and has begotten of himself sons, who are princes in the land of Midian,
before Israel comes into the promised land. And it shall come to pass
soon after, that Cain built the city of Hanoch at the first, and out of
him came shepherds,

Many masters of works in brass and iron, singers and pipers 2c. All of
which is an indication that the punishment and cursing is wrongly
attributed to Cain and his lineage. For the right church is most
oppressed by this, since the wicked, on the other hand, enjoy happiness
and prosperity.

This affliction has not only affected the pagans, but also the saints
themselves, as the Psalms indicate in many places (Psalm 37 and 73). And
the prophets, as Jeremiah Cap. 12, 1, are often displeased when they see
that the wicked are free and free from all misfortune, but they must be
troubled and afflicted in many ways. Where then, someone might say, is
the curse of the wicked? Where is the blessing of the pious? Is not the
contradiction true? Cain is said to be unfaithful and fugitive, and yet
he first builds a city and a certain place where he can stay. But we
will answer such questions and arguments superfluously hereafter and
continue in the text now.

**Sixth part.**

**[The behavior of Cain in his punishment.]{.underline}**

**[And Cain said unto the Lord, My sin is greater than this, that it
should be forgiven me.]{.underline}**

197 With this text Moses caused a lot of trouble to the grammarians and
rabbis, because they work themselves to pieces here and torture this
text whimsically. Lyra relates several opinions that have interpreted it
affirmatively, as if Cain had said in despair that his sins were greater
than that they should be forgiven him; as we have also interpreted it.
And Augustine also kept this understanding; therefore he says: Cain, you
are lying, because God\'s mercy is greater than all sinners\' distress
and misery.

The rabbis, however, interpret it as a question to be answered in the
negative, as if Cain had asked himself: Is my sin greater than that it
could be forgiven me? But should this opinion

**[362 n, SU-8S. Interpretation of Genesis 4:13. W. l. V4L-S47.
363]{.underline}**

If Cain had not recognized his sin, but had also excused it and defied
God, it would follow that Cain had not recognized his sin, but had also
excused it and defied God, as if he had interpreted such a punishment to
him, which he had not deserved. Thus the rabbis almost everywhere
falsify the meaning in the Scriptures. Therefore I begin to be hostile
to them, and admonish those who read them that they may read them with
diligent consideration and judgment. For though they have received some
things by tradition from the fathers, yet they have falsified them
manifold, wherefore they have often deceived Jerome. And the poets have
not made the world so full of fables, as the godless Jews have made the
Scriptures with false interpretations. Therefore it costs us no small
effort that we may have the text pure and free from their glosses.

This is where this error comes from, that they are grammarians, but they
do not understand what is said in the text, that is, they are not
theologians. Therefore they must be absent and torture both themselves
and the Scriptures. For how is it possible that one should judge rightly
of unknowable things? Now the whole matter in this place is this, that
Cain is accused in his conscience. And this is such a judgment and
accusation that no godless person, not even the devil himself, can bear
it; as St. James says in chapter 2, v. 19, that even the devils tremble
before God, and Peter says in 2 Epist. 2, 11, that even the angels, who
are mighty in strength and power, cannot bear the judgment that God will
pass on the blasphemers. So also Manasseh says in his prayer, v. 4, 5:
\"Before your wrath everyone is terrified.\"

Such sayings and examples show sufficiently that there was not so much
courage in Cain at this judgment that he should have laid himself
against God and entered into speech and answer with Him. For God is an
almighty fighter and directs the first storm at the heart and seizes the
conscience. The rabbis know and understand nothing of this: therefore
they speak of this judgment of God as if it happened before men, either
denying the wrongdoing or excusing it. But God\'s

Judgment is another thing, in which you are either justified or
condemned from your words, as Christ says Matth. 12, 37.

Therefore Cain recognizes his sin, although it does not hurt him as much
as the punishment that is laid upon him. It is therefore an affirmative
statement, which testifies to the frightening despair. And that he thus
speaks out of despair is also indicated by the fact that he does not add
a word that indicates reverence, and does not say: Oh dear God, or, dear
Father, my sin is greater, but his conscience is so distraught and
burdened with terror and despair that he cannot think whether there is
still hope of grace and forgiveness. Thus the epistle to the Hebrews
says of Esau, Cap. 12, 16, 17: \"He sold his firstborn for the sake of
food. But know that afterwards, when he wanted to inherit the blessing,
he was rejected; for he found no room for repentance, though he sought
it with tears.\" So Cain also feels the punishment here, and it hurts
him more than the sin; as all do who fall into despair.

These two words, mineso and avon, give much work to the grammarians.
Jerome gives the text thus: \"My sin is greater than that I can earn
forgiveness.\" But Sanctes Pagninus, a learned and, as he regards me,
also diligent grammarian, gives it thus: \"My punishment is greater than
that I may bear it.\" But with the way we would make a martyr out of
Cain and a sinner out of Abel. I have said above of the word nasa, that
when it stands by the word \"sin,\" it means to lift up or take away
sin; as we speak in our common way, to forgive sin, and forgiveness of
sins. Thus Psalm 32:1, Aschre neeu pescha, literally reads, \"Blessed is
he that is freed from iniquity or sin.\" This we say, \"Blessed is he
whose sin is forgiven,\" or, that sin is removed; as Isa. 33:24: \"The
people that dwell therein,\" nesu avon, that is, \"their sin shall be
removed and forgiven.\"

203\. the other word avoni is derived from the word anah, which means:
to suffer hardship or misery; as Zech. 9:9: \"Your king is coming.

**[364 L. n, 38-10. interpretation of I Moses 4, 13. 14. W. 1, 547-sso.
365]{.underline}**

to thee poor\", or miserable and afflicted, since our (the Latin)
translation has: mitis, meek; as Psalm 132, 1: \"Remember, O Lord, David
and all his meekness\", that is \"suffering\". This is also the origin
of the word humilitas, lowliness, which Mary uses in her song, Luc. 1,
48. This gave Sancti cause to translate the word avon: punitio,
punishment, although here it means misdeed or sin, as in many other
places of the holy scriptures; as also the word levare, to raise, which
stands next to it, indicates.

204 Thus we see that the grammarians, who are nothing more than
grammarians, and do not understand theological matters, have their
torment in such sayings, and torment and torture not only the
Scriptures, but also themselves and the hearers. But first of all one
should be sure of the matter and the right opinion, that they are one
and the same and agree with each other everywhere; then one should apply
grammar to them. But the rabbis hold the contradiction. Therefore it
grieves me and vexes me that the teachers and holy fathers have commonly
followed them.

**V. 14 Behold, thou hast driven me out of the land this day, and I must
hide myself from thy face, and be iniquitous and fugitive upon the
earth. So it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall find me shall
strike me dead.**

From these words it is clear that this judgment was spoken and passed
through the mouth of Adam. First of all, Cain recognizes that he will be
cast out of the house and world government, and then also from the
church. What difference there is between the words adamah and erez, we
have said above, namely, that erez means the whole earth, but adamah a
piece of land or field that one builds. Therefore Cain\'s opinion is:
\"I must now flee from you out of the place I have built, and the whole
earth is open to me, but I will be inactive and fugitive on it, that is,
I will not have a certain place anywhere. As with us the fugitive
murderers are punished with misery. And these words sufficiently
indicate how it is to be understood that Adam said above: \"For-

Cursed be you on earth\", namely that Cain had to be in misery. And this
is a political punishment, by which he is excluded from the worldly
community or society.

But that he says, \"I must hide myself from your face,\" is the church
punishment and the right ban. For since the priesthood and regiment was
Adam\'s, and Cain is excommunicated from Adam because of his sin, the
honor of the priesthood and regiment is taken from him at the same time.
But why Adam inflicted this punishment on him, we have heard above. \"If
you,\" he says, \"build the field, he shall not give you his wealth,\"
that is, you are cursed and your work is also cursed. If thou shouldst
therefore abide with us in this land, we must die with thee of hunger:
for thou hast corrupted and poisoned the earth with thy brother\'s
blood. You will have to carry such blood around with you, and the earth
will exact its punishment on you.

207 There is almost such a saying in the first book of Kings, Cap. 2, v.
29, 31, 32, 33, where Solomon commands Benaiah the son of Jehoiada,
saying, \"Strike Joab dead, that thou put away from me the blood which
Joab shed in vain, and from my father\'s house; and let the LORD pay his
blood upon his head.\" 2c.; \"But David, and his seed, and his house,
and his throne, have peace for ever before the LORD.\" As if he wanted
to say: If Joab will not be punished because of the wrongful death
stroke, then the whole kingdom will have to pay the same punishment and
perish by war. So Adam also wants to say here: If you stayed in this
land, God would punish us so much for your sake that the land would
never bear fruit.

\(208\) Here we will answer the question mentioned above. It is said to
Cain, \"You shall be iniquitous and fugitive on earth,\" yet Cain first
builds a city, and afterward his family grows and multiplies to such an
extent that it has deceived, oppressed and devastated the entire church
of God, except for eight people from the family of Seth. The other whole
great multitude, which is in the Sint-

**[366m , tv-iLAinterpretation of I Genesis 4, 14. W. 367]{.underline}**

Cain followed, as the text clearly says Genesis 6:4: \"The children of
God took unto wives the children of men, and begat tyrants, which were
mighty in the world.\" Because Cain has such a great lineage and builds
a city first, how is it true that he is inactive and volatile on earth?

209 We will answer this from the text, for what we have just said from
the New Testament of Paul, the apostles, Christ and the prophets, is of
a different opinion. Now when Adam says, \"Thou shalt be iniquitous and
fugitive upon the earth,\" he says that he lets him go without any
command or commandment. He does not say, \"Go to the morning;\" nor does
he say, \"Go to the noon;\" he does not name a place where he should go,
nor does he give him a command as to what he should do, but rather he
casts him off altogether, letting him go wherever he wants and do
whatever he wants; he does not ask anything about it, nor does he give
him an escort or a promise that he will have protection, nor does he
say: God will take care of you and protect you; but just as the whole
air is free for a little bird to fly wherever it wants, but has nowhere
safe where it can be safe from the attack of other birds: so Cain is
also left there by his father. Cain feels this and therefore adds:
\"Whoever finds me will strike me dead.

But Adam was in a different and better situation. He had sinned and was
put to death because of sin; but when he was cast out of Paradise, God
commanded him to do a certain work, to build the land in a certain
place; so He also clothed him with a garment of skins. All this, as we
said above, was a sign that God wanted to take care of him and protect
him. But above all this was the glorious promise that God made to the
woman of the seed that would crush the serpent\'s head. Cain has none of
these things, but is badly left in an uncertain place and work, without
any promise or command, like a bird that wanders uncertainly in the free
air. This actually means: to be inactive and uncertain.

211 All who have neither the word nor the commandment of God, by which a
certain place and person is indicated, are thus uncertain and
inoffensive. In the same way, we were under the papacy, where there was
no lack of worship, of certain works and exercises: but all this was
done and carried out without God\'s word and command; which was a real
Cainian challenge, namely, not having God\'s word, not knowing what to
believe, what to hope for and what to suffer, but doing and carrying out
everything for an uncertain outcome. For what monk has ever been who
could have said for certain that he had done this or that right? For
there was nothing there but the laws of men and what reason had devised
and invented without God\'s word. In the same way, we were all unaware
and went astray, like Cain, not knowing what God would think of us and
judge us, whether He would be merciful or unmerciful, loving or hostile,
because that is how we were taught at that time. Thus, the entire
lineage of Cain was uncertain and unknowable, for it had no promise or
commandment from God, nor did it know how it should live or die.
Therefore, if some have come to the knowledge of Christ and have united
with the true church, it was not by promise but by grace.

212\. but Seth, who was born afterward, had a certain promise with his
lineage, along with certain oerter, certain form and order of worship,
whereas Cain was in vain. For although he built a city, he was uncertain
how long he would dwell in it, for he had no promise from God. But what
we have without God\'s promise, we are uncertain how long we will have
it, for the devil can disturb or take it away at any moment. Again, when
we walk with God\'s commandment and promise assured and prepared, the
devil fights against us in vain; for God assures and fortifies
everything by His commandment. Therefore, if Cain were a lord of the
whole world and had all the treasures of the world under him, yet
because he had no

**[368 L. II, 42-14. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 14. 15. W. I. SW-S5\".
369]{.underline}**

If he is promised divine help, is also deprived of the protection of
angels, and has nothing else to rely on but human suggestions, he is
quite unaware and uncertain. As he goes on to say:

**That\'s how it will go for me, that whoever finds me will strike me
dead.**

This is a very clear consequence. For since he is forsaken by God and
his father\'s help, has no more right to the priesthood nor to the
regency, he sees that he has nothing certain before him but that whoever
finds him will kill him. For he is excommunicated spiritually and
worldly. Nevertheless, God still shows two benefits to such a rogue. He
has lost the reign and the church, but he keeps his life and gets
another generation. For God promises him that he shall be protected and
secure in his life, and gives him a wife for this purpose. This is a
twofold blessing, which is not to be despised, and which even Cain could
not have provided for himself, since he first heard the verdict from his
father. But this happens to him so that he may have the opportunity and
the space to repent, even though it happens to him by chance and without
commandment. For God does not add a certain promise. How we came to
grace under the papacy by chance (that I call it so). For we had no
certain promise before us that it would come to pass that the truth
would come to light and the Antichrist would be revealed while we were
still alive. But this double blessing happened to Cain also for the sake
of the elect. For it can well be believed that many of Cain\'s
descendants have been saved, who have gone to the right church and
converted, just as it happened afterwards to the Jews and the Gentiles.

214\. it was a serious and severe law that none of the Moabites and
Ammonites should be used for church offices, and yet many of them, both
of the Moabites and Ammonites, were saved, who came to the kings of
Judah and served them. Thus Ruth, the aged mother of our Lord and
Saviour

Therefore, that I speak thus has been an accidental grace, which has not
been assured beforehand by a certain promise.

215: Naaman, 2 Kings 5:17, is the king of the Ninevites, Ion. 3, 6, item
Nebucadnezzar, Dan. 4, 34, Evilmerodach, 2 Kings 25, 27, and others from
the Gentiles were saved by accidental grace. For they did not have the
promise of Christ like the Jews. So Cain was also given the protection
of his life, a wife and descendants for the sake of the elect, who were
to be saved by chance grace. For although his lineage, as is now said of
the Moabites, was to live under the curse, yet some of the patriarchs
moved from it and became friends.

V. 15 **But the LORD said unto him, Nay; but he that killeth Cain shall
be smoked sevenfold.**

In the epistle to Damasus, Jerome writes that Cain asked the Lord to put
him to death, and he confidently holds to this opinion as certain and
true. Lyra also follows this, and says straightforwardly that this is
concluded and follows from the text itself. But they may thank their
rabbis for such an error. For the correct understanding is that no one
should strike Cain dead. For here it is a matter of divine judgment and
God leaves the murderer a consolation, because he gives him life and
lets him move afterwards.

But how is it possible that because God holds a judgment, the godless
man should ask for death? Yes, because death is a punishment for sins,
he flees and shuns it as a punishment; therefore, let such rabbinic talk
go. The same then is, that Lyra says, how one should divide this text
and that the opinion is: Who kills Cain, shall be punished severely; and
that it stands: \"shall be smelled seven times\", they interpret thus:
He shall be punished in the seventh generation.

218 The rabbis are worthy of such fables and lies after they have seen
the bright light.

**[370 L. n, 44-4\". Interpretation of Genesis 4, 15. W. I. sös-svs.
371]{.underline}**

of the New Testament. But they make two kinds of work for us, because we
have to save and purify the text from such falsifications and punish
useless and false glosses at the same time. For this reason, however, I
am in the habit of denouncing them at times, so that it may not be said
that we arrogantly despise them or that we have not read their books and
do not respect them. For we read and understand them; but we read them
with deliberation and judgment, and do not admit that Christ is obscured
by them or that God\'s word is falsified.

Therefore the Lord does not change his judgment that Cain should be
cursed on earth. But he shows him this accidental grace for the sake of
the elect, who should still be saved from this cursed people and the
rest of the host, that he says that Cain should not be struck dead, as
Cain was afraid. And there is no need to tear the text as Rabbi Solomon
does, who after these words: \"Who will kill Cain\", puts a point that
it is an \"aposiopesis\", as in Virgil: Quos ego! sed motos praestat
etc., and draws the following words: \"shall be smelled sevenfold\", to
Cain, who was killed in the seventh generation. For Cain begat Hanoch,
Hanoch Irad, Irad Mahujael, Mahujael Metusael, Metusael Lamech.

They tell a story that Lamech, when he had grown old and had a stupid
and dark face, was led by his son Thubalkain into a forest to hunt and
shoot in it; but when Cain, as a fugitive, had hidden himself in it and
Lamech shot at a game, he hit Cain unawares and killed him. These are
all Jewish fables, and not worthy of being taught in our schools. They
are also contrary to the text. For if the time of the seventh
generation, in which he was to be slain, was appointed for Cain , how
was he then inactive and fugitive on earth?

221 Therefore we condemn this foolish opinion and have good reason and
right to do so; for it is contrary to what God has said before, who does
not waver and is of a different mind than a man, 1 Sam. 15, 29. And this
is to be diligently looked at and respected in all Scripture, that the
following opinion

is not contrary to the first. That they also say that Lamech\'s
punishment was the Flood, Lyra refutes this rightly and says that the
Flood was a common punishment of all the wicked. Therefore we leave such
lies and keep the right mind that after Cain was afraid that he would be
slain by anyone who met him, the Lord forbids it and sets a punishment
on it that is seven times greater.

But Lyra also disputes how he can deserve sevenfold punishment who slays
Cain, when Cain had slain his brother? But why is it necessary to search
so closely for God\'s counsel and will in such matters, especially since
it is certain that Cain will be allowed and permitted the protection of
accidental grace, or, as we say, a promise and blessing, as the Law
gives.

For the promises, as we have often said, are of two kinds: the first of
the law, which, that I speak thus, is reduced to our works; as this is
Isa. 1:19: \"If ye will obey me, ye shall enjoy the good of the land\";
item Ex. 20:6: \"I am the LORD thy God, which do good in a thousand
measure unto them that love me\"; as also this was above: \"If thou be
upright, thou shalt be accepted. But such promises of the law commonly
have with them their threats. Different are the promises of grace, where
there is no threat: as this is Deut. 18, 18: \"I will raise up for them
a prophet like you\"; item Jer. 31, 33: \"I will write my law in their
hearts\"; item Gen. 3, 15: \"I will put enmity between you and the seed
of the woman\" 2c. Such promises are not based on our works, but on
God\'s goodness and grace to do so. As we have the promise at baptism,
sacrament of the altar, the key 2c. in which God presents His will,
grace and work to us.

God does not make such a promise to Cain here, but only says that
whoever kills him will be smelled sevenfold. But Adam had such a promise
of grace, and Cain, because he was the firstborn, should have inherited
and received it as an inheritance from his parents. It was

**[372 n. 42-Interpretation of I Genesis 4, 15. W. I, WS-Ü8I.
373]{.underline}**

but a rich promise of eternal glory; for God promised a seed that would
crush the serpent\'s head without all human merit and work. For there
was no condition: if you sacrifice, you will be pious 2c.

\(225\) Now if you hold against this promise what is said here to Cain,
it is like a piece of bread given to a beggar. For life is not promised
to him, but it happens to him that God threatens those who would strike
him dead. But he does not say, \"No one shall kill you\"; nor does he
say, \"I will rule and guide the others in such a way that they shall
not strike you dead,\" for then Cain would surely have come before God
and his parents again; but he alone maintains that people shall not
strike him dead. Now if it were a promise, it would have to be one that
was based on the works of men: and yet it is not to be despised, as the
promises of the law contain excellent things.

226 Augustine says that God gave such power to the Romans in ancient
times for the sake of their excellent redemption. Just as even today,
countries in which people abstain from death, adultery and theft have
greater gifts than those who do not abstain from such sins: and yet the
police and worldly regiments, even if they are ordered and ordered for
the best by reason, have nothing more than such temporal promises.

The church, however, has eternal promises of grace, which, although Cain
did not have them, it was nevertheless something great that the bodily
promises remained to him, namely, that he would not be killed again
immediately, but would still take a wife, beget children, build a city,
build the land, raise livestock, and not be completely excluded from all
human fellowship and society. For God was not only able to take all
these things away from Cain, but also to send him all kinds of
sicknesses and diseases, such as the plague, epilepsy, stroke,
stone-weight, podagra 2c. And yet, people are arrogantly arguing how God
could have increased Cain\'s curse sevenfold. How he takes away all
blessings from Cain above,

Both spiritual and temporal, he restrains the same here and commands
that no one should strike him dead, but does not promise him that all
men will obey this command. Therefore he is still inactive and
uncertain, although this bodily promise is there. For it may come to
pass, that, if he continue wicked, he shall be slain at once: again, if
he keep himself right, he may live longer; for nothing certain is
promised him. And so the promises of the flesh or of the law are
uncertain and accidental, though they are great and glorious.

Whether Cain was slain, I cannot say for sure, because the holy
scripture does not clearly report it. This alone can be proved from the
text, that no certain promise was made to him, but that God had left him
in an uncertain and unfaithful life, and had only threatened and
forbidden the wicked that Cain should not be slain, so that certain
punishment should follow such a deed; but had not promised him that he
would oppose it and defend himself against it, so that he would not be
slain. Now we know the nature of the law and how it works, namely, that
the least of the people always obey it. Therefore, although it is not
written at what time, where and by whom Cain was slain, it is
nevertheless plausible that he was slain; however, the Scriptures do not
remember this, just as they do not remember how many years he lived and
on what day he was born and died. For he perished and died with his
race, as it is said in Proverbs: sine crux, sine lux, et sine Deus
(without cross, without light, and without God), with the exception of a
few who have been preserved and saved by accidental grace.

But here is still another question: Whom these words: \"Who finds me,
will strike me dead\", concern? For it is certain that at that time
there were no more men than Adam and Eve and some daughters. Therefore I
would like to answer that Moses sees with these words that the wicked
flee when no one is chasing them, Proverbs 28:1, and make danger for
themselves where there is none. As we still see in the case of the
slayers, that they are afraid when it is safe and without any danger,
and can nowhere be satisfied.

**[374 8. n. 49-51. Interpretation of Genesis 4:15, 16. W. 1, 561-581.
375]{.underline}**

For it seems to them everywhere as if they see death before their eyes.

But because in the commandment of God it follows: \"He who kills Cain
shall\" 2c., then this cannot be drawn solely on Cain\'s fear; for Cain
had sisters, and was perhaps most afraid of the one whom he took to
wife, that she would avenge her slain brother. He also had uncertain
thoughts of a longer life, and saw that more sons would be born to Adam,
and was therefore afraid of all of Adam\'s descendants. So the fear also
makes it greater that God alone shows him an uncertain grace. For I do
not think that Cain was afraid of the wild beasts, lest they should kill
him. For what is it to the beasts that God threatens sevenfold
punishment to him who would strike Cain dead?

**And the LORD made a sign unto Cain, that whosoever found him should
not slay him.**

What kind of sign this was, is not found in the holy scriptures;
therefore one has invented this, the other that. But they all agree and
understand it thus, that it was a great trembling of Cain\'s head and
all his limbs, and indicate such a cause that it is not to be believed
that God moved, changed or mutilated a limb in his body, but left the
body as it had been created, but only added an outward sign to it, which
everyone could see, namely, a trembling and quaking. These are the
thoughts of the fathers, which, though they are not evil, cannot be
proved from Scripture. For it could have been another sign, as we see in
almost all death-witnesses, that they soon use their eyes, look rigid
and cruel, and no longer have the natural sweetness that is in the eyes.

232: Let it have been a sign, whatever it has been, it is truly an
abominable and terrible punishment that Cain must carry it on his person
all his life as punishment for such an abominable death blow, and in
addition, with this shameful, ugly and abominable sign, he is considered
by his parents to be a guilty one.

hated monster into misery. For even if the life he asked for remains, it
is still a life of shame, as it had a shameful mark and sign of the
death blow on it, not only so that he should remember his sins and
grieve over them, but also so that others would be deterred from the
death blow. He could not remove or erase this mark with any remorse, but
had to carry it as a sign of God\'s wrath and punishment of the death
blow throughout his life, like misery, cursing and other punishments.

233 But here it is to be noted that above the word harag stands, that
is, to strike to death. But here the word nakah means to strike, so that
he will not only secure him from death, but also from all danger that
follows death. But it is, as I said before, an assurance of the law. For
he only forbids that no one should strike Cain dead, and threatens with
sevenfold punishment; but he does not promise him that everyone will
obey this commandment. But it is better for Cain to have such a promise
of the law than to be without any promise at all.

**V. 16 So Cain departed from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the
land of Nod, beyond Eden, toward the east.**

This is also a strange text, and it is a wonder that the rabbis,
according to their kind, did not invent something strange and monstrous
about it. But here Moses lets the reader think about how miserable and
pitiful the parting was. The dear pious parents had lost Abel before:
now, by God\'s command, the other son must also go into misery full of
curses for the sake of sin, although the parents had consoled themselves
that he would be the only heir of the divine promise, and had therefore
loved him very much from his youth. However, they are obedient to the
commandment of God and expel him according to the order.

That is why obedience to God or fear of God is praised and praised here.
They had also learned it through their own experience in paradise,

**[376e . n. si-88. interpretation of Genesis 4, 16. w. i. ssr-ss?.
377]{.underline}**

how it would not be an easy sin at all to deviate from God\'s
commandment. Therefore they will have thought: Behold, our sin is
punished with death and other innumerable miseries, into which we are
cast after we are cast out of Paradise: because therefore our son also
hath sinned abominably, it is not fitting for us to resist the will of
God and His righteous judgment, though it is a great sorrow to our
hearts and grievous.

236 We know from the story of the woman from Thekoa that she asked Joab
to intercede for the fugitive Absalom. For she said in 2 Sam. 14, 2. ff.
that after she had already lost one son, it would be very unreasonable
that she should be deprived of the other. And Rebecca said Gen. 27:45 to
her husband Isaac, when she realized that Esau was angry: \"Why should I
be deprived of both sons?\" But Adam and Eve overcame this heartache and
thus killed the paternal and maternal affections at once. For without
understanding that one must be obedient to the will of God, they were
also warned by their own example. For before they were expelled from
paradise because of sin, but now they are worried that if they keep
their son with them against God\'s will, they will be expelled from the
whole world.

This is truly a strange history, which greatly praises obedience to God
and exhorts to the fear of God; as Paul also does in the first epistle
to the Corinthians, which is written entirely against the security of
men\'s hearts. For although God is gracious and merciful, one should not
sin because of it; for he alone is gracious and merciful to those who
fear him.

As it was the greatest sorrow of the parents that they had to lose their
son, so I think that this parting must have hurt Cain very much. For he
must leave not only the common lodging, his dear parents and their
protection, but also the right of inheritance of the firstborn, the
privilege of the regiment and priesthood and the church community. That
is why the text says that he went out \"from the presence of the Lord.
But now we have said above what the

Scripture calls the \"face of the Lord\", namely the things in which God
reveals Himself to us and [shows that]{.underline} He assists us. Thus,
in the Old Testament the faces of the Lord were the fiery pillar, the
cloud, the mercy seat. In the New Testament they are baptism, the
sacrament of the altar, the ministry of preaching, and the like. For by
these things God shows Himself to us as a visible sign that He is with
us, takes care of us, and is favorable to us.

So Cain went out from the place where God showed Himself and revealed
Himself, and where Adam had his seat as a high priest and lord of the
earth, and came to another place where there was no face of God, nor any
visible sign, so that he could have consoled himself that God was with
him and inclined toward him; without keeping the things that are common
to all creatures, even to animals, as sun and moon, day and night,
water, and air. For these are not signs of the unchanging grace of God,
but are signs of divine blessing and kindness toward all creatures.

240 Therefore this was a miserable departure of Cain, which would not
have happened without weeping and crying, that he had to divorce his
parents, who nevertheless in such loneliness and inactivity let a sister
follow him as wife, who lived and lived with him, but did not know how
both, the son and the daughter, would fare. Therefore, in this case,
their grief and heartache will be greater, because they will have to
lose three children at once. And how could one think and speak
differently of it, because afterwards follows: \"Cain recognized his
wife\"?

241\. Where then did Cain remain? Moses says: \"in the land of Nod\".
This name comes to the country from the unfaithful and uncertain
inhabitant. But where is this land? Beyond Eden, toward the east. This
is a remarkable text: Cain comes to a certain place, located after the
morning; but how he comes there, he was not sure, because it was the
land of Nod, in which he could not sit down with certainty. For there
was no face of God, which he had left with his parents, who dwelt so as
to have Paradise either by the side or after the evening.

**[378 L-Il. W-ss. Interpretation of Gen. 4:16, 17, W. 1:567-S73.
379]{.underline}**

had. But Cain became a fugitive and moved to your morning, so that the
Cainites were distinguished from Adam\'s family by the paradise, which
lay in the middle. This text also proves that paradise remained even
after Adam was expelled from it, and was only completely destroyed by
the Flood.

242 Thus the text also agrees with their thoughts, which hold that Adam
was created in the land of Damascus, and when he was subsequently driven
away because of sin, he dwelt in Palestine: so that the center of
paradise had been, where afterwards Jerusalem, Bethlehem, and Jericho
had been, in which places Christ and John most abode. For the fact that
the present occasion is bad is due to the Flood, which destroyed
everything and changed the mountains, waters and springs. And it may be
that the place of the skull, where Christ sacrificed himself for our
sins, was there afterwards, where the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil was in the times of paradise; so that, as far as the place is
concerned, death and damnation, which the devil introduced, and life and
blessedness, which Christ has restored to us, meet.

243 Daniel does not use a new way of speaking in vain, Cap. 9, 26, when
he says: \"The sanctuary will be destroyed and come to an end like a
flood. As if he wanted to say: The first paradise was destroyed and torn
apart by the flood; but the other paradise, in which the redemption took
place, will be destroyed and devastated by the flood of the Romans.

244 To such thoughts rhymes also this, that as Babel was the ruin of the
Jewish people, so this accident soon took place, that Cain and his
family dwelt in the place of the earth, where afterwards Babel was
built. These are my thoughts and suppositions, which I have in part from
the fathers. But if they are not true, they are nevertheless probable
and have nothing ungodly in them. For after the Flood, Noah made many
other designs for the earth.

For by such a mighty and raging water the mountains have been worn away,
the springs of water broken up, and the streams of water changed.

**Seventh Part.**

**Of the lineage of Cain and the lineage of the pious.**

**I.**

**V. 17 And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and bare Hanoch. And
he built a city, and called it Hanoch, after the name of his son.**

It is surprising that Moses describes the lineage of the children of
Cain rather than the children of God. But this is done according to
God\'s special counsel. For the children of this race surpass in this
life the children of God according to the first promise, for the seed of
the woman has a spiritual blessing, but the seed of the serpent brings
under itself the bodily blessing, for it bites the heel of the seed that
is given: so that the bodily is earlier than the spiritual.

246 But in this there is a great disparity afterwards. For although
Cain\'s lineage is told at the beginning, we see that the Holy Spirit
takes more care of the lineage of the pious. For he does not set a mere
register of the names, but also diligently counts their years, and
reports when they died. He does not only say what they have done, as is
said here about Cain\'s children, but what the Lord has done and said to
them, what he promised them, how he helped them in times of need, how he
blessed them 2c.

247 These things are not remembered in the wicked generation of Cain,
but when Moses said: Cain begat Hanoch his son, and built a city, which
he called after his son\'s name, he soon breaks off, remembers them no
more, and immediately buries Cain with such words; so that he asks
nothing after his life or death, but remembers only the bodily blessing,
how they begat and built children. For

**[380 \" H\' 87. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 17. \". 1. 873-87\".
381]{.underline}**

Just as God did not take away the gift of begetting children from the
murderer Cain, He also left him the gift of ruling and reigning. But he
lost such a rich blessing of the earth, because the earth drank his
brother\'s blood into itself, as we have indicated above.

The Holy Spirit tells us this, so that we may see how there were two
churches so soon in the beginning: one of the children of Satan and of
the flesh, which multiplied suddenly and greatly; the other of the
children of God, which was weak and multiplied slowly. Although the
Scripture does not remember how they lived together, nevertheless,
because it is said, \"I will put enmity between you and their seed,\"
2c., one can easily understand and know for certain that Cain\'s church
was poisonously hostile to Adam\'s church. So the text also shows
clearly enough that the children of men have become so powerful and have
taken over that they have almost turned the whole church of the children
of God around and destroyed it. For in the Flood no more than eight
people were preserved; the rest of the great multitude and race perished
and perished in the water because of sin.

This is a common lament at all times, that when the true church improves
and increases, it opposes the devil and the wicked with all its might.
But it is made weary by the wickedness of the enemy and either gives way
to the rage of the enemy and allows itself to overcome the cross and
temptations, or allows itself to be dampened by pleasure and riches.
Thus Adam\'s lineage, through such a protracted war with the children of
men, has grown weary and weak, and has lain low except for eight men who
have been preserved. For since the ungodly nature had the upper hand and
the pious also gave way, God finally came and preserved the remaining
small group of the pious, but the others, who at the same time had
seduced others and had themselves been seduced, he gathered together
under one judgment and punished them at the same time. We hope and
believe that this will also be the case at the Last Judgment.

250 There are many questions here: Who was Cain\'s wife? and at what
time did he commit the death stroke? Whether he did it before he took a
wife or since he was already in the married state? And the Jews say that
when Eve gave birth, she always gave birth to twins, a male and a
female. Therefore Cain took his sister Calmana in marriage, but Abel
took Diboram. Whether this is true or not, I do not know, it is also
without all danger of the church, whether one can already know such a
thing so certainly and just not. It is certain that Cain had his sister
in marriage. Although no one can prove for certain whether he already
had her when he committed the death stroke, the text almost leads to the
conclusion that he was already a husband; for it says that the
inheritance was divided between the two brothers, because Abel was
commanded by his father to raise cattle, but Cain to cultivate the land.
Therefore I wanted to believe well that they all were already married at
that time.

251 And therefore it is also true that it is said above that Cain and
Abel sacrificed to the Lord after some days. For they interpret this to
mean that these new husbands sacrificed the firstfruits of the year that
had grown for them during the first year of their marriage, namely, Cain
the firstfruits of the earth, and Abel the firstfruits of the sheep. The
same season was the autumn, when they gathered together what had grown
out of the ground, just as the Jews had the Feast of Atonement at that
time. For it seems that Moses diligently noted the examples of the
fathers, read them together, and put them into a law. Because the new
husbands wanted to thank the Lord for His blessing and each offered his
gift, but Abel\'s gift was pleasing to God alone, Cain\'s heart was
possessed by Satan and filled with resentment and enmity against his
brother, from which this miserable death stroke finally followed. This
is the opinion of the Jews, which I relate because it seems to be in
accordance with the truth. For as I said above, one should read the
writings of the Jews in such a way that we have the right to judge from
them,

**[3822 . ii. S7-S9. Interpretation of Genesis 4:17, W. i:
383.]{.underline}**

not to be taken, but to keep what is true, but to reject and refute what
is fictitious and false.

252 If Cain had not yet been married at that time, then it is truly a
much more miraculous event that he has subsequently been given a wife,
and the virgin who has taken him is worthy of great praise. For what
could she have greatly rejoiced in such a marriage of her brother, who
had been a death-slayer, cursed and rejected from the church? And no
doubt she would have asked her father, why he would give her, as an
innocent, to a cursed murderer and cast her into misery? So she was also
afraid of the example and worried that he would deal with her as he had
dealt with his brother.

Therefore, Adam had to be a good speaker about this matchmaking and
persuade the daughter to follow him, for although Cain was cursed and
bore the punishment of sins on his neck, God would still consider her
innocence and preserve and bless her. There is also no doubt in my mind
that God will have bestowed upon Cain many blessings and special
benefits throughout his entire family for the sake of his wife, who had
taken this bloodthirsty brother in holy faith against God and obedience
to her parents. For just as Christ was a servant of the circumcision for
the truth and certainty of the promise made to the Jews, but a servant
of the Gentiles for mercy\'s sake, Rom. 15:8, 9 (for the Gentiles had no
promise), so also the same fortuitous grace befell Cain\'s family.
Therefore there are two opinions about Cain\'s marriage state: but which
one is true and certain, I do not know. If he became married after the
death blow, then his wife is to be praised highly and particularly that
she preferred the parents\' power and will to her will and allowed
herself to be married to an accursed murderer.

254 But I think that the first opinion is more similar to the truth,
because we have a clear testimony in the text of the divided
inheritance. And therefore the woman Cain out of necessity

Because man and woman are one body, Adam did not want to separate them
from each other and the woman also had to bear a part of the curse and
the punishment of the man. Just as Cain\'s descendants also received a
part of the blessing that happened to the innocent woman. Thus Pharaoh
was preserved in Egypt in Joseph\'s time, Gen. 41, 39: The king of the
Ninevites was also preserved, Jon. 3, 10, even though they were not of
the people of God. I also consider that some of Cain\'s descendants have
been saved, even though Cain had completely lost the promise of the seed
he had given.

**II.**

**Cain\'s lineage and descendant\".**

255 As for the names of the descendants of Cain, I hold that they were
not in vain, nor were they invented by chance, but by special counsel,
nor without special meaning, as were the names of the pious patriarchs.
Adam means a man; Heva a mother of the living; Cain an inheritance or
possession; Habet vanity or vanity. Such meanings are also in many pagan
names. For surely there is at times in the names a secret divination. So
Hanoch is also a name of a special meaning and future hope, for the
comfort of Cain or rather his wife, who called him Hanoch, from hanach,
that is, he gave or dedicated to his own.

256 And this word is often found in Moses, when he says in Deut. 20:5,
\"He that hath built a new house, and hath not yet dedicated it, let him
not go forth to war. Now here \"to dedicate\" means to possess, to
enjoy, and when this happens for the first time, it always happens with
joyful signs and congratulations. So when Cain\'s wife was born, Cain
said: Hanoch, \"dedicate\"; because it is a command form. As if he
wanted to say: This beginning must be happy and blissful for us; my
father has cursed me and I am rejected from his face because of my sin,
I must live alone and the earth does not give me its ability, it does
not give me the ability to live alone.

**[384 L. u. 5s-\"i. Interpretation of Genesis 4, l 7. 18. W. i.
\"7\^-ssi. 385]{.underline}**

But if I had not sinned, God would have given it to me more abundantly;
and yet God now shows me an accidental grace; that is a good and happy
beginning, let it be well begun. As Hanoch here in Cain\'s lineage is
the beginning of bodily blessing, so afterward in the pious lineage
Enoch is the first, under whom religion and spiritual blessing arise and
prosper.

What is said about the built city belongs to history. But I have said
above that after Cain was separated from the righteous church and driven
into misery, he became an enemy of the righteous church. That he
therefore first builds a city is to prove that he not only despises the
righteous church, but also wants to persecute and suppress it. For thus
he thought, Behold, I am now driven from my father into misery, and am
accursed; but yet I have children, and have good hope of a great
generation. What is it to me that I am cast out from my father? I will
build a city, and therein will I also gather a church: my father goeth
with his church always.

So he did not build it for fear or protection, but out of a certain hope
of prosperity, hope and desire to rule. For he was not afraid of his
father and mother, who had already driven him to another land; neither
was he afraid of his children; but he puffed himself up and defied the
chance of grace, and, as the world is wont to do, he sought opportunity
to rise. On the other hand, the children of God are concerned about
another city, which has a firm and certain foundation and is built by
God Himself, as the epistle to the Hebrews says in the 11th chapter, v.
10.

**V. 18. But Hanoch bore witness to Irad.**

I do not know what one could say of this name, which it means, because
from what it comes, one does not know so actually. And nevertheless I
hold for it that it is not a coincidental name, but has also a special
interpretation. In the book of Joshua

Cap. 7, 2. A city is called Ai, **which** word is also used as a generic
name and means a heap, which a building makes when it has fallen down or
collapsed. Now if you make the word Irad out of this name, it means a
heap that is falling down. So Hanoch called his son Irad, so that he
might be blessed, and go down with a great heap, that though Cain\'s
family might be like a desolate heap because of the transgression, yet
it might not wholly perish, but be preserved and multiply. Now if anyone
has anything better to say about this, I will not despise it, for in
dark matters counsel is needed.

**Irad witnessed Mahujael.**

This name is made from mahal, which means to eradicate, and that is, to
have begun or to have dared; so much so that it means that Cain\'s
lineage has increased and multiplied to such an extent that he may set
himself against the true church, despise and persecute it, as that now
has become very rich and has acquired wisdom, honor and great multitude.
For these are almost the pieces, so that the right church is always
overcome by the world and the false church.

**Mahujael witnessed Methusael.**

261 Meth means death, eel, to desire or demand, from which comes Saul,
that is, demanded. This name is more defiant than all the others,
because I understand it to mean that they threaten to avenge their dead
parents, whom the other church had punished with rejection and misery.

**Methusael witnessed Lamech.**

Until now, the Cainites seemed to challenge and triumph over the true
church without punishment and resistance. But this name indicates that
God punished them around the time Lamech was born. For it comes from the
word that means to humiliate, to make low, or to suppress; although it
can also be understood as meaning that at the time Cain\'s lineage
increased to such an extent that the right church was completely
suppressed by him.

263\. these are Cain\'s descendants and

**[386 n. Interpretation of Genesis 4:18-22. W. i, asi-ss\".
387]{.underline}**

Heirs who were undoubtedly wise and high people. I also believe that
some of them were saved by accidental grace, as I said above, but the
majority of them hated and persecuted the true church in the most
hostile way. For they did not want to give Adam\'s children anything
beforehand, therefore they also arranged their special services and
other things to dampen Adam\'s church with them. Because the false
church was separated from the true church, I believe that Cain gave his
sons and daughters together, and Cain\'s family began to multiply
especially under Lamech; therefore Moses stops telling the story here.

**V. 19 Lamech took two wives, one named Ada and the other Zilla.**

Two questions are asked here. First of all, the theologians argue
whether Lamech took two wives out of unchastity or for some other
reason. And I do not think that he did it only out of unchastity, but
because he wanted to increase his family out of desire to rule,
especially if God punished Cain\'s family at that time with a pestilence
or other ruthlessness, as the name indicates. For then Lamech thought to
rise again and to increase the lineage again. As still the Turks and
other barbarian peoples take a lot of women, so that they get people and
can order the house regiment and police stately and keep it going.

Now Lamech\'s wives are called adah, that is, adorned or adorned around
the neck. For adi means female adornment, and adah means to put on or
adorn. She may have had this name because she not only ruled the house
and was finely adorned, but she was also beautiful in other ways. The
other is called Zilla, which means her shadow.

V. 20. **And Ada bare Jabal; of whom find heredity, which dwelt in
tents, and drew cattle.**

Jabal comes from the verb jabal, which means to bring or carry.

[V.21. **And his brother\'s name was Jubal; from whom find origin the
fiddlers and pipers.**]{.underline}

Jabal and Jubal come from one word and is called jubal one who is
brought here. But both names are a wish for the increase of the family.
For Cain\'s descendants took care that they would be superior to Adam\'s
children in number and quantity, and with this blessing they undoubtedly
defied the true church, as it would be a certain sign that they were not
rejected by God, but were also His people.

**And Zillah also gave birth to Tubalcain, the master of all kinds of
bronze and iron. And the sister of the Thubalcain was Naema.**

Thubalkain is said as much as: bring goods and possession; as the Latins
of strength and increase have such names, Valerius and Augustus. Naema
has the name of loveliness or pretty figure. And this is the family of
the Cainites, which multiplied innumerably. Therefore Moses says nothing
more about it.

The Jews, however, not only told Moses their names, but also reported
what each one\'s handicraft and work had been, a strange delusion, which
one rejects and considers foolish, namely, that Cain\'s descendants
therefore had to learn various handicrafts and arts, that the earth had
been cursed for them, therefore they had to feed themselves and make do
in another way, and thus some had become shepherds, some ore and iron
polishers. Some, however, have taken to singing, whistling and playing
the violin, so that they could obtain grain and other food from Adam\'s
children by such means. But if the Cainites had been so poor and had
suffered hunger, they would have forgotten the pipes, violins, harps and
other instruments in their poverty; for those who are hungry and thirsty
do not ask for music.

The fact that they have invented music and have taken care to devise
other arts shows that they have had enough and superfluous of everything
that belongs to food;

**[388 D. n. ki-sv. Interpretation of Genesis 4:22-24. W. i, Wt-°87.
389]{.underline}**

Because of this, they were not satisfied, like Adam\'s children, but
went into the arts, so that they wanted to be mighty and have special
praise and fame before others as skillful and sensible people. But I
believe that there were some among them who went to the right church and
accepted Adam\'s religion.

As Moses describes the generation of the wicked, or the false church, as
it was before the flood, so it still is, and so it will remain forever,
until the flood of fire. \"For the children of this world are wiser than
the children of light in their generation\", Luc. 16, 8. Therefore they
promote and increase their own, boast of themselves and their own, get
riches, honor and power. But the true church lies in contempt, is
plagued, oppressed, rejected 2c.

V.23. 24. **And Lamech said unto his whites, Adah and Zillah, Ye wives
of Lamech, hear my speech, and know what I say; I have slain a man to my
wound, and a young man to my bruise. Cain shall be smote seven times,
but Lamech seven and seventy times.**

Until now Moses chose the generation of the children of the world, whom
he buried and put into oblivion according to this story, having left
them no promise of either temporal or future life. For beyond the
accidental and common blessing of begetting children and multiplying and
nourishing, they have nothing. But they have become so strong and
powerful that they have filled up the whole world, and have also finally
oppressed and devastated the holy generation of God\'s children, who had
the promise of the life to come, and have sunk them into such deep
wickedness and godlessness that only eight people remain. Although there
is no doubt that some will be saved, both before and after the Flood,
the Scriptures say nothing about this, so that we may fear God and keep
and live according to His word. But there must be stony hearts, which
the example of the Flood, such cruel procedures one has to all the

lines has not had, can not meet and move.

273 After Moses has been silent about the wicked and has buried them, he
tells a little story about Lamech, but does not express the nature of
it. Therefore I think that in the whole holy scripture there is no text
which is so variously acted and martyred as this one. For although
ignorance is not of many words, yet it is full of error and false
delusion; whereas wisdom is of plain and simple words. Now I will count
the common opinions about this text.

The Jews have such a fable. When Lamech had grown old and had seen evil,
he was led into the forest by a young man to hunt and shoot game, not
for the sake of the game, but for the sake of the skins (this is a very
clumsy thing, and one soon hears that it is a lie). Cain, however, had
lain hidden in a thick bush and had not only repented there in the
desert, but had also sought some rest and safety. Then the boy, who was
holding and drawing the bow for Lamech, thought that there was a deer in
the same bush and told Lamech to shoot at it; so Lamech shot and killed
Cain against his opinion. But when he found that he had committed
murder, he struck the boy, and he died of it. So, they say, a man and a
youth were slain by Lamech. But such lies are not worth answering and
refuting. For Moses himself refutes them sufficiently, because he does
not say that Cain fled into a desert, but that he built a city, that is,
that he led a regiment and established a kingdom for himself. The time
also does not fit: because that Cain should have lived until Lamech
became old and blind is not believable.

275 The Jews also say that after Lamech had killed Cain, his wives did
not want to live with him any longer for fear of the punishment that
might come upon him again. Therefore Lamech had to comfort the wives
again and to take them with him.

**[390n , 66-68. interpretation of I Moses 4:23, 24. w. I, S87-SS0.
391]{.underline}**

He said that he who would slay him would be punished seven and seventy
times. They also told such lies about his sons, whom he had taught to
make weapons and armor to destroy people. The others say that this is
negative speech and that Lamech wants to say: If I had slain a man like
Cain slain his brother, then I would be worthy of being rejected by you
2c.

Therefore, this is my opinion, that these words, \"Cain shall be smelled
seven times,\" are not to be considered as if they were God\'s words.
For the same generation had no word of God; how then can it be
considered that Lamech was a prophet, because he had no word of God? As
Jerome also claims: because from Adam to Christ, according to St. Lucas
Cap. 3, 23. ff., so many generations can be reckoned, he says that after
seven and seventy generations Lamech\'s sin was abolished by Christ. But
if it were a matter of such lying and inventing, one could probably
invent whatever one wanted from the Scriptures. But Jerome forgets that
Lamech is the seventh after Cain. Therefore, such words are not to be
held as those that are said above to Cain; for those were God\'s words,
but these are free and presumptuous and not true words of a godless man
and murderer, which are taken from the words of Adam to Cain and
invented. For why does he not let himself hear such words before his
church, but at home alone before his wives?

It may well be that the pious and godly wives have been grieved because
of the manslaughter committed by their husbands. That is why the godless
murderer, so that he would seem like his father Cain, wanted to comfort
his wives in such a way that they would not think that he also had to be
slain. For this is what the godless church is wont to do: it always
wants to prophesy from its head; but such prophesying is nothing and
vain. So we can have this some piece from the text, namely, that Lamech
does not preach this from God\'s word, but from his own head.

278\. But as far as Cain is concerned, I consider it

not that he was slain by Lamech, but that he perished long before
Lamech. But because there was eternal hatred and enmity between Cain\'s
and Adam\'s church (because the Cainites did not want to be outcast and
excommunicated people), I think that Lamech had slain a fine man and
young man from the lineage of the righteous, like his father Cain had
slain his brother Abel, and that he wanted to protect himself in this
way after the example of Cain. For he was undoubtedly a man of good
sense, mighty and famous in authority, and increased his food and his
household in a new way, and the example that he first took two wives
will also have troubled and challenged the church of the pious in many
ways, as such people do who are prudent and wicked. Therefore, he armed
his own with weapons, wealth and pleasure, so that he would overcome the
true church everywhere, which clung to the holy faith, kept God\'s word
and the divine service pure and righteous, and was only concerned about
the same, but did not pay much attention to the other things, which were
temporal and worldly.

But it is probable that about that time the first patriarch Adam died.
For this reason Lamech kept to the same occasion, so that he would take
over the reins and rule everything alone, as the world still does. For
the church, which is in the midst, as it were, is oppressed and pressed
from both sides, namely, by the tyrants and bloodthirsty, and by those
who deal in pleasure and temporal cares. For just as the tyrants use
force and the sword, so these deal with good and smooth words.

280 Therefore Moses tells with special diligence that the bloodline of
the Cainites also went to the pleasures and sorrows of this life. And
Christ also indicates that much blood was already shed before the Flood,
when he says Matth. 23, 35: \"All the righteous blood that was shed on
earth will come upon you, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood
of Zacharias. And that Moses afterwards Cap. 6, 5. says that

**[392 2c. ii,\"-70. interpretation of Genesis 4:23, 24. w. i, \"o-m,.
393]{.underline}**

Before the Flood, the wickedness of men became great on earth; this he
says not only of the sins and wickedness of thieves and adulterers, 2c.,
but he applies it to the tyranny of the Cainite church, which raged with
the sword against the holy race of Adam, and calls Cain\'s descendants
tyrants for the sake of the cause. This causes me to think that Lamech
has taken his father\'s way and has killed a fine famous man at the same
time as his son from the holy fathers.

But it is especially tyrannical that, after he has been punished by his
wives, he does not let himself be sorry for the deed, but even though he
is afraid of the punishment, he still despises it. \"I have,\" he says,
\"slain a man,\" but what is that to you? that will be \"a wound to
me,\" not to you. \"I have slain a young man for a wound,\" that is, I
will have to suffer and be punished for it, and not you. But what more
contemptible thing could he have said in a public sin? Therefore, these
are my thoughts. For the text indicates that the Cainite tyrants have
lived in pleasure and have prospered. And even these words of Lamech
indicate that he was a proud man, who did not grieve anything for the
sake of the committed death stroke, but boasted even more as if he had a
good cause. For the Cain church always excuses its tyranny and violence,
which it practices on the pious; as Christ Jn 16:2 says: \"Whoever kills
you will think he is doing God a service by it.\" Therefore Lamech goes
on to say:

**[V. 24. CainM shall be smelled seven times, but Lamech seven and
seventy times.]{.underline}**

He prefers himself to his father as if he had a more just cause to kill.
He also wants to protect himself against those who should avenge the
death blow on him. For these are not the words of the Lord, but of
Lamech himself; as the priest also does, who keeps himself safe with
violence, tyranny, threats, with the ban 2c. so that he may be safe; for
he has Cain\'s and Lamech\'s conscience. Whoever acts contrary to this,
he says, he shall know,

that he would fall into the wrath and disfavor of St. Peter and Paul.

For Lamech is an example of the world, on which Moses wanted to paint
and show what kind of heart the world has and what its will and wisdom
is. As if he wanted to say, \"This is what the seed of the serpent does,
this is what the children of the world do: they gather money and goods,
seek pleasure and power, then abuse them by tyranny against the true
church, which they persecute and strangle: and in such great sins they
have no fear, but are still proud and secure, and boast, Ps. 11, 3:
\"What shall the righteous do?\"; Ps. 12, 5: \"Our tongue shall have the
upper hand, it is ours to speak; who is our Lord?\"; item, Ps. 10, 11:
\"The wicked saith in his heart, God hath forgotten, he hath hid his
face, he shall never see it\" 2c.

That this is the opinion of this text is evident from the matter itself,
although the words do not make it so clear. For the true church has an
eternal enemy, the devil, who, under a semblance of holiness, drives the
wicked against their brethren; as Christ says John 8:44, that the devil
is a liar from the beginning. Thus it is written from time to time in
the Scriptures that the wicked shed their blood; as Ps. 72:14: \"Their
blood shall be esteemed precious in his sight\"; item Ps. 116:15: \"The
death of his saints is esteemed worthy in the sight of the Lord\"; and
Ps. 44:23: \"We are slain daily for thy sake.\" Here now count the
histories.

Just as the church has at all times given its blood to the ungodly and
false brethren to drink, so also in the beginning at the first time it
had to suffer over itself its enemies, whom the Scripture calls tyrants
(Genesis 6:4) and says that the earth was full of their violence and
their will. Among them was Lamech, who might have been a man like Julius
II or Clement VII, who practiced the highest cruelty and tyranny and
still wanted to be considered and called the most holy; as Lamech here
wants to be considered the one who had a just cause for his deadly blow.
Therefore, he threatens a much greater punishment to the one who has
done this.

**[394 \". n. 7o-7\>. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 24. 25. W. i,
395]{.underline}**

Death blow would avenge, **because which** was set from divine power on
the death blow Cain.

Thus, from the beginning of the world, the church was plagued with
crosses and persecution until God had to destroy the whole world with
the flood because of the wickedness of man. And so Pharaoh, when his
wickedness was fulfilled, was drowned in the sea, Exodus 14:28, and when
the wickedness of the Gentiles was ripe and full, Exodus 15:16, they
were destroyed and cut off by Moses and Joshua. So also the Jews, when
they persecuted the gospel, were destroyed, so that not one stone was
left upon another in Jerusalem. The Babylonians, Medes, Persians, Greeks
and Romans are similar examples.

Therefore the scripture does not say whom Lamech slew: it only says that
he had committed a death stroke, and, unrepentant, like his father Cain,
had still wanted to defend it, and had set up a commandment to testify
that he had a just cause of killing. If this opinion is not absolutely
correct, it is nevertheless true that Cain\'s family was bloodthirsty
and hated and persecuted the true church.

Secondly, it is also true that Lamech had no word from God, and
therefore his words are not to be understood as those spoken to Cain,
which was the voice of truth: but Lamech\'s words are words of hope,
which portray Satan\'s kingdom and the false and hypocritical church,
which is secure in its sins and still boasts of them as if they had been
well done.

**The lineage of the righteous and the pious.**

V. 25 **Adam again knew his wife, and she bore a son, and called his
name Seth. For God has given me,\" she said, \"a seed without seed for
Habel, whom Cain slew.**

Until now Moses has spoken of the generation of the wicked and has said
little about it, but now he is completely silent about it and begins to
describe the pious and the true church. And first of all the saying is
to be noted that of Seth said

It says, \"She called his name Seth. For Moses did not speak in this way
of Cain when he was born, nor of the righteous Abel, nor of Hanoch
afterward, nor of others. So that Moses wants to indicate that this is
the first man to whom the promise made to his parents in paradise was
directed. Eve also points to this when she indicates the cause of this
name; and here she shows her faith and fear of God not indistinctly by
giving the son such a name.

The fact that she again remembers Cain\'s death stroke also indicates
that there had been fierce enmity between these two churches and that
Eve had to see and suffer many unjust things from the Cainites.
Therefore, she remembers the shameful death stroke here again, that Cain
had wanted to destroy the righteous seed, so that he would keep the rule
alone. But God be remembered, she says, who has given me another seed
for the righteous Abel.

Notice, however, that Moses, after his own fashion, puts great and
important things into very short words, so that he wants to encourage
the reader to diligently ponder the works of God. We have said above
about the mourning of the parents and their reasonable sorrow, and I
still find no reason why I should not believe that after Cain\'s death
no son was born to Adam except for Seth. For the pious parents were
shocked by the danger they had tried and abstained from childbearing.
Therefore, I believe that a special promise was made to them by an
angel, by which they were again comforted and assured, namely, that such
a son would be born to them, who would have and fulfill the promise
completely; that although Cain\'s lineage would now have to be lost
because of sin, this son\'s lineage would nevertheless be preserved
until the seed that was given would come into the world.

292 For that they will have had such a special promise, this shows that
Eve makes a short sermon to the name, and Moses uses a peculiar way of
speaking, which he has used of no one, that he says: \"And she called
his name

**[396 \". ii, 72-74. Interpretation of Genesis 4:25. w. r. ss5-\^ss8.
397]{.underline}**

Seth.\" This name Seth comes from the word shath, which means, he has
laid, fortified. For Eve wants to indicate that this son would be, as it
were, the foundation on which the promise of Christ would rest and
stand, whether more sons would be born to them. She does not give him a
proud name, like Cain, and still gives to understand that no one would
suppress Seth\'s lineage.

293 So the Cainites were cast out by their parents and remain under the
curse without all promise, and have no further use for grace, except
what they accidentally inherited from the pious generation as beggars,
not as heirs, which we called accidental grace above. For this reason
Moses does not remember those who came from Cain\'s lineage, so that he
makes a distinction between the two churches: one is righteous and has
promises of the life to come, but in this life it must be under the
cross and poor; the other is godless, but in this life it has happiness,
prosperity, wealth and power.

And Eve, the mother of us all, is praised as a holy woman full of faith
and love, that she praises and extols the right church in Seth so
gloriously and asks nothing about the Cainites. She does not say: I have
another son in Cain\'s place, but she prefers the slain Abel to Cain,
who was the firstborn. Therefore not only faith, but also special
obedience is praised in her, that she does not allow herself to be
annoyed by God\'s judgment, nor does she dispute it, but she changes her
judgment herself. For she had despised Abel as soon as he was born; but
of Cain she had thought great, when he should inherit and possess the
promise. Here she holds the contradiction and wants to say: \"Abel was
everything to me, because he was righteous, but the wicked Cain killed
him; therefore another seed was given to me in Abel\'s place.

295\. nor is she attached to the maternal nature and heart, nor does she
excuse or diminish her son\'s sin, but because Cain is rejected by GOD,
so she

She also cast him out, and relegated him with all his family to the
Gentiles, who live without certain grace, without any but that they have
taken accidental grace, as beggars and not as heirs.

It is a miracle that the pope\'s church, which has created such a large
and innumerable group of saints, did not place Eve, who was full of
faith and love and suffered much for it, among the saints. Perhaps it is
a sign that she preferred to follow the Cainites rather than the Holy
Church.

I leave aside the foolish and clumsy fable of the Jews, how Lamech
brought the two disobedient wives before Adam as before a judge, and
when Adam commanded them not to deny their husband his duty, they
reproached him why he denied his duty to Eve? Then Adam, who had
abstained from his wife from the time when Abel was slain, lay with her
again, lest by his example he should give others cause for everlasting
chastity, and the world should remain unpolluted. Such fables show the
impure thoughts of the Jews. As they also are, that they dispute how
within a hundred years after Seth was born, Cain grew to the seventh
generation. Such questions are thought up by godless people to blaspheme
the Scriptures and to interpret them evil. Such is also that they think
that Cain was conceived in paradise, since the first perfect
righteousness was still in the parents. But where does such a thing go
but that one wants to abolish Christ altogether? For what do we need him
for, if original sin has been removed? Therefore such lies are not
worthy to be spoken of, but the enemies of Christ and persecutors of
grace are worthy of them.

Thus we have in Seth a new generation, which is born and given from the
promise that the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent.
Therefore such name rhymes well with him, that Eve enjoys her happiness
with it, namely, that this seed should last and not be able to be
suppressed 2c. And this word is also in the 11th Psalm, v. 3.

**[398n , 74-77. interpretation of Genesis 4:25, 26. w. i, sM-soi.
399]{.underline}**

have ravished what you have laid as a foundation.\" Thus the Hebrew word
rhymes with the German word: seth, it stands.

**V. 26. And Seth also begat a son, and called his name Enos.**

The word jikra, refers to a man, that one understands that the father
called the son thus. Above it is said of a woman, namely, that Eve gave
such a name to her son. Therefore it is not one kind of language, but
two kinds, which one cannot give in Latin language thus. But Enos is
called a troubled and miserable man, as it is written in the 8th Psalm,
v. 5: \"What is man, that thou art mindful of him?\" Therefore Seth
indicates that at that time there was a special persecution and distress
of the church. For the old serpent, who had brought man out of Paradise
and strangled Abel, who was dear to God, did not sleep and was not idle.
Therefore, after the consolation that Seth is born, another challenge or
fear soon follows, which the pious parents want to indicate with this
name. For it should not be considered that these names were just thought
up or invented, but that they either have a prophecy in them, or are
taken from the beginning.

**At that time they began to preach the name of the Lord.**

The rabbis understand this from an idolatry, that at this time one began
to give the name of the Lord to the creatures, as sun and moon 2c. But
Moses does not speak here of the family of the Cainites, but writes what
the godly family of Adam had done; namely, that after Enos was born, the
right worship and true invocation of the name of the Lord had begun.

And here is explained most beautifully what is meant by serving God,
namely, calling upon the name of the Lord, which is a work and service
of God in the first tablet, which commands the right service of God. But
the invocation of the name of the Lord also includes the preaching of
the word, faith or

Trust in God, the confession 2c. in itself, as Paul also summarizes it
finely Rom. 10, 13. 14. However, the works in the other table also
belong to the service of God, but they are not drawn directly to God.

After the confusion caused by Cain in Adam\'s house, the pious
generation gradually began to gather and multiply, and became a small
church[, in]{.underline} which Adam, as a high priest, governed
everything through the word and pure doctrine. Moses says that this
began around the time when Enos was born. This name, although it
indicates that the church had suffered great damage and disruption in
the course of time, was nevertheless restored by God through His grace
and mercy and given this spiritual blessing, so that they came together
in a certain place and taught, prayed and sacrificed, which had perhaps
been either forbidden or prevented by the Cainites. And here again we
see how the promised seed is in battle with the serpent and crushes its
head.

The fact that Moses does not say that they began to call on the Lord,
but on the \"name of the Lord\", is rightly referred to Christ; as he is
also called in other places schem jehovah (\"the name of the Lord\").
And from this is concluded a fine opinion that one began to call on the
name of the Lord around the time, that is, that Adam, Seth, Enos
admonished their descendants that they should wait for salvation,
believe the promise of the seed of the woman and through this hope of
the Cainites overcome deceit, cross, persecution, enmity, injustice 2c.
and should not despair of their salvation, but should rather thank God,
who would one day redeem them through the seed of the woman.

For what could Adam and Seth have taught that was better and more useful
than the Savior, Christ, who was promised to their race? And this is in
accordance with the right way and order, which one should keep in the
teaching of religion. For the first tablet is to be taught and practiced
first. And when this is understood, then is the

**[400 n n. 77-7S. Interpretation of Genesis 4:26. W. i. soi-\"-.
401]{.underline}**

The other table is easy to understand afterwards, yes, it is also easy
to fulfill the other table. For how can there be a lack of other lesser
fruits and works (commanded in the other table) if the teaching is pure,
if one believes rightly, prays rightly, gives thanks to God rightly 2c.?

At the same time, God wanted to comfort the poor and afflicted church of
the pious, so that they would not despair, but rather take comfort in
the future redemption. And so we see throughout all history that
consolation and the cross always follow one another. Since
[Joseph\'s]{.underline} parents and brothers were afflicted and hungry,
Joseph had to comfort and feed them in Egypt, Gen. 47, 11. Since they
were further oppressed and afflicted by godless kings, Moses delivered
them from bondage, Gen. 3, 7. And since they were captives in Babylon,
Cyrus released them, 2c, 2 Chron. 36, 22. 23. 36, 22. 23. For this is
the way God always leads: when He allows His own to be oppressed by the
violence and cunning of the devil and the world, He comforts them and
raises them up again, gives them prophets and pious teachers, who help
the church up again when it begins to decline and stop and resist the
devil and his fierce raging for a while.

Here we must give a certain and correct explanation, as I also said
above, what Moses calls worship, namely: not ceremonies invented and
arranged by men, nor images erected, nor such child\'s work of human
reason; but the invocation of the name of the Lord. Therefore, this is
the highest worship that is pleasing to God and commanded in the first
tablet, which includes fear of God, trust in God, confession,
invocation, preaching 2c.

For the first commandment requires faith, that you believe that God is a
helper in due time: as is said in the 9th Psalm v. 10. The other demands
true confession and invocation, that we call upon God\'s name in danger
and give thanks to God. The third requires that we teach rightly, defend
and preserve the pure and sound doctrine 2c. These are the right and
proper services that God wants. He does not want sacrifices, nor money,
nor anything else.

Other, but the first tablet he wants you to have, that you hear God\'s
word, contemplate and teach, pray, fear God 2c.

If this is done, the services or works in the other table will follow of
their own accord. For it is impossible that he who performs the services
in the first table should not also perform the other table. As also the
1st Psalm v. 2. 3. says: \"He who delights in the word of God and speaks
of it day and night, he is like a tree planted by the rivers of water,
which brings forth its fruit in its season, and its leaves do not
wither.\" This is a clear consequence that does not fail. For he who
believes in God, fears God, calls on God in times of need, praises Him
and thanks Him for His good deeds, gladly listens to God\'s word and
constantly observes His works, and teaches others to do the same: how
can he offend his neighbor? Should he not be obedient to his parents?
How could he also kill, commit adultery 2c.?

309 Therefore let the first tablet be held up to the people, and let
them be instructed in the very first thing, which is the right worship:
for this is to make a good tree, out of which good fruit will grow
afterward. But our adversaries turn it back, and want to have the fruit
before the tree is there.

But I believe that at the same time an outward and visible ceremony is
done for this service. For this is God\'s way, that He always lets a
visible sign go beside the word. When Cain and Abel sacrificed, God
showed them a visible sign that He graciously accepted Abel\'s sacrifice
and not Cain\'s. This may be what happened here. This may also have
happened here, since the Church began to flourish again and God\'s Word
was taught publicly with great prosperity and improvement and continued
well, God added a visible sign so that the Church could certainly
conclude that God was pleased with it.

311\. And God has delayed this sign, what it was, perhaps a fire from
heaven or something else, until the third generation, so that people
would learn how to be satisfied with the word. But after they were
satisfied with the mere word in

**[402 n, 7S. so. Interpretation of Genesis 4, 26. w. 1. 604-607.
403]{.underline}**

When they had comforted the Cainites in all their afflictions and
temptations, God, according to His mercy, also gave them a visible sign,
appointed a place for them, as well as people and some ceremonies, so
that the church could gather, practice its faith, teach and pray. 2c.
For when one has this, namely, the word and the first table, then, when
God does visible signs to it, a church is made of it, in which people
practice teaching, hearing, taking sacrament 2c. Then follow the works
of the other table, which are worship and pleasing works for those alone
who have and practice the first table.

312 Now Moses praises such a gift here with short words, because he says
that they began to call on the name of the Lord; not that it was done by
the Cainites, as the Jews interpret it, but by Adam\'s God-fearing
children and descendants, who were the only true church at that time.
Therefore, if some of Cain\'s descendants were also saved, they had to
keep and go to the right church.

313 So this is the sum of these first four chapters, that we should
believe that after this life there is a resurrection of the dead and
eternal life through the seed of the woman. This is the portion of the
pious and faithful, who in this temporal life are subject to all misery,
violence and persecution. The wicked, on the other hand, have the goods
and power of the world, which they use against the true church. For in
the first chapter it is shown that man was created for an immortal and
eternal life, because he was created in the image of God. This also
shows

to the commandment in the second chapter v. 17: \"The day you eat of
this tree, you will die of death. For it follows that Adam and Eve would
not have died if they had not eaten of the forbidden tree. Therefore,
through sin, they fell from the immortal being into the mortal one, and
thus they beget from themselves all their descendants equally mortal. In
the third chapter, however, immortality is again negated by the promise
of the seed of the woman. After that, in the fourth chapter, there is a
public example of eternal life, because Abel lives, even though he was
slain by his brother and taken into the bosom of God, who testifies that
his blood cries out.

The following fifth chapter is written primarily for the sake of Enoch,
who was taken up by the Lord. For though it must necessarily follow, for
the sake of the number of years of the generation of the pious, yet in
it there is something special and excellent, that he says that Enoch did
not die, like Adam, nor was he slain, like Abel, nor torn by lions or
bears; but was taken up by the Lord himself to immortality, so that we
should believe in the seed of the woman, the Lord Christ, our Redeemer
and Conqueror of the devil, for whose sake we should also wait for an
eternal and immortal life after this wretched and mortal one.

The Jews do not see or understand that these five chapters are in
perfect harmony with one another, for they do not have the true sun, the
Lord Christ, who makes all things clear and reveals them, through whom
we have forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

**404** L.H.S.\". Interpretation of Genesis 5:1. **405**

**The fifth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of the genealogical register of men and of the glory of the
Cainites.**

I.

**V. 1. This is the book of man\'s generation.**

Genesis counts here and counts the generations for two reasons: First,
because of the promise of the blessed seed that happened to Adam;
second, because of Enoch. And although he also keeps such an account in
the tenth chapter, he does it in a much different way than here. For
here he reckons the years, how long each one has lived, and says of each
one, out of special counsel and concern, that he has died.

\(2\) It seems as if these words, \"He died,\" were too much and
unnecessary. For what need is there that, after he has said that Adam\'s
whole age was nine hundred and thirty years, he adds, \"And died? For
since the number of years he lived is put, the time he died is also put;
for if he had lived longer, he would have counted the same years. But
Moses does this with special concern, namely, that he wants to hold
before us the unspeakable wrath of God and unavoidable punishment, which
is laid upon the whole human race because of sin; as Paul Rom. 5, 12.
disputes from this text and says: \"Through one man sin entered the
world, and death through sin, and so death has come to all men, because
they have all sinned.\" For this is a standing conclusion: Adam died,
therefore he was a sinner; Seth died, therefore he was a sinner; the
little children die, therefore they have sin and are sinners. Moses
wants to tell us

He says of the whole order of patriarchs that they died whether they
were sanctified and renewed by faith.

\(3\) But under this story of the deceased, like a lovely and beautiful
star, the pleasant light of immortality shines out, that Moses tells of
Enoch that he was no longer seen among men after his years, and yet he
did not die, but was taken away by God. For with this he indicates that
although the human race is condemned to death because of sin,
nevertheless the hope of life and immortality is left to us, so that we
shall not remain in death.

For this reason God not only promised life to the first world, but also
had to prove immortality with an example. And therefore Moses says of
every patriarch that he lived so many years and died, that is, he bore
the punishment of sins and was a sinner. But of Enoch he does not say
this. Not that he was not a sinner, but that even sinners are left with
the hope and comfort of living forever for the sake of the blessed seed.
Therefore also the patriarchs, who died in faith and trust in this seed,
kept the hope of eternal life. And so this is the other example that
shows that God wants to give us eternal life after this life. For of
Abel, who was strangled, the Lord says above that he lived and cried
out; so it says here that Enoch was taken up by the Lord Himself.

5 Therefore we should not despair, because we see how death was
introduced and brought from Adam into the whole human race. For we
suffer this death because we are sinners; but in death we shall not
abide, for we have made ourselves sinners.

**[406 Interpretation of Genesis 5, 1. W. i, mo-6i3. 407]{.underline}**

We are comforted by the divine providence that God intends to destroy
this death through the blessed seed, as He began with the promise of the
blessed seed and the examples of Abel and Enoch show. Therefore we have
the firstfruits of immortal life, Rom. 8:23, in hope until the
perfection of the last day comes, in which we will feel and see the life
we have believed and hoped for.

6 Flesh and blood do not understand this, but think that a man dies like
an unreasonable animal. That is why the philosophers, who were among the
best, thought that through death the soul would be released from the
body, and after it was released from the body, as from a dwelling place,
it would come into the assembly of the gods and would be rid of all
bodily burdens. The philosophers dreamed of such immortality, although
they did not consider it certain enough, nor could they defend it. The
holy scriptures, however, teach differently about the resurrection and
eternal life, and present us with the hope of the same so certainly that
we cannot doubt it.

After this part, this chapter gives us a picture and form of the whole
first world. For here are counted ten patriarchs with their descendants
until the Flood, who belong to the Lord\'s line or lineage. And would it
not be a useless effort for someone to write down on a piece of paper
this account as Moses sets it here, so that he could see from it how
long and with whom each patriarch would have lived, as I have done for
myself at leisure. For Cain also has his lineage, as Moses indicated in
the previous chapter, and I have no doubt that his lineage will have
been much greater than Six the Righteous.

\(8\) And of these two tribes or families the whole world was filled
until the Flood, in which the branches that came from both families,
that is, the descendants of both the wicked and the pious, were
destroyed and cut off, except eight men, among whom nevertheless one was
wicked and ungodly. How the

he same is seen from this chapter as a beautiful picture and form of the
first world: so this is also an exuberant wrath of God and exceedingly
terrible case, that one sees that of these ten patriarchs the whole
lineage perished and only eight people of them remained.

\(9\) But this sad history let us save to its place, and now undertake
this, that Moses may deal in this chapter, namely, that he would have us
consider the honor and supreme majesty of the first world. Adam outlived
his grandson Enoch, and died not very long before Noah was born: for
there are but an hundred and six and twenty years between them; but Seth
died but fourteen years sooner than Noah was born; but Enos and the
other patriarchs, except Enoch, lived with Noah. Whoever therefore adds
up the years, will find that so many old patriarchs, who reached some
seven hundred, some nine hundred years, lived with each other and taught
and ruled with each other of the pious church.

\(10\) This is the highest honor of the first world, that it has had so
many pious, wise and holy men together. For we are not to think that
these were common names of simple and common people; but they were the
greatest heroes that ever came into this world after Christ and John the
Baptist, and we shall see their majesty at the last day and marvel at
it, as we shall also see their glorious stories and deeds. For then it
will be revealed what Adam, what Seth, what Methuselah and others did;
what they suffered from the old serpent, how they comforted and
sustained themselves with the hope of the seed against the violence and
persecution of the world or Cainites, and how they experienced and
endured all kinds of danger and deceit; item, how great envy, hatred and
contempt they endured for the sake of the honor of the blessed seed that
was to be born from their tribe. For let no one take it for granted that
they lived without the greatest misfortune and infinite cross. All this
will become clear and evident on the last day.

**[408m ,\"-\". Interpretation of Genesis 5, 1. \".i.\"\"-\"\".
409]{.underline}**

Now it is useful and very funny to look with the mind, as it were with
the eyes, at that blessed first world, in which so many patriarchs lived
at the same time with each other, who almost all saw their first father
Adam, except Noah.

**II.**

**The Cainite Glory.**

\(12\) But the Cainites also had to boast: for they had among them the
very wisest men in all kinds of worldly dealings, also the very most
beautiful glorifiers and hypocrites, who caused much trouble to the true
church and plagued the holy patriarchs in many ways, so that we can
justly count them among the very holiest martyrs, who have constantly
confessed God and his word. For as Moses indicated above, the Cainites
outnumbered them early on in strength and skill. Although they had to
shy away from their father Adam, they nevertheless tried various ways
and means to suppress the true church of the pious, especially since the
first patriarch Adam died. For this reason they have caused the
punishment of the Flood all the sooner with their godless nature and
have pulled it over their necks.

\(13\) But the violence and wickedness of the Cainites served this
purpose and caused the holy patriarchs to teach their church all the
more faithfully and diligently. For how many mighty sermons they will
have preached throughout that time! At the same time Adam and Eve often
spoke of the first blessed state and glory in Paradise, and diligently
warned their descendants against the serpent, who had caused so much
misfortune through sin. How diligently they will have explained the
promise of the seed! How bravely and courageously will they have
comforted their own and given them courage that they should not let
themselves be overcome by the honor and violence of the Cainites, nor by
their misery and misfortune!

14 Moses omits all these things, because it is too long and too
extensive to write.

and will keep the revelation of these things until that day of eternal
glory and redemption.

15 Thus he describes the Flood, which was cruel and horrible. For he
willed that each one should think more diligently about such great
things.

\(16\) So then, he has recently described and shown the form of the
first and initial world, which was exceedingly good, and yet had a great
multitude of the very worst people: so that not more than eight men were
saved in the flood. What do we think will happen before the last day,
because now that the gospel has come to light and has been revealed,
there are so many who despise it that it is to be feared they will gain
the upper hand in a short time and make the world full of error, and the
word will be completely destroyed?

For Christ says a terrible word Luc. 18, 8: \"When the Son of Man comes,
do you think that he will also find faith?\" and Matth. 24, 37. he
compares the last times of Noah, which is all terribly said. But the
world is secure and ungrateful, despises all promises and threats of
God, is full of all sins and becomes more and more angry and perverse
day by day. For after the kingdom and power of the pope, who ruled the
world only with fear of punishment, have ceased among us, the people,
despising the pure doctrine, are now becoming vain unreasonable animals
and beasts; the holy and pious teachers and preachers are becoming fewer
and fewer, and everyone is indulging in his lusts. But it will come
about that the last day will attack the world like a thief, 2 Petri 3,
10., and will seize and creep up on the people in security, ambition,
tyranny, fornication, avarice and all kinds of vices.

\(18\) And because Christ himself said it before, let us not think that
it is fictitious. For since the first world, which had so many excellent
patriarchs, is so miserably corrupt, what have we not to fear in such
weakness of nature? Therefore, may God grant us that in the faith and
confession of His Son Jesus Christ we may soon

**[410 L. ii.\"-\". Interpretation of Genesis 5:1. \". i. 6is-\"s.
411]{.underline}**

> may be gathered to these fathers and die within twenty years, that we
> may not see such abominable misery and distress of the last times,
> both spiritual and bodily, amen.

**Second part.**

**From Adam and his son Seth.**

> **[V. 1. This is the book of man\'s generation.]{.underline}**
>
> \(19\) Adam, as follows, is a common name of the whole human race, but
> for the sake of honor it is applied to Adam alone; for it is like an
> origin of the human race. The word sepher means a sight and comes from
> saphar, which means to tell. The book of the lineage of Adam is
> called: the narration of the lineage of Adam or his descendants.
>
> **Since God created man, He made him in the likeness of God.**

From these words the blinded Jews have taken cause to fable, how Adam
slept with his Eve in paradise the day he was created, from which she
became pregnant. They have many such fables. For as far as the
understanding of divine scripture is concerned, one must not expect
anything pure or wholesome from them.

21 But Moses says it because he wants to tell Adam\'s time completely
and count the days of his life from the day he was created, so that he
may show that there was no generation before Adam. Because one must keep
difference between the procreation and creation. Before Adam there was
no procreation, but only the creation. Therefore Adam and Eve were not
born, but created and the same directly from God Himself. But he adds:
\"In the image of God he made him\", so that one should understand, when
he will say afterwards that he begot Seth, that he counts his years from
the first day in which he was created.

\(22\) What God\'s likeness or image means, we have said above. And even
though the teachers almost all understand God\'s likeness and image to
be one thing, as far as I know, it is not the same thing.

through diligent attention, there is a difference between these two
words. For zelem they have actually called an image, or figure. As when
the Scripture says, \"Tear down the altars of your images,\" the word
zelem means nothing other than a figure or image that is set up. But
humility, which means a likeness, is a perfect image. As an example,
when we speak of a dead image, as on a penny or coin, we say that it is
the image of Brutus or Caesar 2c.; but the same image does not therefore
look quite like and resemble Brutus and Caesar.

23\. because Moses says that man is also made in the likeness of God, he
indicates that man is not only similar and like God in that he has
reason or understanding and a will, but that he is also conformed to
God, that is, he has such a will and understanding, so that he
understands God and so that he wills what God wills 2c.

\(24\) If man, created in such a perfect image and likeness of God, had
not fallen, he would have lived in eternal joy and gladness, and would
have had a cheerful and firm will to obey God. But through sin, both the
likeness and image of God were lost; yet it is restored to some extent
through faith; as Paul says Eph. 4, 23. Col. 3, 10. For we begin to know
God, and the Spirit of the Lord Christ helps us to desire to be obedient
to God\'s commandments.

\(25\) Although we have only the firstfruits of such gifts, this new
creature in us only rises, but is not brought to perfection, because we
are in this flesh. The will to praise God, to give thanks, to confess,
to be patient 2c. arises to some extent, but only after the firstfruits.
For the flesh follows its kind after that which is its, and the things
that are God\'s it resists: so such gifts in us only begin to be repaid,
but the tithes or perfection of this conformity will come to us in the
life to come, after the sinful flesh has been submerged and destroyed by
death.

**[412 D. ii, 89-91. Interpretation of Genesis 5:2, 3. W. i. \"20-622.
413]{.underline}**

**V. 2. He created them male and female, and blessed them, and called
their name man, at the time they were created.**

\(26\) Above I said that the common name Adam or Man was given to Adam
alone for the sake of honor and excellence. And here I leave undone the
Rabbis who say that no man can be called Adam or Man unless he has a
wife; item, neither can a woman be Adam or Man unless she has a husband.
Such things may have flowed from the teachings of the fathers, but the
Jews falsify them with their foolish delusions and thoughts.

27 But Moses remembered the blessing to show that it was not taken from
man for sin; even as this gift of childbearing and dominion remained to
Cain, though he had slain his brother.

**V. 3. And Adam was an hundred and thirty years old, and begat a son in
his own image, and called his name Seth.**

\(28\) Moses does not remember Abel, for he departed without an heir and
is presented to us as an example of the resurrection of the dead.
Neither does he remember Cain, because he was cut off from the line of
Christ for sin and was cast out of the true church.

29 The Scriptures do not indicate what Adam did with Eve during these
hundred years. Some of our commentators, however, add another hundred
years that Adam should have lived with Eve before Cain slew his brother
Abel, and thus give Adam two hundred and thirty years before he begat
Seth. But this seems to me to be believable, as I have also told above
that the pious parents have suffered these hundred years and have
mourned the great accident of their house. For after Adam was first cast
out of paradise, he begat children, sons and daughters, who were like
him, and perhaps Abel was at his thirty years when he was struck dead.
Thus it can be seen that the children were not much younger than their
parents, who were not born, but created.

\(30\) Therefore I believe that the pious parents gave room to their
sorrow and abstained from childbearing, not of the opinion, as the Jews
lie, that Adam, like a monk, had vowed eternal chastity, and would also
have kept it, if he had not been commanded by an angel to sleep with his
wife again. But such fables belong to the Roman pope, he is worthy of
them and nothing better. But Adam was not so godless; for that would
have meant to avenge his heartache and to throw away the gift of
blessing, which God has left to nature even after sin. Such a thing was
not in Adam\'s power; for God had created him, as Moses indicates, as a
man who needed a wife, and had in his nature an instinct, given by God,
to beget children. If he now abstained from this, he abstained in such a
way that he wanted to leave his grief and heartache, which he had from
this miserable fall of his children, alone for a while, but in his own
time he wanted to come back to his Eve.

\(31\) But the fact that Moses says of Adam, \"He begat a son in his own
image,\" is disputed by many theologians. But this is the simple opinion
that Adam was created in the image and likeness of God or was an image,
created by God and not born; for he had no parents. He did not remain in
this image, but fell out of it through sin. Therefore Seth, who is born
afterwards, is not born in the image of God, but in the image of his
father Adam, that is, he is not only like his father with mouth and
nose, as one speaks, but he is also like him, so that he does not only
have eyes, ears, mouth and nose, fingers, speech, and gestures 2c. like
his father, but he is also like him with other characteristics, both of
body and soul, with manners, nature, and will 2c. In all this Seth does
not have God\'s likeness, which Adam had and lost again, but he leads
his father Adam\'s likeness; and this is an image and likeness not
created by God, but begotten from Adam.

**[\
414 \"-\". Interpretation of I Genesis 5:3-5. W. i, \"ss-\"ss.
415]{.underline}**

This image includes the original sin and the punishment of eternal
death, which fell from Adam because of sin. Just as Adam, through faith
in the future Seed, was restored to his lost image, so God also raised
up the image of Seth, after he had grown up, through the Word; as Paul
also says in Gal. 4:19: \"But I bear you again with fears, until Christ
take form in you.\"

\(33\) As for the name Seth, I have said above that it is to be taken as
a command, namely, that it is a word to wish one good fortune and
foretell good things, as if Adam had wanted to say: Cain has not only
fallen, but has also brought down his brother; so now let God grant that
this son may sit, stand and be laid as a certain foundation, which the
devil may not overthrow. Such a blessing, wish or prayer is included in
this name.

**V. 4, 5: And after that he lived eight hundred years, and begat sons
and daughters: and all his days were nine hundred and thirty years: and
he died.**

This is also a part of the blessed state in the first time of the world,
that the people have become so old and have lived long, which, if we
wanted to compare it with our lifetime now, is unbelievable. But it is
asked, how and from where it has come that the people have lived so
long? And I am not displeased that some say that nature was better then
and everything that was used for food and drink was healthier. They also
kept to the most moderate food and drink; it is unnecessary to say how
much this alone contributes to health.

35 Although the bodies were much healthier then than they are now, the
members were not as completely strong and vigorous as they were before
the fall in paradise. But this blessing of the body was also helped by
the fact that after sin they were regenerated and born again through
faith in the promised Seed; therefore, through this faith sin also
became weaker.

And as far as we have now come from such righteousness of faith, so much
have we also lost from the strength and powers of our bodies.

\(36\) As for the nourishment of the body, it is well to believe that at
the same time an apple, a fruit, was more noble and worked more
wholesome nourishment than now and lousy; so also the roots, which they
used, had more odor, strength and taste than they have now. And so all
these things, namely, holiness and righteousness, temperance, good
fruits, healthy and pure air, served and helped to long life, until the
new order of God came, by which much of the life of men departed and it
became less.

\(37\) But now, if we will diligently look at and consider our lives,
our bodies are more corrupted than nourished by eating and drinking. For
how much less and worse have the plants and fruits become, because we
live in the highest intemperance? Our first parents, however, first
lived moderately, and then chose for food and drink only that which was
convenient and useful for the nourishment and strengthening of the body.
But now there is no doubt that after the flood all fruits will be worse
than before; as we see now and in our time that all things go bad and
decrease. There is not so great a difference between the wine and fruit
of the Flood and ours as there is between the fruit before the Flood and
that which grew out of the salty and rotten ground after the Flood.

\(38\) Such and such other things are reported by some to have been the
causes of such a long life, which I do not disapprove of. I am satisfied
with the fact that God wanted people to live so long in the best part of
the world. And let us see that God, as Peter says in 2 Epist. 2, 4, 5,
did not want to spare even the first world, just as He did not spare the
angels in heaven. It is such a horrible and terrible thing about sin.
Sodom and Gomorrah are the best part of the earth.

**[416 n. n, W-S5. interpretation of Genesis 5:4. 5. W. i. sss-Wg.
417]{.underline}**

and yet they perished because of sin, Gen. 19:24. Thus the Scriptures
everywhere point to the greatness of sin and exhort to the fear of God.

39 Thus we have the reason or rather the origin of the human race,
namely Adam with his Eve, from whom is born Seth, the first branch of
this tree. Since Adam lived eight hundred years after Seth was born, he
saw and had a great generation from that time on. And this was also the
time of the righteousness renewed by the promise of the future seed. But
after that time, when men multiplied, and the children of God were mixed
with the daughters of men, the world began to be evil and corrupt, and
the glory and majesty of the holy patriarchs were despised.

\(40\) But it is a lovely spectacle, if you do not mind the effort of
reckoning, when you see how in the same first age of the world so many
gray patriarchs lived with each other. For if you diligently add up the
years of our first father Adam, you will see that he lived longer than
fifty years with Lamech, who was Noah\'s father. Therefore Adam saw all
his descendants up to the ninth generation, all of whom had innumerable
sons and daughters; which Moses does not tell, but suffices himself that
he counted the tribe and the next branches up to Noah.

\(41\) But there were undoubtedly many brave and high saints in the same
number, whose histories, if we had them, would far surpass all the
histories of the world. For the exit of the children of Israel from
Egypt, the passage through the Red Sea, through the Jordan, the prisons
and redemption 2c. are nothing in comparison. But as the first world has
perished, so have the histories of the same perished with it. So now the
most distinguished history is the Flood, whereas the others are all
barely a speck. But from the first world we have nothing more, than the
names, which are nevertheless also signs of the most important stories.

Perhaps Eve also lived until the eight hundredth year and saw such a
great generation. But what care, diligence and work did she have to
visit, adorn and teach her children and grandchildren? What cross,
sighing and misery will she have had because of the fact that the
Cainite family has so violently opposed the true church? But some of
them were also converted by accidental grace.

Therefore, it was a very golden time, whereas our time can hardly be
called filthy and dirty, since nine patriarchs lived at the same time
with all their descendants and were one in the doctrine of the promise
of the seed. All this Moses recently indicates, but does not explain it
according to the length, otherwise it would be a history over all
histories.

**Third part.**

**From Enoch.**

44 However, he did not want to pass over the history of Enoch, who was
the seventh from Adam, as it is particularly excellent, although he is
also very short in it. For with the others he only puts the names and
number of years; Enoch, however, he paints in such a way that it seems
that he did not pay attention to the other patriarchs and obscured them,
as it were, as they were godless or were not respected by God. For did
not Adam, Seth, Kenan and their descendants also walk before the Lord?
Why then does he praise such things of Enoch alone? Or is Enoch so taken
up by God that the other patriarchs are not with God and live? But now
they are certainly alive and we will see them shining in the greatest
glory on the last day.

45 Why then does Moses prefer Enoch to them, and why does he not praise
others who, although they were not taken away from God but died, also
lived a godly life? We have also heard from Enos above that great things
happened in his time, namely, that they were called to be gods.

**[418 ii, 95-vs. interpretation of I Genesis 5:4, 5. 21-24. w. i,
\"ss-oss. 419]{.underline}**

The people of Enoch, who had begun to call on the name of the Lord, that
is, God\'s word and the right service of God had begun to grow again and
to come into pregnancy; therefore, at that time, they also walked
divinely. But why does Moses not say this about Enos, but says it about
Enoch alone? Because these are his words:

**Enoch was five and threescore years old, and begat Methuselah**. **And
after he begat Methuselah, he continued in a godly life three hundred
years, and begat sons and daughters; so that all his days were three
hundred and five and threescore years. And while he lived a godly life,
God took him away, and he was seen no more.**

46\) That he says he led a godly walk or life is not to be understood in
the same way as the monks understand it, that he hid himself in a corner
and led a monastic life there; but the whole patriarch is to be placed
on a lampstand or, as Christ says Matth. 5:14, 15, on a mountain, so
that he may shine in the public ministry.

\(47\) As Jude also praises him in his epistle. \"He says, v. 14, 15,
\"Enoch, the seventh from Adam, has spoken of such, saying, Behold, the
Lord cometh with many holy ones continually, to execute judgment upon
all, and to punish all their ungodly, for all the works of their ungodly
doings, that they have been ungodly, and for all the hard things which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.\" Where Judas got this from, I
do not know, but it is likely that the patriarchs\' holy sayings and
works have remained in people\'s memories and have been passed on from
one to the next; perhaps they wrote them themselves. So now Moses
publicly praises this preaching ministry and lifts up the God-fearing
Enoch like a bright sun above all other teachers and patriarchs in the
first world.

48 From this we see that in Enoch there was a peculiar defiance of the
Holy Spirit and an excellent good courage, so that with the highest
confidence and boldness he stood alone before the other patriarchs
against Satan and the Church of the Cainites.

has. For as I have said above, to walk godly is not to run into a
wilderness or to hide in a corner, but to come forth according to one\'s
profession, and to lie down against the iniquity and wickedness of Satan
and of the race, confessing the seed of the woman, condemning the
religion and pretensions of the world, and preaching of another life
after this by Christ 2c.

\(49\) Such was the status of the pious Enoch three hundred years as the
highest prophet and high priest, who had six patriarchs for teachers.
Therefore Moses praised him as the best disciple, who had been
instructed and taught by many excellent masters, and had been so graced
and adorned by the Holy Spirit that he had been a prophet of all
prophets and a saint of all saints in the first bet. Thus Enoch is first
of all great because of his profession and preaching ministry.

50 Secondly, it is also praised before others because God wanted it to
be an example for the whole world to comfort and strengthen faith in the
life to come. Therefore, this text should be written in letters of gold
and deeply engraved in the heart.

\(51\) And here is shown once more what it means to walk before God,
that is, to preach of another life than this; to teach of the seed that
is to come, how the serpent\'s head is to be crushed and Satan\'s
kingdom destroyed. For this was Enoch\'s sermon, who was a husband and a
householder, had a wife and children, governed his household and
provided food through his work; lest one think of a monastic life, which
seems to be a godly walk before God. Since the pious man had lived three
hundred years after Methuselah was born in the highest devotion, faith,
patience and innumerable crosses and misfortunes, which he overcame
through faith in the future Seed, he was no longer seen.

52\) Here consider how weighty and significant these words are; he does
not say, as he has done of other patriarchs, \"He has died,\" but, \"He
is no longer seen.

**[420 L. n, ss-ioo. Interpretation of Genesis 5:21-24. W. i, sss-\"M.
421]{.underline}**

which all teachers have diligently noted as a certain proof of the
resurrection of the dead. In Hebrew it is interpreted recently, but very
emphatically; for thus it is written, \"And Enoch walked with God,\"
veenennu, \"and not he,\" thus indicating that he was lost or
disappeared unexpectedly and contrary to all the other patriarchs\'
opinion, and was no longer among men.

Therefore, his father and grandfather will undoubtedly be greatly
shocked at the loss of such a great man. For they knew with what
diligence and earnestness he had taught the fear of God and how much he
had suffered for it. How do you think they must have felt, having lost
so suddenly such a man who had testified to his piety before God and
man?

\(54\) Now give either an eloquent poet or orator, who could act this
text as it is worth, and as it should be acted upon. Enos, Seth, and all
the other patriarchs do not know where Enoch has gone; therefore they
seek him, his son Mechusalah seeks him, the other children and
children\'s children seek him. And because the Cainites were suspicious
of wickedness, they may have thought that Enoch was slain by them, like
Abel, and buried secretly, until they were finally told by God\'s
revelation through an angel that he had been saved by God Himself and
placed in Paradise. They did not learn of this soon after the first day
or the next, but perhaps after many months or years. However, they
lamented the misery of this holy man as if he had been slain by the
Cainan hypocrites. For this rule and order is always kept, that before
consolation comes, one always feels the cross and suffering first. For
God comforteth no man but they that mourn, neither quickeneth any but
they that die, neither justifieth any but sinners: for out of nothing he
maketh all things.

55Therefore it must have been a very great cross and suffering of the
holy patriarchs, that they had lost the man and could see him nowhere,
who had been the whole

He had ruled the world with wholesome and healthy teachings and had done
many good things throughout his life. Because they mourned and grieved
over the fall of the holy man, they were comforted and it was revealed
to them that the Lord had taken Enoch away. We have no such text from
any man, except from Elijah alone. So God soon wanted to testify and
prove in the first world with a public example that he had prepared
another life for his saints, in which they should live with him.

\(56\) The Hebrew word lakach does not mean, transtulit, has accepted,
as it reads in our translation, but: He took unto Himself; and these are
the words of life, which God hath revealed by an angel unto Enoch\'s
father, and unto all the generation of the saints, that they might have
comfort and promise of eternal life, not in word only, but also in work,
as they had of Abel before. For how sweet and comforting do you think
this sermon was to them, when they heard that Enoch did not die, nor was
he slain by the wicked, nor was he taken away by Satan\'s cunning and
deceit, but was taken up by the living and almighty God Himself?

57 And this is the special decoration that Moses wanted to show in this
chapter, namely, that the Almighty God does not take to Himself geese,
nor cows, nor wood, nor stones, nor dead men, but Enoch himself; to show
that a much better life is reserved and appointed for men than this one
here, which is full of all misery and unhappiness. For even though Enoch
is a sinner, he passes away from this life in such a way that God gives
him another and eternal life, because he lives with God and God takes
him to Himself.

\(58\) Enoch therefore walked before God, that is, he was a faithful
witness in this life, that after this life men should live in an eternal
life for the sake of the promised seed. For this is the right life
before God, not the natural life, which is subject to voluptuousness.

**[422 L. n. 100-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 5:21-24. W. i, sss-E
423]{.underline}**

is thrown. And as Enoch preached these things continually, so God also
fulfills and makes true in him this sermon, that we should believe and
certainly believe that Enoch was a man, like us, born of flesh and
blood, like us, taken from the fleshly Adam to God, and now lives a
divine, that is, an eternal life.

59 Before the same generation of holy fathers knew this, it must have
been terrible to hear that Enoch, such a holy man, had gone away and
disappeared in such a way that no one knew where he was or how he had
perished. Therefore, the dear parents and forefathers were in great
distress; but afterwards they were again excellently rejoiced and
comforted, since they heard that their son lived with God Himself and
was transferred by God into an angelic life.

This comfort God shows to Seth, who was the highest prophet and high
priest of the time, \"after his father Adam had already slept seven and
fifty years in the faith in the giving seed and he was now in the eight
hundred and sixty years old. The same, when he is now old and
well-bedded, and therefore without doubt (assured in faith in the giving
Seed) waits with great desire for the redemption of his body and desires
to be gathered to his people, he dies with great willingness shortly
thereafter, namely, after two and fifty years; which will have been a
short time for him and the holy old man will have made his will in it,
visited his sons and children\'s children, preached and admonished them
that they should persevere in the faith of the promised seed and hope
for an eternal life, to which Enoch, his son and their father, would be
taken up and now lived with God. In this way, the holy old father stayed
among his own throughout the time, blessed each one especially and took
leave of them, comforting and teaching himself and them in joy and in
old age.

61, If I should die within six moons, I would hardly have time enough to
make my will; for then I wanted to teach the people what the summa would
be mei

I wanted to admonish them and urge them to persevere in this, and as
much as I could see and think for myself, I wanted to warn them and
admonish them that they should beware of the doctrine. This could not be
directed to a day or a month. Therefore, the fifty years that Seth lived
after Enoch was taken up were a very short time (for spiritual people
have a much different way of reckoning their time than the children of
this world), in which he taught his people of the glorious comfort that
after this life there was hope for another, which God revealed in taking
Enoch, who was our flesh and blood, to Himself.

62 Therefore do not follow your lusts, but despise this life and hope
for a better one. For where is trouble and misfortune that is not in
this life? How many diseases, how many great dangers, how many terrible
accidents it is subjected to! That we remain silent about the highest
misery, namely, the spiritual misery, so\' the conscience exercises and
plagues, as there is, the law, the sin and the death itself.

\(63\) What is it, then, that you desire this life so fervently, and it
seems that you cannot be satisfied with it? If God would not let us live
for the sake of praising Him, thanking Him and serving our brethren, we
should shorten it for ourselves. Therefore, let us diligently render
this obedience to God, and hasten with sighs to the righteous life to
which my son and your brother, Enoch, is admitted by God Himself. Such
and such will have been taught by the holy old man after the recognized
consolation. And no doubt, after they understood that Enoch had been
taken up to immortality by the Lord while still alive, they would have
wished that they could also be redeemed from this miserable life in the
same way, or even through death.

64 If the holy fathers had such a great desire for the life to come for
the sake of Abel and Enoch, who they knew lived with God, how much more
should we, who have the Prince of life, the Lord Christ, do so?

**[424 \" ri. IM-IV4. Interpretation of Genesis 5:21-24. W. I, WS-\"I.
425]{.underline}**

Himself? as Peter calls Him in the Acts of the Apostles Cap. 3:15; in
whom they believed that he would come, but we know that he appeared and
went to the Father, that he might prepare the place for us, and sit at
the right hand of his Father, and represent us. Should we not sigh for
the things to come and be hostile to these temporal things? For it was
not Enoch or Abel who showed us the hope of a better life, but Christ
himself, who is the Prince and Lord of life. Therefore, we should
generously despise this life and this world and sigh with all our
hearts, longing for the future honor and glory of eternal life.

But here we feel how great is the weakness of our flesh, which rages and
rages with diligence and love for temporal things, but does not look
forward at all to the most certain life to come. For how could it not be
certain, since we have so many witnesses to this, Abel, Enoch, Elijah,
even the head and first fruits of the resurrection, Christ Himself, 1
Cor. 15:20, 23. Therefore the godless Epicureans find it well worth
their while that God and man are enemies to them; and our own flesh is
also worthy of this, which often tempts us to an Epicurean nature,
because we drown so deeply in temporal concerns and so surely despise
eternal goods.

\(66\) Therefore, we should keep these words in mind and take them
diligently to our hearts, that Enoch was not taken away by a patriarch
or an angel, but by God Himself. For this is the comfort which made the
death of the holy patriarchs easier and gentler, so that they also
departed from this life with joy. . For they saw that the seed which was
promised to them, even before he came, would lie with Satan in the
field, and would bruise his head in Enoch. They also had such hope of
themselves and all their faithful descendants, and most surely despised
death, as not being death but only a sleep from which they would awake
again to eternal life. For to the faithful, death is not death but
sleep. For if the terror, the sting and the power of the

death is gone, it cannot be called death. Therefore, the greater and
stronger faith is, the weaker death is; but the weaker faith is, the
more violent and bitter death is.

67 And our sin is held up to us here once again. For if Adam had not
sinned, we human beings would not have died, but, like Enoch, would have
been taken up from this natural life to a better and spiritual one
without any fear or sorrow. But because we have now lost life, this
history shows us that we should not despair of the restitution of
paradise and life. The flesh cannot be without pain and suffering, but
when the conscience is satisfied, death comes to us like a swoon,
through which we pass into rest. But in the innocent nature also the
flesh should not have felt pain; for we would have moved away as through
a sleep, from which, as soon as we awoke, we would have been in heaven
and an angelic life. But because the flesh is corrupted by sin, it must
die and be erased by death. Thus, perhaps Enoch fell asleep on a green
lawn in prayer and ascended in sleep from God without pain and death.

\(68\) Therefore, let us remember this text, which Moses did not want to
pass over, but to show it as a special history of the first world. For
what more excellent thing could have happened than that a corruptible
sinful man, born of flesh and blood and defiled and corrupted by sin,
should thus overcome death and yet not die? Christ is a man and
righteous, but our sins make him subject to the most bitter death, from
which he is redeemed on the third day and rises to eternal life.
Therefore this is a special thing with Enoch, that he does not die, but
is raised without death into a spiritual life.

69\) The rabbis are a common enemy, because what is especially good in
the Scriptures, they falsify in the most shameful way. As they do here
of Enoch much useless gossip, that he may well have been pious and holy.

**[426 \" n. Interpretation of Genesis 5, 21-24. W. i. kti-sis.
427]{.underline}**

but was very much inclined to carnal pleasures. Therefore, God had mercy
on him and prevented him with death, so that he would not sin and be
condemned. Dear, does this not mean that the text is masterfully
falsified? For what is it necessary to say of Enoch alone that he had
evil inclinations, as if the other patriarchs had not also had and felt
them? And why do they not pay attention to the fact that Moses says
twice that he walked before the Lord? This is indeed a testimony that he
did not dwell on his temptations, but overcame them, strong in faith.
But when the Jews speak of evil inclinations, they mean fornication,
avarice and similar movements. But Enoch undoubtedly lived in severe
temptations and felt the stake with Paul, 2 Cor. 12, 7, and fought daily
against the old serpent. Finally, however, when he had been afflicted
and weighed down with all kinds of temptations, the Lord called him to
depart from this life and enter into a better one.

\(70\) But what kind of life he now lives in, we, who are still flesh
and blood, cannot know. But we have enough to know that he was also
taken up with the body, which the patriarchs undoubtedly knew from the
revelation, and who needed such comfort when they also died. We know
this much, but what Enoch did, where he was and what kind of life he
led, we do not know. We do know that he is alive, but not in this
natural life, for he is with God, as the text clearly says.

Therefore, this is a remarkable and excellent history by which God
wanted to assure the first and initial world and make certain the hope
of a better life after this one. Afterwards, in the other world that had
the Law, He gave the example of Elijah, who was also taken away by the
Lord in the presence and appearance of His servant Elisha. But we are in
the New Testament as in the third world, and have much clearer example,
the Lord Christ our Savior Himself, who went to heaven with many other
saints. For

God wanted the world to bear witness to the resurrection of the dead at
all times, so that He could lead our hearts and minds away from this
stinking and utterly miserable life, in which we serve God as long as it
pleases Him, with obedience in all kinds of worldly offices, and
especially by instructing others and bringing them to the fear and
knowledge of God. But we do not have a permanent city here, Hebr. 13,
14. For Christ went to the Father to prepare a place for us, Joh. 14, 3.

\(72\) As we may now find among us those who consider such teaching
ridiculous and unbelievable, there is no doubt that this history, at the
time it happened, would have been considered foolish and mocking by the
majority of people. For the world always keeps its kind. That is why
such histories are written in the holy scriptures by divine counsel and
will, and are written for the saints and believers to read, understand,
believe and follow. For they obviously prove the victory over death and
sin, and also show certain comfort in the overcoming of the law, wrath
and judgment of God on Enoch. Therefore, pious and God-fearing people
could not have anything more lovely, nor more pleasant, than such
histories.

But in the New Testament, God\'s mercy is quite exuberant. For although
we do not reject such histories, we have much greater ones, namely, the
Son of God Himself, who ascends to heaven and sits at the right hand of
His Father. In him we see that the serpent\'s head is completely crushed
and that life is restored, which we lost in paradise. This is much more
and greater than that Enoch and Elijah were taken up, and in this way
God wanted to comfort the first world and the other world that had the
Law.

74 This, then, is the main doctrine held out to us in these five
chapters, namely, that men died and came to life again. For through Adam
they all died, but those who believed came to life again through the
promised seed, as the story of Abel shows.

**[428L. n, 106-108. Interpretation of Genesis 5, 21-24. 28. 29. W. 1,
643-\"47. 429]{.underline}**

and Enoch testifies. In Adam, Seth and others death is clearly
indicated, because it is written: \"And died\". But in Abel and Enoch is
shown the resurrection of the dead and an immortal life. To this belongs
all this, that we should not despair in death, but consider it certain
that those who believe in the promised seed will live and be taken up to
God, whether out of water or fire, or from the gallows, or from the
grave. Therefore we want to live and shall live in an eternal life,
which is after this life, through the promised Seed.

**Fourth Part.**

**Of Lamech and his son Noah.**

I.

V. 28, 29: **Lamech was an hundred and two and fourscore years old, and
begat a son. And called his name Noah, saying, He shall comfort us in
our labour and our labours upon the earth, which the LORD hath cursed.**

Genesis 75 touches only incidentally on the history of the name of Noah,
which is nevertheless worthy of careful consideration. Lamech had
already lived when Enoch was taken away from this life into another and
immortal one. Because of this, God showed such honor and such a glorious
miracle that He took Enoch, a man like us, and from a lowly and despised
state (for he was a husband and a householder who had sons, daughters,
servants, fields and cattle) into an eternal life: then the holy fathers
became full of courage and joy and came to think that the joyful day of
fulfilling the promise was now near at the door. For God, by receiving
Enoch to Himself alive, had shown them His grace and mercy in a special
way.

76\) Just as Adam and Eve, after God had made the promise to them, had
come to hope that Cain would be the same promised seed, because they saw
that he was a man, as they were: so also I consider that Lamech from

He said, \"He will comfort us and help us out of the misery of this
life; now the original sin and the punishment for it will cease, and we
will be restored to our perfect righteousness; the curse that the earth
bore because of Adam\'s sin will also cease, along with all the misery
and suffering that has come upon the whole human race because of sin.

Thus, when Lamech sees that his grandfather is moved into paradise
without any sorrow, without sickness and death, he thinks that it exists
that the whole paradise follows, considers that Noah is the promised
seed that will restore the whole world; for he clearly insists that the
curse should be taken away. Now the curse or punishment of sin cannot be
taken away unless the original sin itself is taken away.

Therefore the rabbis, the harmful and cursed corrupters of the
Scriptures, are worthy to be hated. For they falsify and pervert this
text thus: He will give us rest from the works and labor of our hands,
that is, he will show us an easier way to build the earth, namely, that
it can be plowed with oxen harnessed together and does not have to be
dug with human hands, as has been the practice until now. Now I am
surprised that Lyra also accepts this opinion and follows them, who
should know the usual way to falsify the Scriptures, which the Jews use
everywhere, namely, that they draw what is spiritual only on the
physical, that they have fame with men. For what can this holy patriarch
be accused of more unreasonable than that he should rejoice over his son
Noah\'s birth for the sake of this benefit, which belongs to the belly?

79 For his heart was troubled with another sorrow, namely, the wrath of
God and death with all the other miseries of this life, which he hoped
Noah would put an end to, so he leaped for joy, proclaimed good things
beforehand, and put others off on this hope. But for the plow and cattle
and other small things, so to this

**[430 e n, los-m. exegesis of Genesis 5, 28. 29. W. i, w7-6°o.
431]{.underline}**

He did not worry, as the blind Jews rave; but he hoped that his son Noah
would be the future seed, who would bring back the previous state in
paradise, in which there had been no corruption. But now, he says, we
feel the curse even in the work and deeds of our hands, that the earth
bears thorns and thistles, even though it is built with the greatest
diligence. But now a new and blessed time will come, and the cursing of
the earth, so that we are punished for sin, will cease, because sin will
cease. This is the right understanding and opinion of this text.

But the pious father is deceived and mistaken. For the honor of bringing
back all that we lost in paradise should not belong to a man\'s son, but
to God\'s son. Therefore the rabbis are foolish. For although the earth
is not dug with hands, but plowed with animals, the work of hands has
not yet ceased, and the taking away of Haystack pointed not to a bodily
comfort, which would serve the belly and be pleasant, but to the
redemption from sin and death. Therefore Lamech also hoped that
everything would be restored to the first state through Noah; for he saw
that the beginning of such change had already taken place in his
grandfather Enoch, and was certain that the redemption and restitution
of all things was now at the door. As Eve also said when she gave birth
to her first son, \"I have overcome the man of the Lord,\" that is, the
one who is to cancel the punishment that lies on us because of sin and
restore us to the first estate. As Eve was deceived at that time, so
here, out of great desire that the world would be set right, the pious
Lamech is also deceived.

81\. And these examples show how sincerely the holy patriarchs desired,
hoped for, and sighed for this redemption. For though they may have
erred, as Eve miscarried with Cain and was deceived, yet this desire for
redemption is of the Holy Spirit and indicates that they had true and
abiding faith in the promised Seed; and

That Eve calls her son Cain, Lamech his son Noah, these are words, as
St. Paul calls it Rom. 8, 22, to the anxious and longing creature, which
thinks that there is the resurrection of the dead, redemption from sin
and restitution of all lost goods. Therefore this is the simple and
right opinion: that after Lamech, the grandson, sees that his
grandfather Enoch is taken away from this misery, fear and work of
original sin with certain meaning and indication of a future life, and a
son is born to him, he calls him Noah, that is rest. For he hopes that
through him redemption from the curse of sin and sin itself shall come
to pass. This interpretation is according to faith and affirms the hope
of resurrection and eternal life.

Therefore, you can see from this how terribly ungrateful the present
world is, because these most holy people, of whom we are not worthy to
wipe their shoes, show such a great desire of the future life
everywhere. But how far is it from each other to have a thing and to
desire it? These patriarchs were the holiest of men and adorned with the
highest gifts, as the true heroes of the whole world: nor do we see that
the highest desire for the future Seed, the Lord Christ, was with them;
whom they considered the highest treasure, hungered and thirsted after
him, and burned with love for him. But we, who have Christ among us,
given, bestowed and glorified, sitting at the right hand of God and
representing us, despise him and consider him much less and less worthy
than any other creature. O sorrow upon sorrow! O sin upon sin!

Therefore we see how unequal the world has been at all times. The first
world is the best and holiest, in which are the noblest gems of the
whole human race. After the Flood there were also some glorious and
great men, patriarchs, kings, prophets, who, though they are not like
the patriarchs before the Flood, are seen to have a special desire for
Christ, as Christ Himself says in Luc. 10:24: \"Many prophets and kings
desired to see,

**[432n . iii-us. Interpretation of I Moses 5:28, 29, 32. w. i, \"o-LA.
433]{.underline}**

which ye see, and have not seen.\" But our time, which is the time of
the New Testament, in which Christ came, is, as it were, the shell and
basic soup of the world; for it holds nothing less than Christ, since
the former world had nothing more noble nor more precious than this
treasure.

What is the cause of this misery? Our dear holy flesh, the world and the
devil. For we soon tire of the present, as it is said and true: What is
strange, always makes love; what is mean, is soon despised. And as a
poet says: Minuit praesentia famam. (In reality, nothing is so beautiful
as we see it in our thoughts.) As far as revelation is concerned, we are
richer than the patriarchs; but they held much more dear also a much
lesser revelation and were, as it were, lovers of this bridegroom. But
we are the fat, full, horny, thick and strong servant, Deut. 32, 15;
because we have the word abundantly and are too abundantly showered with
it.

\(85\) As the first world was the best and holiest, so the last is the
worst and most wicked. Since God has not spared the first world, but has
also corrupted the other world, destroying one monarchy after another,
one empire after another, what do we think will happen to the last
world, which most certainly despises Christ, the comfort of all the
Gentiles, as he is called in Haggai 2:8, who nevertheless imposes
himself on us through his word and the dear sacraments, to such an
extent that we grow tired of him and are disgusted with him?

**II.**

V. 32. **Noah was five hundred years old and begat Shem, Ham and
Japheth.**

This also is very briefly spoken, but Moses does according to his way,
and sums up great and important things with very few words, from which
an industrious reader does not pay attention. What is it then (someone
might say) that Noah only begets children in his five hundredth year? It
must be either a special and great temptation, so he had the marriage so
long without children, or must be the highest chastity, so he

has been able to abstain from a woman for so long, which seems more
likely to me. Of the Papists\' shameful chastity I say nothing here; of
ours neither. Look at the prophets and apostles, item, the other
patriarchs also, who were undoubtedly chaste and holy people: but what
were they compared to this Noah, who is a man and yet lived chastely for
five hundred years without marital status?

In our time you will hardly find one in a thousand who abstains from
wives until his thirtieth year. But Noah, having lived so many years
without a wife, finally entered into matrimony and begat children. This
is a certain proof that he was capable of marriage before that time, but
for some reason he abstained from it.

\(88\) Therefore, first of all, he had a special gift for keeping
chastity and an almost angelic nature, for it seems impossible for a man
to live five hundred years without a wife. This also indicates that Noah
had great displeasure with the world. For why else would he have
abstained from marriage, but because he saw that his cousins had all
become tyrants and filled the world with injustice and violence? That is
why he thought he would rather be without children altogether than have
them so advised. And I also think that he would never have taken a wife
if he had not been admonished and commanded to do so either by the
patriarchs or by an angel. For he that abstaineth from matrimony until
the five hundredth year, shall also abstain therefrom in the remainder
of his life.

Thus Moses indicates very great things in short words, and (an unskilful
reader does not pay attention to this) since he seems to speak nothing
of chastity, he praises Noah\'s chastity above all the chastity of those
who were in the first world, so that he almost sets him as an example of
angelic chastity.

90 The Jews lie here, as is their way, and pretend that Noah abstained
from marriage because he knew that God would destroy the world with the
flood: so he, like the other patriarchs, was now in time, about the
hundredth year of his life.

**[434 n\> 113-interpretation of Genesis 5, 32. w. 1, 653-656.
435]{.underline}**

or even less, he would have filled the world almost within four hundred
years and God would have had to destroy him with his entire family. Then
they also invented that Shem was called the firstborn because he was the
first to be circumcised.

In sum, the Jews distort everything and direct it to their carnal mind
and glory. If this is the reason why Noah abstained from marriage, why
did not the other patriarchs also abstain from marriage and
childbearing? Therefore they are stale and loose lies. Why do they not
rather insist that this was a special gift to Noah, that he, since he
was a man, abstained from married life for so many years? Therefore,
such examples of such great chastity are not found at any time.

\(92\) The papists are annoyed that Moses so often says of the
patriarchs that they begat sons and daughters, and say that the first
book of Moses about creation is a book in which there is nothing more
than that the patriarchs loved their wives too much; and they consider
it a shameless thing that Moses so often and diligently remembers this.
But the impure hearts cannot leave even the highest chastity
unblasphemed.

For if you want to see good examples of chastity, read Moses, who says
of the patriarchs that they did not enter into marriage until they were
well advanced in years. And among these, Noah shines like a bright star,
abstaining until the five hundredth year. You will not find such
examples of such high chastity in the papacy. For although some of them
do not sin in their bodies, they have nothing in their hearts but impure
and shameless thoughts, and this is the punishment for despising the
marriage state, which God has ordained as a remedy for the corrupt
nature.

\(94\) But that Noah abstained was for another cause. For he did not
condemn the married state, nor did he consider it an ungodly state, nor
did he reproach it, but he saw that the children of the patriarchs, who
had been before him, were wicked.

They have gone to the ungodly race of the Cainites. He could not suffer
such children, but waited in the fear of God for the end of the world.
But that he nevertheless entered into matrimony and begat children, he
undoubtedly did out of special admonition and command of God.

Now here is the question: How the sons of Noah succeeded one another,
and this is worth asking, so that one may have the account of the years
of the world all the more certain. Now it is the common opinion that
Shem is the firstborn, because here his is thought to be the first. But
the Scriptures enforce that Japheth is the firstborn, and Shem the next,
and Ham the third. And this is proved thus: Two years after the flood
Shem begat his son Arphachad, but Shem was then an hundred years old,
Gen 11:10. Therefore Shem was old in the flood at eight and ninety
years. But Noah was old when Shem was born, four hundred and eight and
ninety years. Japheth was older than Shem, Gen 10:21, so it follows that
Ham alone, the youngest brother, was born in the five hundredth year of
Noah.

96\. but Shem is preferred to Japheth not because he was first
circumcised, as the Jews lie, seeking only carnal honor and glory, but
because through him Christ, the promised seed, should come. And just in
this way Abraham, the youngest son, is preferred to his brothers Haran
and Nahor.

97\) But how does this rhyme with the text that says that when Noah was
five hundred years old, he begat Shem, Ham and Japheth? So it rhymes: if
you turn the preterite into a plusquamperfectum and thus say: Since Noah
was five hundred years old, he had begotten 2c. For Moses does not say
what year each one was born, but sets a year in which he says that these
three sons were born to Noah. Thus the scripture unites at the very
best.

98 And so Moses now concludes this fifth chapter with a very beautiful
and noticeable example of chastity, that Noah was only as a

**[436 D. rr, II5-N7. Interpretation of I Moses 5, 32. cap. 6. w. i,
\"se-seo. 437]{.underline}**

Before that, however, he was holy and chaste, and abstained from being
married because he was angry that the youth of his ancestors had fallen
into Cainian wickedness. But he is obedient to God when he calls him to
be married, even though he could have lived fully without a wife and
chastely.

So Moses describes the first and initial world through these five
chapters with short and few words, but so that one can easily see that
the first world was the holiest and a right golden time, of which the
poets also say and have it without doubt from the tradition and teaching
of the fathers.

When sins became strong and prevalent, God did not spare the first
world, but destroyed it with the flood, just as He did not spare the
others who were under the law. For because of idolatry and unrighteous
worship, not only was one monarchy after another abolished, but God\'s
people themselves, after many misfortunes and imprisonments, were
finally completely devastated and destroyed by the Romans.

Our present world, which is the third world and yet a world of grace, is
so full of blasphemy and abominations that it is impossible to speak
them out with words or to reach them with thoughts; therefore it cannot
be punished with bodily and temporal punishment, but it must be punished
with eternal death and eternal hellish fire, or, that I speak thus, with
the deluge of fire[.]{.underline} For this is prophesied by the colors
on the rainbow. The first is a watery color and means that the first
world is punished with the deluge because of sin and fornication. The
middle color is yellow, because God avenged the idolatry and godlessness
of the middle world with various plagues. The third and highest color is
fire, which will finally consume the world with all unrighteousness and
sins.

Therefore, we must pray that God may rule and keep our hearts in His
fear and make us full of faith and trust in His mercy, so that we may
joyfully await our redemption and the punishment and judgments of the
ungodly world, Amen! Amen!

**The sixth chapter.**

**First part.**

**From the sins of the first bet at all, as the cause of their
downfall.**

\(1\) In the first five chapters Moses described the birth of mankind as
it was in the first world, and painted before our eyes the wonderful
glory of the holy patriarchs who ruled the same first world. And with
these five chapters, as with the first book, he concluded the histories
of the most blessed part of the whole human race and of the first world
before the Flood. Here we will now turn to the other book of Genesis, in
which the history of the Flood is described, that is

indicates that Cain\'s entire lineage is destroyed, but the lineage of
the pious remains forever. For since in the Flood everything perishes
and perishes, the generation of the pious is preserved as an eternal
world.

\(2\) But this is very terrible, that the whole human race is destroyed
except for eight people, when the same time was the right golden time.
For the following generations are not at all equal to the glory,
greatness and majesty of the first world, and yet God has destroyed that
which he created as the best and most glorious in the human race, so
that we are justly terrified by it.

3\. yet God has kept His way even in this punishment, for that which is
highest

**[438 8. II, N7-ns. Interpretation of Genesis 6. W. I, \"61-664.
439]{.underline}**

and most excellent, he is the one who is most willing to strike down and
humble, so that Peter does not say in vain, 2 Epistle 2:5, that God did
not spare the first world, because he wants to indicate that it was like
a paradise compared to the next world. He did not spare even the most
glorious creatures, the angels, nor the kings of His people, nor the
firstborn at all times; but the more and higher men were adorned with
gifts, the harder and more severely He punished them, since they began
to misuse their gifts.

4 Thus the Holy Spirit speaks of the kings in Psalm 2, v. 9: \"You shall
smite them with a scepter of iron; you shall break them as pots. But is
not he who has ordained the kings, and wills that every man should honor
them and be obedient to them, the LORD himself? So he condemns and
rejects the wisdom of the wise and the righteousness of the just. For
this is God\'s true and constant work, that He condemns what is most
glorious, strikes down what is most powerful, and makes weak what is
strongest, even though they are His creatures: but He does this so that
the world may have many and terrible examples of His wrath, to terrify
the wicked with it, and to awaken us to learn to despair of ourselves
and to trust in His power alone. Therefore, one must either live under
the shadow of God\'s wings and trust in His grace and mercy, or perish.

Now, after the fall, it has taken on such a form with men that the more
one is adorned with gifts, the more he exalts himself with them. This
was the sin of the angels who fell; this was the sin of the first world,
in which the best and most glorious part of men lived. But because they
have exalted their wisdom and other gifts, they have perished. This has
been the sin of the highest kings; this has been the sin of almost all
the firstborn. And what may it be much said? This is the original sin,
that we do not recognize the great and excellent gifts of God, nor can
we use them properly.

6\. that for this reason the highest people to

The fact that the gifts or goods are set as horrible examples does not
happen because it is the fault of the gifts or goods, but of those who
possess them. But God is such a dialectician that he punishes the person
and the thing that belongs to him at the same time (arguere a
conjugatis).

7\. but it is good that such examples be diligently remembered, to
frighten the worthy with them, and to humble us, that we may learn how
we, our lives, and all that is ours, depend upon the will of God, who
will give grace to the humble, but destroy the worthy, 1 Peter 5:5. But
because the world does not understand this, nor does it do so, kings,
mighty men and righteous men fall one after the other, and the world
becomes full of examples of God\'s wrath and judgment. As the Virgin
Mary also sings Luc. 1, 51. 52. 53: \"He scatters those who are hopeful
in their hearts. He pushes the mighty off the throne; he leaves the rich
empty.\"

\(8\) Such examples abound in all ages, in all courts of lords and
princes, in all countries and people; and yet we have such hard hearts
by the grace of the holy devil, the prince of the world, that we do not
turn to such things, but utterly despise them, even though we see and
feel that we must also fall to the ground because of them. Therefore,
good to those who pay attention to it and allow themselves to be moved
by such examples of wrath, so that they may be humbled and live in the
fear of God.

\(9\) Therefore let us consider how the first world, which perished in
the Flood, was excellent and had the best, holiest and noblest men in
appearance and reputation, whereas we are to be reckoned as the yeasts
of the world. For the Scripture does not say that they were wicked and
unrighteous among themselves, but before God. \"The same,\" says Moses,
\"saw that they were wicked.\" Now the eyes of God see and judge much
differently than the eyes of men. \"My ways,\" saith he in Isaiah, chap.
55, v. 8, 9, \"are not your ways: but as the heaven is higher than the
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts.\"

\(10\) That is why these tyrants and giants were kept and regarded among
themselves.

**[440 \"- n. iis-iri. Interpretation of Genesis 6. W. i, \"\"4-66\"\".
441]{.underline}**

The most wise and righteous people; as in our time kings and princes,
popes, bishops, theologians, physicians, lawyers, noblemen sit on top
and are considered great, as special gems and lights of the world. Such
people were the children of God in the first world, not according to
delusion, but with truth, as they were adorned with virtue and many
glorious gifts. But because they fell into pride and contempt of God
over these gifts, God rejected them and corrupted them with their gifts,
as if they were the yeast, filth and dung of men.

And this is a common affliction of our nature. For it cannot refrain
from it, it must blow itself out and exaggerate its gifts, which are
given to it by God, if it is not prevented from doing so by the Holy
Spirit. That is why I have often said that a man has no more harmful
enemy than himself. For this I learn and experience in myself, that I
have no such great cause to fear apart from myself as in myself. For the
gifts that we have within us stimulate and drive our nature to hope.

\(12\) But as God, who is by nature the most gracious, cannot refrain
from adorning and showering us with various gifts, such as a fresh and
healthy body, money and goods, wisdom, skill, knowledge of the
Scriptures, etc., so we also cannot refrain from exalting ourselves with
such gifts and becoming proud of them. Therefore our life would be the
most miserable thing if we had to do without the gifts of God: nor is it
twice as miserable if we have them; for we become twice as worse
thereby. Such wickedness is original sin, which all men, except
believers, do not know or understand, or even despise as a bad and small
thing.

We see such wickedness not only in ourselves, but also in others. For
how proud and arrogant are money and goods, which are the least of all
other gifts! That is why the rich, whether they be noblemen, burghers or
peasants, regard all other people as gnats and flies. But much greater
abuse is done with

other higher gifts than wisdom and righteousness. Because these are all
gifts that God distributes among us, both things happen, namely, that
God cannot suffer such arrogance and we cannot let it go.

This was the sin of the first world. Among Cain\'s descendants were the
best and brightest people, but before God they were the worst; for they
exaggerated their gifts and despised God, from whom they had such gifts.
The world does not understand and judge such naughtiness, but
[God]{.underline} alone judges it.

\(15\) And where these spiritual vices are persistent and continue, they
are soon followed by the carnal ones. For \"the beginning of sin is to
fall away from God,\" as Jesus says in Sirach Cap. 10, 14. So the
devil\'s first fall is from heaven to hell, that is, from the first
table to the other. For when people begin to become ungodly, that is,
they do not fear God and do not believe Him, but despise Him, His word
and His servants, then it comes about with them that they stray from the
right doctrine into heretical delusions and thoughts, teach, defend and
adorn the same. Now these are such sins that the world considers them to
be the highest holiness, and those who commit them have only the praise
that they mean religion, are God-fearing, pious, righteous, and have
only the name of the church and God\'s cinema. For men cannot judge of
the sins of the first table, and thereafter such despisers of God fall
into abominable adultery, theft, capital murder, and other gross sins in
the other table.

\(16\) I tell this so that it may be understood that the first world was
not only subject to the sins of the other table, but mostly sinned
against the [first]{.underline} table, that is, had wisdom, godliness,
worship, and religion as its best outward appearance, which in itself
was wrong and unrighteous. Since therefore the ungodly nature and the
sins against the first table have gone in full swing, there has also
followed the other corrupt nature, of which Moses in

**[442n , isi-iW. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 1. 2. \" i. \"s-\"s.
443]{.underline}**

This chapter says that people have first defiled themselves with all
kinds of immorality and then made the world full of tyranny, bloodshed,
violence and injustice.

17 Since the godless world had therefore trampled both tablets
underfoot, God came to judge them, who is a worshipping fire and a
zealous God. Therefore, he punishes the wicked being so that simply
everything becomes desolate and neither authorities nor subjects remain.
Therefore, we can think that the closer the world was to the fall of
Adam, the better it was, but after that it decreased and became worse
day by day until our time, in which the basic soup and, as it were, the
last dirt of the human race still lives.

If God has not spared the same world, which has been blessed with so
many and great gifts, what can we hope for, who are like dirt and
sweepings against it, and are subject to many more misfortunes and
miseries? But that I do not speak too near to the Roman pope and his
holy bishops, who do not believe such things. Now I come to the text.

**When men began to multiply on the earth and beget daughters for them,
the children of God looked at the daughters of men and saw how beautiful
they were, and took them as wives whom they wished.**

19 This is a very short speech, but it understands a lot. First of all,
the text must not be understood to mean that the world began to multiply
only in the five hundredth year of Noah, but that it also includes the
patriarchs who existed before that time. Which is to be proved by this:
For Noah had no daughters; but because the text says of daughters, it
must be understood also of the former times, when Lamech, Methuselah,
Enoch 2c. had lived. Therefore the world was corrupt and evil, even
before Noah was born, and especially since many of them began to live
more boldly after the first patriarch Adam had died, before whom they
had had to shy away as before the first father.

020 But as I said above, that Noah was a virgin above all virgins,

so we see here also that he is a martyr above all martyrs. For our
martyrs, whom we thus call, are in the very best position compared to
him: Cause, they are strengthened and assured by the Holy Spirit and
overcome death in one hour and thus come out of all danger and
temptation. Noah did not have to live among the wicked for a whole six
hundred years without many and severe dangers and temptations, just like
Lot in Sodom.

21 And perhaps this was also one of the reasons why the father Lamech
gave this name to his son Noah when he was born. For when the holy
father saw before his eyes that the wickedness of the world was becoming
more and more prevalent, he had hope in this son of his that he would
now be able to comfort the pious, that is, to stand against sin and
Satan, from whom sin had come, and bring back the lost righteousness.

22\. the wickedness, which began at that time, not only did not cease
under Noah, but the longer it went on, the more it spread and became
prevalent; therefore Noah is a martyr above all martyrs. For is it not
true that it is much easier and less to escape all danger and distress
in one evil hour, than to have to see so much and great wickedness of
the world through so many hundred years and to have to live with it?

As I also said above, I have these thoughts that Noah abstained from
marriage so long because he did not want to see and tolerate in [his own
that which he had]{.underline} to see in the others, the descendants of
the holy fathers. Therefore this mirror and contemplation of human
wickedness was the greatest cross for him; as Peter says of Lot in
Sodom, 2 Epistle 2:8: \"Because he was righteous and dwelt among them,
that he should see and hear, they tormented the righteous soul from day
to day with their unrighteous works.\"

\(24\) Therefore this multiplication of men, of which Moses speaks here,
belongs not only to the time of Noah, but also to the time of the former
patriarchs. For with the same

**[444 k. n, 12S-1M. Interpretation of Genesis 6, I. 2. W. 1. 66S-672.
445]{.underline}**

the transgression of the first table, namely the contempt of God and his
word; followed by the great and gross sins, as violence and injustice,
tyranny, fornication, which Moses here especially remembers and starts
from them, as from the main cause of evil. For look at all histories,
look at all Greek tragedies, all histories of the Romans and other
nations at all times, and you will find that all kinds of misery and
misfortune have arisen from fornication. Now it cannot be without this;
but where the word is not, or is despised, there men must fall and get
into fornication.

\(25\) Fornication carries with it other innumerable sins, such as
pride, injustice, and false oaths (2c). These sins cannot be countered
or counseled in any other way than by the first tablet, that people
begin to fear God and trust in Him; for then it will follow that they
will follow the word as a light shining in the darkness, and not pursue
such evil, but beware of it. But when the first table is lifted up and
taken out of sight, it is impossible that anything else, except all
kinds of sin, shame and vice, can follow and go on.

\(26\) But someone may be surprised that it seems as if Moses counts the
begetting of daughters among the sins, which he vowed to the patriarchs
above and God\'s blessing is also in the ungodly: why then does he count
it among the sins? Answer: He does not condemn the child gene in itself,
but the abuse that flows from original sin. For to be a lord, or prince,
or king, to be wise, rich, and strong in body, is in itself a good
thing, and it is also good to have it; for it is given to men by God:
but for men to fall out of the first table with these gifts, and to
fight against the first table with such gifts, and afterward the more
surely to trespass at the other table, such is ungodliness, and worthy
of condemnation. That is why Moses uses special words here. \"The
children of God,\" he says, \"looked on the daughters of men as they
were beautiful, and they took them for their own.

Women, which they wanted\", namely, regardless of God, the natural or
worldly right.

\(27\) Thus, after the first tablet is despised, the other tablet is
also despised and rejected, and fornication gains the most prominent
place, which despises conjugal childbearing and becomes an animal thing,
even though God has ordained marriage primarily for the help of the weak
nature and for childbearing. Therefore, when fornication has taken the
upper hand, the preceding and following commandments fall away and are
torn apart, so that one does not spare the honor of one\'s parents, does
not abstain from murder and slaying, but makes a mess of other people\'s
property, speaks false testimony 2c.

28 The word jiru, \"saw\", does not simply mean to look at, but to see
with pleasure and delight; as it is written in the Psalm east: \"My eye
will see its delight in my enemies\", Ps. 92, 12, that is, will look
with delight at the vengeance on my enemies. Therefore it is said here
that they have turned their eyes away from God and His word and have
turned to lust and fornication against the daughters of men. This
consequence is so very serious and certain that from the transgression
of the first table men also fall into the transgression of the other
table; and despising God, they have also despised the laws of nature,
and have taken wives of their own pleasure, which they desired.

29 These are truly harsh words, and yet I believe that fornication still
had its measure and purpose, so that the children did not yet mix with
the mothers in an unnatural way and defile themselves, as happened
afterwards in the other world with the Canaanites; they also did not yet
defile themselves with the shame of the Sodomites. For Moses blames them
for this alone, that they threw away the law of their fathers, and kept
no certain order in marriage, but followed only their pleasure, and whom
they loved, took by force, against their parents\' will.

030 But it may be seen that the fathers with special earnestness forbade
their sons that they should not intercourse with the Cainoths; as there
was a law afterwards

**[446 e ii. 125-127. interpretation of Genesis 6, i. 2. w. i. \"72-675.
447]{.underline}**

is that the Jews should not mix with the Canaanites. And although there
are those who write that before the Flood there were incestuous
marriages and no honor nor respect of blood friendships, but there were
intermarriages between those who were close relatives: However, because
Peter praises the first world, I consider that such enormous incest had
not yet been in it, but that this was the sin of the first world, that
they did not shy away from their parents, but despised them and took
them as wives from the Cainites, whom they wanted, since lust and
fornication became their master and gained the upper hand. And is this a
hard word, that he saith, \"They took unto wives whom they would.\"

\(31\) I have said above that these two families or churches, Adam\'s
and Cain\'s, were separated from each other. For as Moses clearly
testifies, Adam rejected and cast out the murderer Cain from his
community; therefore he will no doubt have admonished his descendants to
beware of the church of the wicked and not to mix with the accursed
lineage of Cain, and they kept to this counsel or commandment of Adam
for a time.

\(32\) When Adam died and the reputation of the other patriarchs began
to decline, the children of God, that is, those who had the promise of
the blessed seed and belonged to it, also desired friendship and
marriage from the ungodly generation, the Cainites. For \"children of
God\" Moses simply calls the sons of the patriarchs, to whom the promise
of the blessed seed had been made and who were the true church. They
also let themselves be taken in by the aversions of the Cain church,
followed their flesh, took wives from the Cainites, item, concubines,
which and how much they wanted. Lamech and Noah saw this with sorrow,
therefore they were perhaps a little slower to marry.

\(33\) Here again the Jews invent many foolish things and say that the
\"children of God\" are the devils of the fox, of whom the same is true.

They say that they are called \"children of God\" because of their
spiritual nature. But those who have spoken more modestly of these
things refute such foolish fables and say: Children of God are called
children of the mighty, which Lyra also refutes intelligently. For this
punishment of the flood was not only the punishment of the mighty, but
of all flesh; as also will be the punishment of the last day.

34 As for the devils of the fief, called incubi and succubi, I am not
opposed to them, but believe that it can happen that the devil is either
incubus or succubus. For I have heard many of them who have said of
their own examples. And Augustine writes that he also heard this from
credible people whom he had to believe. For Satan is very pleased when
he can deceive us in the assumed form of a young man or woman. But that
something can be born from the devil and a man, that is absolutely
wrong. But that it is said of ugly and shapeless children, of which I
have seen some, that they are similar to devils, I think that they are
either pretended by the devil, but not begotten by him, or are real
devils themselves, who have either falsified and invented flesh, or
stolen it. For if by God\'s decree the devil can possess the whole man
and change his mind, what wonder is it that he disguises the body and
causes the blind or crippled to be born?

35 Therefore he can make a noise in front of the eyes of godless people
and those who live without fear of God, so that when the devil is in
bed, a young journeyman thinks that he has a virgin in bed, or a virgin
that she has a young man: but I do not believe that anything can be
begotten from the same sexual intercourse. For many sorceresses have
been burned from time to time because they have bargained with the devil
and kept silent. For if he can make such a noise in front of your eyes
and ears that you let yourself think that you see or hear something that
is nothing, how much easier is it for him to make you feel that you are
seeing or hearing something?

**[448 2. n, 147-IN. Interpretation of I Genesis 6, I-3. W. I.
S7\"-\"S0. 449]{.underline}**

which is very coarse and thick in this nature? But enough of this; for
such a thing does nothing to this text: but it makes the Jews loose and
useless gossip that we have come to speak of it.

\(36\) Therefore, it is the right understanding that Moses calls
\"children of God\" the people who belonged to the promise of the
blessed seed. For it is a way of speaking in the New Testament and means
the believers who call God their Father and whom God in turn calls
children. And the Flood did not come because Cain\'s lineage was corrupt
and wicked, but because the lineage of the righteous, who had believed
God, obeyed His word and had the right worship, had fallen into
idolatry, disobedience of parents, lust, fornication and tyranny. Just
as God will hasten to bring the last day, not because pagans, Turks and
Jews are ungodly, but because the church itself has become full of error
through the pope and the swarming spirits, and because those who are
most noble in the church and lead the reign practice lust, fornication
and tyranny.

\(37\) But this is to frighten us all, because even those who came from
the best patriarchs have begun to exalt themselves and depart from the
word of God, boasting of their wisdom and righteousness, as the Jews
boast of circumcision and of their father Abraham, and as the popes,
because of the title of the church, have forsaken the knowledge, word
and service of God, and have turned their spiritual glory to carnal lust
and splendor. The Roman Church may have been quite holy and adorned with
many excellent martyrs, but now we see what it has come to.

\(38\) Therefore no one should boast of his gifts, no matter how great
they are, for the highest gift is to be a member of the true church. But
beware lest you become proud because of it, for you may fall again, as
Lucifer fell from heaven, and as we hear here that the children of God
have fallen into fleshly lusts. For they are no longer children of God,
but children of the devil, so at the same time, from the first

and other table of God\'s commandments; as in times past the popes and
bishops were pious and holy, but now they are the worst of knaves and a
basic soup of all other estates.

\(39\) St. Noah was forced to live in such a crowd of wicked and unruly
boys, who had departed from their ancestral piety and virtues, and were
hated and despised by everyone. For how could he praise such fornication
of such a wicked and ill-advised crowd? but now they could suffer no
punishment nor plea. Now that his example shines, and his holiness fills
the whole world, the world grows worse day by day; and the greater
Noah\'s holiness and chastity, the more senseless the world is for
fornication. But this is how it tends to go in every case, when
punishment and destruction are to follow.

For when God raises up holy people who are full of God\'s spirit and are
to teach and punish the world, the world, not liking pure doctrine, sits
in sins all the more diligently and presses on with all the more
stubbornness. This happened in the beginning of the world, and now we
know that it will also happen in the end.

**Second part.**

**From the judgment and lamentation of God over the first world, as well
as from Noah and his**

**Sermon.**

**I.**

**V. 3 Then the Lord said, \"Men will no longer punish my spirit, for
they are flesh. I will give them another hundred and twenty years.**

41 Here Moses begins and describes the patriarch Noah as the highest
high priest or, as Peter calls him 2. Epist. 2, 5. But this text is in
many ways bruised and torn. For it cannot be that the natural man should
understand such spiritual things. Because of this, the interpreters of
the holy scripture have fallen into it with unwashed feet and hands, and
have brought with them

**[450 Interpretation of Genesis 6:3. W. i. SM-SN. 451]{.underline}**

The text of the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of
the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of
the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of
the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of the text of
the text of the text of the text of the text of the text. And it has
almost happened that the more glorious and spiritual the text is, the
more ugly and shameful it is falsified. As this text here is also so
variously mangled, that if one wanted to follow the interpreters or
commentators, one could not know what to believe.

And the Jews are the first to crucify Moses. For this is how they
interpret this text: \"My spirit\", that is my wrath and anger, \"shall
not always judge among men\", that is, I will not be angry with men, but
spare them; \"because they are flesh\", that is, they are inclined to
sin, because they are burdened with original sin by nature. Jerome also
follows this opinion and thinks that only the sin of fornication is
spoken of here, to which we are all naturally inclined. But in this he
errs first of all, that he understands wrath for spirit, because Moses
speaks here of the Holy Spirit; as also the contrast indicates that
Moses further says: \"For they are flesh\". For he wants to indicate
that the flesh is not only inclined to sin, but is also hostile to God.

43 Secondly, the whole thing that is talked about here is against this
opinion. For what could have been more clumsy and inconsistent here?
They see before their eyes the overwhelming wrath of God, who takes away
the whole human race through the Flood: and yet they interpret it in
such a way that God will not be angry with mankind, but will have mercy
on them and will do the same after a hundred and twenty years, at which
time the Flood took place.

Rabbi Solomon interprets it thus: The spirit that is in God will not
quarrel any further; as if God, in His divine majesty, had debated and
quarreled with Himself about what He would do with man, whether He would
destroy him or spare him, and yet finally, having grown tired of man\'s
wickedness, had decided with Himself that He would destroy man
altogether.

The others understand it from the created spirit: \"My spirit\", that
is, which I have blown into the face of man, that is, the human soul,
will no longer quarrel and fight against the flesh, which pursues
fornication; for I will take away the same spirit and redeem it from the
flesh, so that it will no longer trouble it when it is eradicated. This
is an Origenic understanding, and is not much different from the error
of Manichaeus, who wanted that not the whole man sinned, but only a part
of him. And Augustine says that what pleased him most about the
Manichaean teaching was that he heard that his wickedness was not all
his, but only that part of the body that is wicked from the beginning.
For the Manichaeans pretended that there were two beginnings, one good
and the other evil, as some philosophers have called quarreling and
friendship. Thus, people not only lack the right goal, but also fall
into ungodly delusions and thoughts.

46 Sanctes cites Rabbi David and derives the word jadon from nadan, that
is, a sheath. But as the same mind is very foolish, so he gives it by a
very foolish word. My mind shall not be shut up and kept further in man
than in a sheath. Who ever heard a more strange and whimsical mind? But
with this the Jews mock the new Hebraists, because they persuade them
that one cannot understand the holy scriptures otherwise than by the
grammar and exact manner of the punctuation. Therefore, no opinion is so
clumsy that they cannot defend and adorn it with the nasty grammatical
rules.

But tell me: where has there ever been a language that one has learned
to speak rightly and well from grammar? is it not true that even the
languages that have the most certain rules, such as the Latin and Greek
languages, are learned more from practice and habit than from the rules?
Is it not a very clumsy thing, then, that in the sacred language, in
which theological and spiritual matters are dealt with, one should
abandon the righteous and proper understanding of things, and

**[452n . iW-rst. Interpretation of I Moses 6, 3. W. 1, 6S3-SSK.
453]{.underline}**

to pick it out of the grammar? Now the rabbis and their students do this
almost everywhere, since many nouns and tense words can be declinatured,
which are not used at all in the language, as can be seen. Therefore,
because they pay the most attention to it and want to pay close
attention to the etymology of words, they get into strange fantasies
about it.

48 So here. Because the word jadon can be derived from nadan, they make
a monstrous meaning out of it and thus say: My spirit will not be kept
as in a scabbard. But they understand the spirit of man, which is held
in the body of man, as in a sheath. This, they say, I will not leave in
the sheath, but will take it out and destroy the sheath. Such a clumsy
interpretation comes from the nasty grammatical rules, when one should
rather consider the habit and manner of speaking; for by this a
grammarian is taught.

49 For this reason I am telling you all this in such detail, that I
would like to warn you, so that if you come across such foolish
interpreters of the Scriptures, you do not follow them or consider their
glosses to be special wisdom. For even many great men delight in such
foolish work of the rabbis, and are not much different from the
Sacramentarians, who do not deny the words of Christ in the Sacrament:
\"This is my body,\" but gloss them thus: Bread is bread, and yet
Christ\'s body, that is, his creature; thus: \"This is my blood,\" that
is, my wine. No sensible person will suffer such a shameful desire to
falsify the sayings, even in Terence\'s fables or Virgil\'s eclogues,
and should we suffer it in the church?

50 But to understand the Scriptures aright, the Spirit of Christ is
necessary. And we know that there is one Spirit until the end of the
world, who was before all things. We have this Spirit, as we may well
boast of it by the grace of God, and so through it we also have faith
and a fair understanding of the Scriptures and knowledge of the other
things that are necessary for a Christian life. Therefore, we do not
devise a new understanding, but follow that which is in

The following is a summary of the principles of the law.

\(51\) Therefore the word dun, to judge or punish, signifies throughout
the Scriptures a public ministry in the church, or preaching, by which
we are punished, admonished, taught to distinguish good from evil, 2c.,
as Ps. 110:6 says, jadin ba gojim, \"He will judge among the Gentiles,\"
that is, he will preach among them; for there is the very word which is
here. And in the New Testament this way of speaking, taken from the
Hebrews, is very common, especially in Paul, who uses more Hebrew ways
of speaking than the others.

52\. so I understand these words to be spoken either by Lamech himself
or by Noah, and they are like a new sermon presented to the world: for
it was a public sermon or judgment delivered in a public meeting. For
when Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah saw that the world was hastening to
ruin and destruction with its sins, they passed this sentence: \"My
Spirit will no longer be a judge among men,\" that is, we teach and
admonish in vain, for the world does not want to mend its ways.

53\. as if one said now and in our time, when men are wicked and
perverse, we teach faithfully and have much to do, that we would gladly
bring the world back to the fear of God and a chaste life; but we are
mocked, suffer persecution, are killed, and fall every man with blinded
eyes and ears to his destruction; therefore we must cease. So these are
also the words of a heart that considers what is to be done, and is
anxious and distressed, as in the extreme danger and distress of the
whole human race, because they see that there is nothing to be done.

This understanding is according to faith and the holy scriptures. For we
see that when God\'s word is revealed from heaven, some are converted
and saved from damnation. The rest of the people despise it and are sure
to follow avarice, fornication and other vices; as Jeremiah says

**[454 \" n- Interpretation of Genesis 6, 3. W. i, 68s-\"s8.
455]{.underline}**

Cap. 51, 9. of Babylon says: \"We heal Babylon, but she will not be
healed. So let her go, and let us go every man to his own land.\" So it
was with Moses and Aaron. The more diligently they exhorted and taught,
the more hardened Pharaoh became. The preaching of the Lord Christ
himself and the apostles did not improve the situation of the Jews. We,
who preach the Word of God, are in the same situation. What shall we do?
We can deplore the blindness and impenitence of the people, but we
cannot correct them. For who would rejoice in the eternal damnation of
the popes and all those who follow them? Who would not rather that they
accept God\'s word and convert?

\(55\) Such hardened hearts Methuselah, Lamech, and Noah also saw in
their days; therefore they go forth with such words, as if all were
lost, and the people could neither be advised nor helped. \"My Spirit\",
that is, the pure doctrine, \"will not judge among men\"; for because
you will not accept the word, will not abide in the pure doctrine, nor
be satisfied with it, you may go away and be lost. So these are the
words of a troubled heart and, as the Scripture says, God is troubled,
that is, the heart of Noah, Lamech, Methuselah and other holy people who
are full of love towards everyone. But because they see such wickedness
of the people, they are distressed and grieved.

56 Such sadness is actually the sadness of the Holy Spirit, as Paul says
in Eph. 4:30: \"Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, that you may be
sealed for the day of redemption. For he so much as signifies that the
Holy Spirit is grieved, when we poor men are grieved and distressed by
the wickedness of the world, which despiseth the word which we preach in
the Holy Spirit. As Lot was afflicted in Sodom, 2 Peter 2:8; the pious
Jews in Babylon under the godless king Belshazzar; item Jeremiah, when
he preached to the godless Jews and cried out, Cap. 15:10: \"Alas, my
mother, that thou hast brought me forth!\"; and Micah Cap. 7:1: \"Alas,
I am as one that is in the

Vineyards slacken, since no grapes are found to eat.\"

But this wrath of God is very terrible when he takes away the word. For
who would not much rather have pestilence, theurge, war (for these are
only the infirmities and punishments of the body), than the hunger for
the word, which is always followed by eternal damnation? For example,
the heathen who do not have God\'s word, how great and terrible darkness
Satan can lead people into if God is silent and does not speak to them.
For who would not be frightened by the fact that the Romans, who were
famous before other peoples for their excellent wisdom and seriousness
of discipline, had a way and a custom that honest women worshipped and
crowned the most shameful image, Priapus; item, that young brides, who
were virgins, were led to this? What is more mocking than that the
Egyptians worshipped the calf Apis for the supreme god.

The Historia Ecclesiastica Tripartita reports that first of all
Constantine the Great in Phoenicia and other places abolished the most
shameful custom of making virgins, who were to be married, into whores
before the wedding. Such abominable monstrosities and disgrace were held
by the heathen to be religion and righteousness. For among people who do
not have God\'s word, there is nothing so mocking, foolish, insolent and
dishonest that they cannot be persuaded to the highest worship.

\(59\) Therefore this is the greatest punishment, so that God threatens
here by the mouth of the holy patriarchs that He will no longer judge
men by His Spirit, that is, because all teaching is in vain, He will not
henceforth give men His word.

60 Our time will also bring Germany into such punishment. For we see how
the devil hurries and is so restless, and tries everything to hinder
God\'s word. How much has he wreaked havoc in our lives, since we have
worked diligently to keep the doctrine pure? What

**[456L . II, 136-138.Interpretation of Genesis 6, 3. W. I, S88-S91.
457]{.underline}**

will still happen when we are now dead? Then he will bring the whole
bunch of Sacramentans, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Servetians, Campanians
and other heretics, who now, because they have been overcome by the pure
doctrine and the diligence of pious teachers, keep quiet, but think of
all kinds of opportunities how they might present and defend their
doctrine.

Whoever therefore has the word pure, let him accept it, give thanks to
God for it, and seek the Lord, because he is to be found, Isa. 55, 6.
For when the spirit of doctrine is gone, then also the spirit of prayer
comes away, as Zechariah Cap. 12, 10. calls it. For the spirit of prayer
is attached to the spirit of grace. This is the Spirit of grace, which
punishes sin and teaches forgiveness of sins, which punishes and
condemns idolatry and teaches right worship, punishes avarice,
fornication and tyranny, and teaches chastity, patience and doing good.
Now the Lord threatens here that this spirit should no longer judge,
because they do not want to hear him, nor do they want to improve. But
when this spirit is taken away, the spirit of prayer is also taken away;
for that he should pray who has not the word is impossible.

\(62\) Thus the office of a priest is twofold: first, that he turn to
God and pray for himself and his people; second, that he turn from God
to the people through teaching and the Word. Thus Samuel says, 1 Sam.
12, 23: \"Far be it from me to sin so against the Lord that I should
cease to pray for you, and to teach you the good and right way.\" For he
recognizes that this is his true ministry.

For this reason the ministry of preaching is rightly praised and
considered the highest good. For if this is abolished or corrupted, then
not only can one not pray, but people are in the power of the devil, and
do nothing else, except that they grieve the Holy Spirit with all their
works, and thus fall into sin unto death, for which one may not ask, 1
John 5:16. Therefore other cases and sins of men are easy against it;
for one may be converted again, and hope is left, let them be forgiven.
But if the

If the Holy Spirit is grieved and people do not want to be judged and
punished by the Holy Spirit, it is a plague in which neither counsel nor
help can be hoped for.

How wicked is this sin in all classes at this time, for neither princes,
nor nobles, nor citizens, nor peasants want to be punished, but rather
they punish themselves and judge the Holy Spirit in his servants and
preachers. For they judge the preaching ministry according to the low
esteem of the person and think: This preacher is poor and despised, why
should he have the power to punish me, who am a prince, a nobleman, an
authority? Before they suffer this, they trample the preachers
underfoot, along with the word and the ministry itself. Who then would
say that we do not have to fear such a judgment of God as is held
against the first world here?

65 Therefore these are the words of a father who disinherits his son, or
of a ruthless schoolmaster who angrily expels a student from school
because he simply gives them a hundred and twenty years to improve; if
not, he threatens that his spirit should not quarrel with them any
further, nor punish them. And this word, to quarrel or to judge,
actually belongs to the office of preaching, which it also illustrates
to some extent. For every preacher or minister of the word is a
contending and judging man, and for the sake of his office must punish
what is unjust, regardless of his hearers, who the person is, or what
kind of office he holds. And because Jeremiah did this diligently, he
had not only hatred and enmity, but also the greatest danger upon him.
Therefore he became impatient that he wished he had never been born,
Jer. 20:14.

And that I also say something about myself, if I had not been specially
strengthened by God, this impenitent world\'s stubbornness and malice
would have made me tired and fainthearted long ago. For the wicked
grieve the Holy Spirit in us to such an extent that we often wish, with
Jeremiah Cap. 20, 7, that we often wish that we had not started anything
of the kind. And I often pray to God that He will bring this present
generation together with us.

**458 D. ii, 138-14\". Interpretation of Genesis 6, 3W. i. ssi-s \"t.
459**

I want to let you die because when we are gone, the most dangerous times
will follow.

67 For this reason Elijah is called the deceiver of Israel by the
godless king Ahab, 1 Kings 18:17, because he punished idolatry, tyranny
and fornication that were rampant in his time. Just as we are considered
today to be the ones who make Germany distressed and restless.

68 But it is a good sign when people rebuke us and call us disputants.
For the spirit of God is such a spirit, which disputes with people,
punishes and condemns them. But people are so clever that they would
like nothing to be done about them, because it pleases them; as they
freely say in the prophet Micah in chapter 2, v. 6, 7: \"Thou shalt not
murmur against us; for such reproach shall not befall us, we shall not
be so put to shame. The house of Jacob thus comforts itself.\" These
last words lead them to the cause; for seeing that they are the house of
Jacob and people of God, they do not want to be punished, nor do they
want threat and punishment to affect them. As now the pope and his
fellows boast of this alone and insist that they are the church, and
conclude from this that the church cannot err. But if you look at this
text, you will see that it is a loose proof.

69\. For those whom God threatens that He will no longer judge them with
His Spirit, are they not also children of God? And what can be more
glorious than such a name? No doubt they will have boasted of the name
and set themselves against the threats of the fathers, or at least
despised their preaching. For no one thinks that God wanted to punish
the whole human race so severely for the sake of a few sins. But this
glorious title did not help them, nor did the fact that they were mighty
and strong with multitudes. Out of Egypt, six times a hundred thousand
men and only two of them entered the land of Canaan; the others were all
put to death because of sin.

70\. so God will not ask at all about the glorious title of the church,
which is

But they will have to have other testimonies, if they want to escape the
wrath of God, than to boast that they are the church. For thus it is
written, Matt. 7:20: \"By their fruits ye shall know them\"; item, v.
21: \"Not all they that say unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven.\"

If a council is ever held, which I hardly believe will happen, no one
will be able to take away this title from our adversaries that they want
to be the church, and they will condemn and suppress us by basing
themselves on this title alone. But there will be another judgment when
the Son of Man appears in his glory, Matth. 24, 30. Then it will be
revealed that righteous and holy members of the holy church were John
Huss and Jerome of Prague: but the pope, cardinals, bishops, doctors,
monks and priests were all the church of the wicked in the pestilential
chair and true servants of the devil, who helped their father to lie and
murder.

We see such a judgment of God here as well. He does not say that the
descendants of the saints are not God\'s children, but God leaves them
this glorious title, so that they may be puffed up and surely sin. And
yet he threatens these very children of God, who took the daughters of
men in marriage, that he will not only take away the word from their
hearts, but that he will also take away from their eyes and ears the
spirit that preaches, prays, punishes, teaches and sighs in the holy
church servants. And this is because these children of God do not want
to be chastened or punished, but because they know that they are
children of God, they despise the Word and the teachers. But for the
sake of this name they do not escape punishment. The same will happen to
the papists and all opponents and enemies of the divine word.

So I think that all the thoughts and actions of pious and God-fearing
people are pointed to God Himself, as is usual in the Scriptures. As,
Mal. 3, 8, the Lord says he will be stabbed, or, as the Hebrew says,
violence will be done to him,

**[460n. 140-143. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 3.W. 1, 6S4-SS7.
461]{.underline}**

because the people unfaithfully gave the firstfruits and tithes to the
priests.

74\. But why, someone might say, does God need such a lament? Can he
not, if he wills, destroy the whole world in one hui? Of course he can,
but he does not like to do it: as he says Ezek. 33, 11: \"I do not want
the sinner to die, but to turn and live.\" Therefore, this effect proves
that God is ready to forgive, to tolerate and to forgive sins, if people
only want to convert: but because they continue so stubbornly and reject
all help, this wickedness pains Him and, as it were, frightens Him.

Therefore, I interpret these words, \"God said,\" to refer to the holy
fathers, who testified with a public decree and resolution that God
would be forced to take vengeance; for they taught by divine command.
And after Noah and his forefathers had preached for almost a thousand
years, and yet the world grew worse day by day, they reproach the
ungrateful world with God\'s judgment, as he thus thinks: \"What good is
it that I always teach and constantly let my preachers call in vain? For
the more I send them, and the longer I pause with my wrath, the angrier
they become. Therefore I must put an end to preaching and let the
punishment go. I do not want my spirit, that is, my word, to judge and
preach for and for, and the wickedness of men to go unpunished, but I
must punish sin.

For man is flesh, that is, he is against me; he is natural, but I am
spirit. Man continues in his carnal nature, despises, scorns and
persecutes the word, is hostile to my spirit in the patriarchs, and no
preaching helps with him: therefore I must stop, and let man, who is so
utterly wicked, have his way. This is what Moses wants to indicate by
putting against it, \"For they are flesh.\" For Noah, Lamech, Methuselah
were the most holy people and full of the Spirit of God; therefore they
carried out their ministry diligently with teaching, exhorting, urging
and stopping at the right time and at the wrong time, as Paul says 2
Tim. 4, 2. But they taught the flesh and did forgiven work; for the
flesh does not keep to pure doctrine. Shall I then,

he says, always suffering such contempt for my word?

So this saying is a public lamentation, done by the Holy Spirit through
the holy patriarchs Noah, Lamech, Methuselah and others, whom God took
away before the Flood, so that they should not see such a great wrath,
which should spread so far. These all with one voice and mouth exhorted
the giants and tyrants to repentance, and added the threat that God
would not suffer such contempt of His word forever.

78\) But the flesh has done as it is wont: for the faithful admonitions
they have despised out of carnal presumption and certainty, and have
thought the holy patriarchs mad men and old fools, because they
threatened that God would prove earnest also of His church, that is, of
the generation that had the promise of the seed to come.

The words, which are written: \"I will still give them a hundred and
twenty years\", also says St. Jerome, must not be understood from the
years of the human life or from the time of each life. For it is certain
that after the Flood many of them lived more than two hundred years.
Since one wanted to draw it now on each year particularly, then it would
be a promise that each man should live so many years. But this is also
wrong. That is why he speaks of the time that God gave the world for
repentance before the flood came.

80 And this opinion agrees with the foregoing. For God indicates that he
is greatly displeased with this perverse wickedness of man. For this
reason, he is grieved and would like to spare; therefore, against his
will, as it were, he lets the Flood rage; therefore, he sets aside a
certain and sufficiently long time for repentance, so that they may
convert and escape punishment. The same time Noah admonished the people
to repentance, so that God would no longer suffer their ungodly nature,
and yet be so kind and gracious that he would give time for repentance
that would be long enough.

81\. so the words and opinion go

**[462 L u. 143-u\". Interpretation of Genesis 6:3. W. l. SS7-6SS.
463]{.underline}**

fine on each other. The preceding words are a threat: I can no longer
tolerate the contempt of my word; my preachers and priests, with their
great effort and work, accomplish nothing more than that everyone laughs
at them and mocks them. Therefore, just as a pious father or a pious
judge would like to spare his son, but his wickedness is so great that
he must prove earnestness, so (says God here) I also do not like to
destroy the whole human race; therefore I will give them another hundred
and twenty years, in which they may convert and I will show them mercy.

For this reason, it was a terrible punishment that neither Noah\'s
brothers nor sisters were preserved. It was therefore necessary that
such a serious threat should precede, whether the people might be
provoked and brought to repentance. Jonah preached to Nineveh that they
should perish within forty days, but they repented and were preserved,
Jon. 3, 4. 5. 10.

\(83\) Thus it seems that the first world must have been secure to the
uttermost. For though they have an hundred and twenty years to repent,
they remain stubborn in their fornication, mocking their high priest and
preacher of righteousness, the pious Noah.

84 Now that the Day of the Lord is at the door, it is almost the same.
We admonish the papists to repentance, admonish our nobles, burghers and
peasants not to continue in such contempt of God\'s word, for God will
not let it go unpunished: but we use strength and diligence in vain; as
the Scripture says Isa. 57:1: Few believers are built up, and they are
gradually carried away by misfortune, and \"no one pays attention to it.
But what do you think, when God has threshed his wheat and gathered the
grain into its place, what will happen to the chaff? Nothing else, but
that it will be burned with eternal fire, Matth. 3, 12. This is what
will happen to the world.

But she will not understand that God is now using the preaching of the
good gospel to separate the wheat from the chaff and to gather it into
the sheaves, so that afterward the chaff may be gathered,

that is, the whole multitude of unbelievers, who have sat in darkness
and idolatry, shall be cast into the fire; as it is written Isa. 49:8:
\"I have helped thee in the day of salvation, and have kept thee. Those
who let this day of salvation pass by, God\'s vengeance will be visited
upon them, for he will not work in vain to thresh out the useless chaff.

But the world is flesh and does not obey, indeed, the closer it is to
disaster, the more certain it is and the more insolently it despises all
good admonitions. And even though this affliction greatly moves pious
and God-fearing hearts, we should nevertheless take it for granted that
God does not punish the world in vain through His Holy Spirit, that the
Holy Spirit is not grieved in vain in the pious either. And Christ
himself draws this example, when he predicts about the godless nature
and the security of our time: \"They will be,\" he says Matth. 24, 37,
\"like in the time of Noah and Lot.\"

But here one must note that also St. Jerome was troubled by the fact
that the Flood came in the hundredth year after Shem, Grove and Japheth
were born. But here it says that the time for the Flood should be a
hundred and twenty years. But from this text it seems that Noah began
his sermon of the punishment of the Flood before he entered the marriage
state.

**II.**

88\. Now think what he will have done to the godless and secure world.
He prophesies that the whole world will be destroyed by the Flood and
takes a wife himself. But why does he do this? Is it not enough that he
perishes alone, must he still have a companion for his misfortune? O
what a foolish old fool that must be! For if he himself believed that
the world should perish by the flood, he would rather perish alone than
be intent on taking a wife and begetting children; but if he be
preserved, so shall we also be preserved. Thus, for the sake of Noah\'s
marriage, they have preached the Flood all the more.

**[464 2. n, I4S-147. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 3. W. 1, 699-702.
465]{.underline}**

But they have not understood God\'s counsel, that he acts in such a way
that the world does not have to understand it at all. For does it not
seem a strange and uncomfortable thing that He promises Abraham a
lineage in his son Isaac in Genesis 21:12, and yet in Genesis 22:2 He
says that he should sacrifice him?

Therefore, St. Jerome answers such an opinion: God may have appointed
and determined a hundred and twenty years for the Flood, but after the
world\'s wickedness became strong and great, He had to shorten that
time.

90 We do not want to make God a liar, but rather believe that Noah
preached how the world would be devastated by the flood while he was
still without a wife, and then, by divine command, he took a maiden as a
branch from the entire family of women and begat three sons. For
afterwards it is written that he found favor with God. Otherwise, since
he had remained so long without a wife, he could have continued to
abstain. But God wanted to leave a nursery for the human race, so that
his wrath would be measured. That is why he told him to take a wife,
which the wicked consider a sign that the world will not pass away.
Therefore they live in security and despise their preacher Noah. But
God\'s counsel is different, namely, that he wants to destroy the whole
world and leave a nursery for a future world through this righteous
Noah.

91 Thus Noah was the highest prophet, the like of which the world has
never had. For first he teaches about a very long time; then he preaches
about the punishment of the whole world and determines the year in which
it is to come. Christ also prophesies of the last judgment, in which all
flesh shall pass away; \"but of that hour,\" saith he Marc. 13:32,
\"knoweth no man, save the Father, which hath reserved it for himself.\"
Jonas, Cap. 3, 4, tells the Ninivites their punishment forty days
before. Jeremiah, cap. 25, 12, prophesies of seventy years of
imprisonment. Daniel, Cap. 9, 24, says of seventy weeks until Christ
comes. Which all meet

These are prophecies, so that certain time, place and persons are
determined and described. But Noah\'s prophecy here is above all these,
that he prophesies by the Holy Spirit a certain number of years, in
which the whole human race shall perish. He would therefore be worthy to
be called the other Adam or prince of the human race, through whose
mouth God speaks and calls the whole race to repentance.

\(92\) But this is horrible and terrible, that his preaching is so
surely despised, that not from the Cainites alone, but also from Adam\'s
descendants, no one has improved. That is why Noah had to see the
downfall of his brothers, sisters, blood friends and brothers-in-law,
who were innumerable and all ridiculed the old pious man and his sermon
as an old Vettelian fable.

But this terrible example is held up to us, so that we should not
persist in sins. For if God did not spare the first race, which was the
very best and, as it were, the flower or youth of the world, in which so
many holy men lived, but, as the 81st Psalm v. 13 says, \"left them in
their heart\'s conceit,\" and rejected them as if they did not belong to
the promise made to the church, how much less will he spare us who do
not have such privilege and prerogative!

94 Thus this judgment, which is given here, that God gave men an hundred
and twenty years to repent and be converted, was spoken and proclaimed
before Noah begat children.

95 But of the family of the Cainites, what patriarchs they had at the
time of the flood, nothing is written. For Moses did not esteem them
worthy to be called. He brought their lineage down to Lamech, but
whether either his children or his children\'s children lived in Noah\'s
time is not known. But this is certain, that Cain\'s descendants still
existed at that time and were so powerful, that they also led the
children of God into trouble, since also the descendants of the holy
patriarchs perished in the flood.

**[466 \>- H-147-14g. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 3. W. 1, 702-705.
467]{.underline}**

\(96\) Therefore the holy patriarchs, as the true rulers of the church,
warned their own before that time to beware of the accursed generation.
The Cainites, however, have been grievously pleased that they have been
condemned, and have endeavored to subdue the pious with all manner of
plagues. For the church of Satan contends for and against the church of
God.

97\. Since the pious were always departing one after another, and
wickedness was great, God raised up Noah to exhort him to repentance,
and that he might be an everlasting example to his descendants, of which
faith and constant diligence in doctrine they should boast and follow.
For this is a great wonder and excellent faith, that Noah, when he heard
this judgment of Methuselah and Lamech, that after a hundred and twenty
years the world should perish by the flood, did not doubt that it was
true. And yet, after almost twenty years had passed, he takes a wife and
begets children, when he should rather have thought thus: Why should I
take a wife, because the human race is to perish? Why should I beget
children? If I have abstained from it so long, I will abstain from it
again. But Noah does not do this, but after he has pronounced the
judgment of the destruction of the world, he is obedient to God, who
calls him to marriage, believes God, and believes that even though the
whole world will perish, he will still be preserved with his children.
This is an excellent faith, and well worthy of diligent consideration.

For first of all, he had the common faith of the seed that should crush
the serpent\'s head, which faith the other patriarchs also had. Now it
was a special virtue that he maintained such faith and trust in so many
adversities and did not depart from God. In addition, there was another
special faith, that he believed God, since he threatened the whole world
with destruction, and promised him and his children alone to preserve
it. And no doubt his grandfather Methuselah and his father Lamech will
have seriously exhorted him to this faith. For so difficult is this to

believe when it was difficult for the Virgin Mary that she alone should
be the Mother of the Son of God. -

This faith taught him to despise the safety of the world, by which he
was ridiculed as an old fool. This faith also admonished and
strengthened him, so that he diligently continued in the ban of the box,
which building the tyrants undoubtedly ridiculed as the greatest folly.
This faith also equipped and strengthened him so that he stood alone
against so many examples of the world and stubbornly despised the
judgment of all men.

Therefore it is an unspeakable faith and almost like a miracle, loaded
with new and very heavy articles, which the Holy Spirit only recently
indicates in this history, but does not emphasize it, but wants us to
think more diligently about all circumstances. For behold, first of all,
the very worst and most corrupt time of Noah. For just as before that
time the church had many holy patriarchs, so now it has lost such rulers
as Adam, Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, all of whom have
now died and have come to only three, namely, Methuselah, Lamech and
Noah. For these alone are still alive, since the judgment, how the world
should be destroyed by the Flood, is fallen and revealed. These three
must see and tolerate the horrible and almost unbelievable wickedness of
men, as idolatry, blasphemy, cruel violence and injustice, shameful
fornication 2c., until Methuselah and Lamech are also claimed on this
life. Since Noah alone had to lie down against the world, which fell to
its destruction, and try whether he would preserve justice and curb
injustice. But he did so little that he had to see how the children of
God fell into the wickedness.

Such a fall and desolation of the church tormented the soul of righteous
Noah and made him almost weary, as Peter 2 Epist 2:8 says of Lot in
Sodom. Now if Lot was thus afflicted and tormented by unrighteous works
in a city, what will we

**[468 L.n, I49-ISI. Interpretation of I Moses 6, 3. W. 1, 705-7k\>s.
469]{.underline}**

of Noah, against whom not only the family of Cain stormed, but also the
family of the patriarchs, who had not been born, and his own house,
brothers, sisters, brother\'s children and sister\'s children 2c. For
these are all corrupted and led away from the faith by the daughters of
men, as the text says, \"They looked after the daughters of men.\"

**Third part.**

**From the sins of the first world in particular.**

**I.**

\(102\) Dear one, how is it that Moses does not also complain about men?
or why does he not also complain about the daughters of God, but only
says: \"They looked after the daughters of men\"? Therefore, the holy
generation of Seth had a special command that since the Cainites were
excluded from the true church, they should also be careful not to make
friends with them and thus not mix with them either worldly through
marriage or spiritually through worship. For devout and God-fearing
people should beware of all occasions of offense.

\(103\) And the pious fathers were particularly concerned about this,
because they forbade friendship and marriage with the Cainites, so that
they might keep their lineage pure. For the daughters bring into the
houses of the men of their fathers folly, wisdom and custom. Thus we
read in the Histories of Kings that Solomon was seduced by a woman who
had been a foreigner, 1 Kings 11:7, 8; thus Jezebel also brought the
godless nature of the Syrians into the land of Israel, Cap. 16:31.

\(104\) The holy fathers saw that this would happen in their lineage.
Therefore, after they had separated themselves from the Cainites by
God\'s command, they decided and decreed that the sons of the holy
generation should not take the daughters of men as wives: for it **was**
easier for the daughters of the holy generation to refuse to mate with
the daughters of men.

Cainites not to marry; but the sons are commonly freer and bolder.

\(105\) And so Moses wants to show that first of all all misfortunes
arose because the children of God intermarried with the daughters of
men, whom they saw were beautiful. For because the children of men were
proud and mighty, and diligently pursued their lusts, they undoubtedly
despised the poor maidens of the holy generation, whom the holy
patriarchs had brought up, not tenderly, but plainly and chastely, in
poor apparel and clothing: therefore it was not necessary to prescribe
such a law for the people of women, which without it was despised by the
noble and glorious Cainites.

When one looks at the histories of the pagans, one finds that women have
often caused the fall and destruction of great kingdoms. For it is known
that the destruction of Troy came from a woman. Thus the holy scripture
testifies that through the sin of a woman the whole human race perished,
1 Tim. 2, 14. But one should say this without reviling the female sex.
For we have a commandment Ex. 20, 12: \"You shall honor your father and
your mother\"; item Col. 3, 19: \"Husbands, love your wives.\" For it is
true that Eve broke the apple first, but before she did so she had
already sinned with idolatry and fallen away from the faith; which faith
governs the body as long as it is in the heart, but when it has come out
of the heart, the body serves sin. Therefore the guilt is not of the
sex, but of the infirmity, which both man and woman have in common.

\(107\) Thus Moses here tells of the unrighteousness and fornication.
But he leaves it to the reader to consider that before they sinned
against the other table, they sinned against the first and despised
God\'s word. Otherwise, the children of God would have been obedient to
the will of their pious parents, who had forbidden them to marry those
who were outside the church.

\(108\) Therefore Moses concludes that the children and descendants of
the patriarchs shall first be given to the

**[470 L. n, ISI-ULAinterpretation of I Genesis 6, 3. W. 1. 7VS-7IL
471]{.underline}**

For the world can do nothing else, when it has departed from God and the
word, and has departed from obedience to its parents; then it has fallen
into lust and fornication, and has taken to wives whom it wished; item,
it has become tyrants, and has attacked other people\'s goods with
painting 2c. For the world can do nothing else, when it has departed
from God, it worships the devil; having despised the word and fallen
into idolatry, it also falls into all the sins of lust, so that wrath is
aroused after denied lust; so that in the will and the lust there is the
greatest disorder. Now when pious preachers punish such sins, violence
and tyranny follow over them.

So the sin of the flood includes everything that can be called sin in
the first and second table; namely, that godless people first fall away
from God through unbelief and despise the Word, then they also depart
from the obedience of their parents and become murderers, adulterers 2c.

\(110\) I say this so that no one will think that the women\'s or men\'s
sex or the married state itself is punished and accused; but the
transgression of God\'s commandments and disobedience to parents is
punished primarily because, since the Cainites had no part nor
fellowship with the true church, the pious parents wanted their sex to
be separated from them also in a worldly way, so that they would not
also be deceived and corrupted by the fellowship of godless women. But
since they have despised God\'s commandment and the reputation of their
parents, they have also fallen into all kinds of lustful and wrathful
sins. Thus the female sex and the married state retain their honor and
dignity, and only the ungodly being is punished and accused, by which
one first deviates from God and then practices violence and violence
against the saints.

111\. and the words themselves bring this with them: \"The children of
God,\" says Moses, \"looked after the daughters of men, as they were
beautiful.\" Why did they not also look after the daughters of God and
desire them, which limbs of the right

Church and had the promise of the seed? Are they not reproached for
despising the females of their generation, that is, of the true church,
and mingling with the carnal and ungodly generation of the Cainites?
They despise the simplicity, earnestness and honesty of their virgins
and are more pleased with the kind, adorned and horny ones of the
Cainites: these they desire and honor, but those either despise them
completely or treat them abominably and evil.

For just as Eve, wanting to sin, looks at the apples, so the children of
God look at the daughters of men with such eyes. Eve also looked at the
forbidden tree before the same time, but with the eyes of faith, which
looked at God\'s commandment: therefore she did not desire it, but
rather fled from it. But since her eyes of faith were blinded and she
looked at the tree only with carnal eyes, she stretched out her hand
with desire for the fruit and tempted her husband Adam to do the same.

\(113\) The children of the patriarchs also saw before the time that the
daughters of the Cainites were beautiful, adorned, and of good behavior
and manners; but they did not worship with them at that time. For their
eyes of faith looked to the commandment of God and the promise of the
seed that should be born of the lineage of the righteous. But since they
have lost those same eyes of faith, they no longer look neither to
God\'s commandment nor to the promise; but simply follow the lust of the
flesh, despising the simple, pious and honest virgins of their
generation, and taking the Cainish ones, whom they see to be adorned,
kind and short-tempered.

\(114\) Therefore it is not a sin for them to take wives, nor is the
female sex itself condemned; but it is condemned that they despise
God\'s commandment and take what they ought not to take, and so let
their wives be led away from the right worship of God to the ungodly
service of the false church, and that they, like the Cainites, despise
the reputation of their parents,

**[472 2. n, iss-iW. Interpretation of Genesis 6:3. 4. w. i, 712-714.
473]{.underline}**

Doing violence, tyrannizing 2c. Such sin is clearly indicated by Moses,
because he says: \"They took wives as they pleased. As if he wanted to
say: Taking wives is not evil, but good, if it is done rightly and
honestly; but they did sin in this, that they took without reason and
against their parents\' will and opinion, whom and how much they wanted,
both married and illegitimate without any distinction.

115 And this is even a terrible word, so that Moses shows great sins,
that they have taken two or more wives without distinction; item,
changed with their wives, or taken others by force; as Herod withholds
his wife from his brother Philip, Marc. 6, 18. Such infinite freedom and
insolence in fornication Moses shows and condemns.

**II.**

Berosus writes that they also unnaturally took their sisters and mothers
in marriage. I doubt, however, whether they should have been so wicked;
and is that in itself a great sin enough, that they used no reason in
womanhood and turned neither to their parents\' reputation nor to God\'s
word, but simply followed their fornications and lusts, took what they
wanted and were able to take, and thus at the same time disordered,
disturbed and disrupted the house government, police and church by such
foolish fornications. That therefore the sin of the same first world has
been a destruction of all estates, that the church has been destroyed by
idolatry and false worship, likewise by the tyrants, who cruelly
persecuted the pious teachers and holy people. Therefore, through
tyranny and injustice, the secular government was broken, but the
domestic government was raised up through unrestrained fornication,
which was practiced and practiced without fear and punishment.
Therefore, this fall of the fear of God and of all respectability must
necessarily be followed by a common ruin; for the people at that time
were not only wicked, but also not at all amendable.

**III.**

**V. 4. There were also tyrants on earth at that time.**

117 Genesis continues with the description of the sins and the cause why
the Flood came. The first sin was that the children of God fell away
from religion and the word of God and became carnal, so that they not
only perverted and destroyed the church, but also all police and house
rules. Now he goes on to say that wickedness has also risen and
multiplied to such an extent that there have been tyrants on earth, and
clearly says that from the camp of the children of God with the
daughters of men there have been begotten and born, not children of God,
but tyrants or giants, that is, proud and presumptuous people, who at
the same time have subdued and usurped the rule and priesthood for
themselves alone.

118\) Just as the pope does when he usurps spiritual and temporal power
at the same time. But the harm would not be complete if he used the
power he uses only for the preservation of the police and the church;
but the greatest sin is that he abuses this power to confirm idolatry,
to challenge pure doctrine and to tyrannize in the world government. If
one punishes the papists with God\'s word, they want to be unpunished,
and say that they are the church and cannot err; they exercise cyclopean
tyranny over the pious Christians. Moses calls such people tyrants or
giants, namely, those who usurp both the power of temporal and spiritual
government and sin most freely and surely.

\(119\) Such are they who are described in the Book of Wisdom, Cap. 2,
11. that they say, \"What we can do wrong, that shall be right.\" And
Psalm 12:5: \"Let our tongue have the upper hand; let us speak; who is
our Lord?\" And Psalm 73:3 ff: \"They are sure and proud, and when they
have done violence to others, they still boast.\" Such people were these
tyrants who opposed the Holy Spirit and spat in the face,

**[474 D- II, 155-Ui7. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 4. W. 1, 714-717.
475]{.underline}**

since he admonished, taught and punished them through Lamech, Noah and
his children.

120\) The word nephilim is disputed as to what it is, and some say that
it comes from the word naphal, which means to cut down; others say that
it means to be cut down, so that when other people saw such horrible
great people, they fell down in fear. But whether this is true, let the
rabbis see. For it is ridiculous that they are called nephilim because
others fall before them. That is why others give this interpretation:
they are called so because they have departed from the common stature of
men. They also cite a text from the 4th Book of Moses Cap. 13, 34, from
which it can be seen that nephilim or the giants were of great bodies;
like the Enakim and Rephaim. But which opinion is right, I do not judge,
especially because one knows that one cannot indicate all words cause
nor origin.

\(121\) But here is another question, namely, why those alone who were
born of the children of God and daughters of men were not like other
common people in height and length? I do not know anything else to
answer this question, because the text does not say anything about how
tall and long they were. In the 13th chapter of the 4th book of Moses,
v. 34, it says: \"We saw giants there, Enak\'s children of the giants;
and we were before our eyes as grasshoppers. There it is indicated that
they were large in body, but not here. Therefore they can be called
giants for another reason, but for the size.

\(122\) But that I also give my opinion of this word, I hold that it is
neither neutral, nor passive, but [active]{.underline}; as the word
naphal, though it is not of the third conjugation, in which the
transitive or neutral actually belong, is often used active; as Joshua
11:7: \"Joshua came suddenly upon them, and all the people of war with
him by the waters of Merom, and overtook them.\" Now if you would give
this word neutral, as if Joshua and his had fallen before the enemies,
history will be against it. For the same

indicates that Joshua and his people suddenly attacked and subdued the
enemies.

123 Therefore this text, and where more is written, gives me a sign that
I understand that nephilim, that is, giants are not so called from
greatness, as the rabbis think, but from tyranny and violence, so that
they have raged and have regarded neither law nor honor, but have simply
followed their lusts and desires. For those who rule with justice and
law, the Scriptures call shepherds and princes, but those who rule with
injustice and violence, they are rightly called nephilim, because they
assault and oppress those who are put under them. As it is written in
the 10th Psalm, v. 10: \"He crusheth, and oppresseth,\" venaphal
baazumav helkaim, \"and thrusteth down the poor with violence.\" There
the Holy Spirit speaks of the kingdom of the Antichrist, of which he
says that he will rage so horribly that he will break what he can, but
what he cannot break and crush, that he will bend and press it, and when
it is bent, push it to the ground by force. For it is like this, if thou
givest baazumav: with his violence, or: with his mighty ones. Such
force, he says, he uses against those alone who are helkaim, that is,
poor and afflicted before. But those who are strong and mighty he
worships, that he may bring them to his side.

124\] So I give here the word giants or nephilim also, that they were
not monstrous and great people, as Genesis 13, 34. says, but free,
furious and mighty people; as the poets fable of the Cyclopes, that they
fear neither God nor men, but pursue their lusts alone and rely on their
strength and power. For they sit in their majesty and have the rule in
their fists; yes, they also arrogate to themselves spiritual power, but
use such power according to their will against the church and God\'s
word.

But here is to be noted the marvelous counsel of God, which commands us
to honor, obey and serve the authorities 2c. And yet let us see that
everything that is said about serious threats and great punishments is
mostly against the force of God.

**[476 u, \"7-I6V. Interpretation of Genesis 6:4. W. 1. 717-720.
477]{.underline}**

and kings and princes, as if God were especially hostile to them. And
the Scriptures tell us to honor the authorities, but they do not seem to
honor them, but by threatening them to the utmost, they seem to dishonor
them; indeed, since the Scriptures command us to honor the authorities,
they can be seen as despising them, because they do not give them many
good words, but only threaten them.

126 For does not Mary preach very earnestly against lords and princes in
her song Luc. 1, 51, 52, 53: \"He scatters those who are confident in
their hearts. He pushes the mighty from their seats. He leaves the rich
empty\" 2c.? If this is to be believed, who would want to be found among
them, who are so sure of their misfortune? Who would not rather be with
the humble and hungry? So the 2nd Psalm accuses the authorities of a
very grave sin, when it says in v. 2, that with all their strength and
authority, they sit down together against the Lord and his anointed, and
oppress his kingdom. This is also what Isaiah Cap. 25:2, \"Thou makest
the strong city a heap of stones.\" And the whole Bible is full of such
sayings.

Therefore, the Scripture does not honor the authorities, but threatens
them with danger and almost brings them into public contempt, and yet
commands us with the utmost diligence that we should honor them and show
them all kinds of respect, service and obedience. But why is that?
Because God himself wants to punish her and has reserved vengeance for
himself and not commanded the subjects. Jeremiah disputes Cap. 12, 1.
how it comes about that because God is just, the wicked are nevertheless
fortunate? Finally, however, he concludes in v. 3: \"O Lord, you let
them go free and save them from being strangled.

\(128\) Someone might say that the ungodly authorities are, as it were,
God\'s swine; for he fattens them, gives them wealth, power, honor and
obedience of the subjects; therefore they are not burdened, but they
themselves burden and oppress others; nor do they suffer violence, but
they exercise violence on others; nor do they give, but they take from
others, until they have been deprived.

that the hour is coming for them to be slaughtered like the
long-fattened sows. Therefore, in the German proverb, a prince is said
to be a rare bird in the kingdom of heaven, or, princes are a game in
heaven.

Thus, without a doubt, those whom Moses calls nephilim here with a
hateful and disgusting name would have been in the proper regiment of
the church and police. But because they do not use their office as they
should, God calls them by a shameful name. For just as in this depraved
nature we cannot use even the smallest gifts without preservation: so
God cannot tolerate less than preservation, and for this pushes the
mighty from the throne and leaves the rich empty 2c., Luc. 1, 52: 53.

130 Thus I understand the word nephilim activ for tyrants, oppressors
and mad dogs. But I believe that (as also happens in other languages)
Moses drew this word from the custom and usage in which it was in his
time and interpreted it to the times before the Flood and changed the
meaning somewhat, that just as Enak\'s children were tyrants who relied
on their strength, so these naughty grandsons of the children of God
abused their honor and power to oppress the pious, as Moses himself will
now explain.

**For when the children of God slept with the daughters of men, and
begat them children, they became mighty men in the world, and famous
men.**

Jerome translated it: Isti sunt potentes a saeculo, these are mighty
from the world. But the word saeculum here does not mean a long-lasting
time, because these giants or tyrants have not been from the beginning
of the world; but were born at the very first, when the children of God
were struck out of their kind. The word saeculum here means a substance,
and Moses wants to indicate with it what kind of power this was, on
which they relied, namely a temporal or worldly power. For they despised
the ministry of preaching as a lowly ministry, and therefore they

**[478n . Interpretation of I Moses 6, 4. W. i, 720-723.
479]{.underline}**

The papists, who were much more pleased to have great incomes and the
kingdoms of the world than to be hated by everyone for the sake of the
gospel, did the same.

For as far as Moses is concerned, the word olam means the world itself
and time. Therefore one should be careful when in Scripture it means a
true time, saeculum, or the world. Now here it must necessarily be
understood of the world; for such giants or tyrants \"have not been from
the beginning.

Therefore these words, \"mighty men of the world,\" belong to the
description of the power that they have not taken from the church, nor
from the Holy Spirit, but from the devil and the world, that it is as it
were a contrast to that which Christ said to Pilate Joh. 18, 36: \"My
kingdom is not of this world. The church servants and preachers suffer
hunger and need and are hated by all classes, therefore they cannot
practice tyranny; but those who have the reign, rule over land and
people, have castles and villages, they are equipped for tyranny.

And so these words also belong to the description of the church, in
which there is a little people, who must all bear the cross and have
neither honor nor good. They have the wait, which is their only good,
but which the world despises and persecutes. On the other hand, these
nephilim or giants use the glorious name of the church, as they are
descendants of the patriarchs, and they also possess the kingdoms. These
rule and oppress the poor church with their power; therefore Moses calls
them meolam nephilim, mighty ones of the world or in the world, or
worldly and temporal mighty ones.

The Jerome further translates: viri famosi, there is in the Hebrew viri
nominis, people of a name, that is, who are famous and celebrated in the
world. With this Moses touches here once again the sin of these
Cyclopes, that after they had everything that is in the world, they also
had a famous name and were famous through the whole world. And that
therefore, that against it

The children of God, namely Noah with his children, were in the highest
disgrace and contempt, and were considered heretics, children of the
devil, those who at the same time would break off and hinder the
spiritual and worldly government, as it is now with us. For Christ
himself testifies in Matthew 24:37 that the last times will be like the
times of Noah.

For Moses said before that the Holy Spirit was taken away from the
wicked and they were given to the way of their lusts. That is why they
were such boys as now are the pope with his cardinals and bishops, who
are not only called gracious lords and princes and hold the kingdoms,
but they also subject themselves to the name of the church, so that they
may consider us heretics and surely condemn us. They do not allow
themselves to be called tyrants, ungodly, church robbers, but want to be
called the most gracious, most holy and most venerable lords.

137 Therefore, it does not have this opinion, which Lyra follows, since
it is famosos, famous, declared, infamous, infamous people. For just as
the world does not call the Pope the Antichrist, but gives him the name
of the Most Holy One, and admires him as one who, with his fleshly
creatures, is completely full of the Holy Spirit and cannot err;
therefore it also humbly worships him, calling him and commanding what
he will: so these giants also had a famous name, and the whole world
marveled at them. But Noah, on the other hand, is condemned with his own
as a rebel, heretic and slanderer of temporal and spiritual majesty; as
in our time we who teach the gospel are held by the pope and his
bishops.

**IV.**

Therefore, in this text there is a description of the sins with which
the same time was afflicted, namely, that it was the people who turned
away from God\'s word and gave themselves over to their lusts and
perverse minds; who sinned against the Holy Spirit with the highest and
utmost impenitence, defending the ungodly nature.

[**480 L. II, 162-164.** Interpretation of **Genesis** 6:4-6. **W. I,
7S3-728. 481**]{.underline}

> and challenged the recognized truth. And yet, in all such blasphemy,
> they retained the name and honor not only of the worldly regime, but
> also of the church, as if they had been exalted by God to the angels.
> But since things stood thus, and Noah and Lamech with his grandfather
> Methuselah taught in vain, God left them in their heart\'s conceit,
> Psalm 81:13, and kept silent until they experienced the Flood, which
> they would not believe.
>
> 139 That is, to fall away from God and the church and to take
> forbidden wives. For one sin, if it is not soon repented of, draws
> into another, and from it soon into another, until there is no more
> cessation, and until one comes to the degree which Solomon describes,
> Proverbs 18:3: \"When the wicked is sunk in the depth of sins, he
> despises them.\" For even if one wanted to warn such people about
> this, they ask nothing about it, think that they do not need a
> teacher, and let themselves believe that they have a righteous cause,
> do not believe that after this life there is another, or still hope
> for salvation in obvious sins. But in the end they are overtaken by
> scorn and shame. Such stubborn impenitence and supreme contempt of the
> Word caused God to destroy all flesh with the Flood.

**Fourth Part.**

> **Of the repentance and sorrow of God over mankind.**

**I.**

> **V. 5. 6. But when the Lord saw that the wickedness of men was great
> upon the earth, and that all the thoughts and actions of their hearts
> were evil for ever, he repented that he had made men upon the earth.**

This is the text that we have led against free will, of which Augustine
writes that without grace or the Holy Spirit it serves nothing but to
sin**.** But the patrons of the free will are thrown in front of the
head and

have taken much pains not only for the sake of this very clear text, but
also for the sake of this saying of St. Augustine, of whom they say that
he speaks hyperbolically and, as Basil writes, that one who had gone too
far in refuting his counterpart did as the peasants do, who, when they
want the young wood to grow straight, bend it a little much to the other
side. Thus, they say, Augustine, in his refutation of the Pelagians, in
which he praises grace, also spoke somewhat more harshly against free
will than was just.

But as far as this text is concerned, they misinterpret it as speaking
only of the wicked generation before the Flood, for now people would be
better, and if not all, there would be some who would use free will
correctly. But the wretched people do not see that the text speaks in
general of the heart of man, and especially there is the little word
\"only\". Thirdly, they also do not see that after the Flood this saying
is repeated almost in the same words as it is here, in the 8th chapter,
v. 21, where God says: \"The thoughts of man\'s heart are evil from his
youth. Since he does not only speak of those who were before the Flood,
but also of those to whom he promises that he will no longer destroy
them with the Flood, that is, of the entire descendant generation of
Noah. For these are words that are spoken in general: \"The thoughts of
man\'s heart are evil.\"

Therefore we conclude in general that without the Holy Spirit and
without grace man can do nothing but sin, and thus goes on infinitely
from one sin to another. But if this is added to the fact that he cannot
tolerate the pure doctrine and rejects the word of salvation and resists
the Holy Spirit, then by the help of free will he also becomes an enemy
of God, blasphemes the Holy Spirit and simply follows the evil lusts and
temptations of his heart; as witnessed by the examples of the Jews under
the prophets, Christ and the apostles; the example of the first world
under the teacher Noah; item, the example of our adversaries of the
present time, who are not to be reckoned with in any way.

**[482 \"- n. is-i\". Interpretation of I Moses 6, 5. 6. W. i, 728-731.
483]{.underline}**

Wise people can persuade that they sin, err and have wrong (worship).

143 Other sayings in the holy scriptures also prove this. For does the
14th Psalm, v. 2, not speak generally enough when it says: \"The Lord
looks down from heaven on the children of men, to see if any are wise
and ask after God. But they have all gone astray\" 2c.? And Paul refers
to this Psalm in the Epistle to the Romans Cap. 3, 10. Item, Ps. 116,
11.: \"All men are liars.\" And Paul Rom. 11, 32.: \"God has decided
everything under sin.\" These sayings are all general and conclude
powerfully for us that without the Holy Spirit, which Christ alone
gives, man can do nothing but err and sin. Therefore Christ says in the
Gospel of John, Cap. 15, 5: \"I am the vine, and ye are the branches:
without me ye can do nothing,\" but without me ye are as a branch cast
down, barren and dead, prepared for the fire.

144 And this is also the reason why the Holy Spirit\'s office is to
punish the world, John 16:8, namely, that He calls the world to
repentance and the recognition of this naughtiness. The world, however,
remains and does as it has long done: even though it is admonished by
God\'s word, it does not listen, but thinks that God will be pleased
with the services it has chosen, even though without God\'s word; and it
cannot be changed from this opinion.

If there will be a concilium one day, it will be of this very doctrine,
of free will, that the decision and opinion will be that one should
follow what the Pope and the Fathers have decreed. If we were to cry out
against this and say that man would be evil of himself without the Holy
Spirit, and that what he does without the Holy Spirit or without faith
would be condemned before God, for man\'s heart would be evil and all
his thoughts would be evil, we would not achieve anything.

\(146\) Therefore, we must firmly insist in our hearts and hold on to
this doctrine, which holds our sin and condemnation against us. For such
a knowledge of our sins is the beginning of our salvation, that we may
simply believe in our sins.

to completely renounce ourselves and give God alone the glory of
righteousness. For why else does Paul complain so much, Rom. 7, 18, and
freely confess that there is nothing good in him, and says first of all:
\"in my flesh\"? That we may understand that our naughtiness and harm is
healed by the Spirit of God alone. If this is firmly established in the
heart, then we have laid the foundation of our blessedness to a greater
extent. For after this we have clear testimonies that God will not
reject sinners, that is, those who recognize their sins, desire to
repent, and thirst for righteousness or forgiveness of sins through
Christ.

Therefore, we should take great care that we are not found among these
Cyclopes who oppose God\'s word and boast of their free will and their
own powers. For though we often stumble, fall and sin, yet the Holy
Spirit, when we give way to Him with humble confession of our
wickedness, will be with us and will not only not impute the sins we
have recognized, but will cover them up by Christ\'s grace and
abundantly grace us with other gifts, both of which are necessary for
this and that life.

But the words of Moses himself should also be considered diligently; for
here, out of certain counsel and concern, he has used a peculiar way of
speaking, that he does not simply say: The thoughts of man are evil,
but, \"the writing of thoughts. And so he calls that what man is able to
do in his thoughts or with his reason and free will in the very highest
degree. For that is why he calls it a poem, that man conceives it with
the highest diligence, chooses it, does it like a potter and considers
it the most beautiful work of all. But this, he says, is evil, and not
just once, but for all times; for without the Holy Spirit, reason is
absolutely without all knowledge of God. But to be without the knowledge
of God is to be ungodly, to live in darkness, and to think that the best
is the worst.

But I am speaking here of the good in a theological way; for here a
distinction must be made between the worldly and the theological.

**[484 D. n. ISS-1SS. Interpretation of Genesis 6:5, 6. W. 1, 731-734.
485]{.underline}**

logic. For God is pleased with the regiments even of the ungodly: He
adorns and rewards the virtues even of the ungodly; but only as far as
this life is concerned, and as far as reason, as outwardly and worldly
good, understands it, but not as far as the future life is concerned.

\(150\) But when we discuss free will, we ask what it can do in a
theological way, not what it can do in worldly things and in those that
are subject to reason. And thus conclude that man without the Holy
Spirit is simply godless before God, even if he were adorned with all
the virtues of all pagans. As one truly finds in the pagan histories
excellent examples of discipline, temperance, generosity, love for the
fatherland, parents, children; item, examples of manliness, kindness 2c.
We also conclude that the very best thoughts of God, of God\'s will, of
God\'s service are the very deepest darknesses. For the light of reason,
which alone is given to man, understands no more than what is good for
the body and does it good. But this is the corrupt love of pleasure.

Therefore, this saying should not be understood in the same general way
as it is understood by Jews and Sophists, who think that it only speaks
of the lower part of man, which is animal, but that reason drives and is
inclined to the best: thus, it only draws the thoughts and thoughts to
the other table, like the Pharisee who condemns the tax collector and
says that he is not like the others, Luc. 18:11. He speaks good words,
for he gives thanks to God, which is not evil: but we say that it too is
evil and ungodly, for it comes most certainly from the lack of knowledge
of God, and is really a prayer that becomes sin and serves neither
God\'s glory nor man\'s blessedness.

Thus one sees that the philosophers in some places do not so foolishly
disputing about God, about God\'s providence, through which God governs
everything; and some seem to be so Christianly spoken that they almost
make prophets out of Socrates, Xenophon, Plato 2c. Prophets. But because
they thus argue about it,

that they do not know that God sent His Son Christ for the salvation of
sinners, then these delicious and beautiful disputations are the highest
ignorance of God and vain blasphemy according to the opinion of this
text, which briefly and roundly makes such a judgment that all thinking,
striving, and intending of the human heart is absolutely evil.

For this reason he does not speak of sins alone before the Flood, but
speaks of the whole nature, of the heart, reason and understanding of
man, as he is when he pretends to be righteous and wants to be most
holy: as the Anabaptists of today have such thoughts in mind, they want
to live in such a way that they sin nothing everywhere, and imagine the
most beautiful virtues in their thoughts. The reason is that if hearts
are without the Holy Spirit, they not only have no knowledge of God, but
are also naturally hostile to God. But how can that be other than evil
that comes from ignorance of God and enmity?

But here this question is also discussed. Moses speaks thus: \"The Lord
saw that all the thoughts of man were evil\"; item: \"And it saved him
that he had made man\"; if God sees everything beforehand, how then does
Moses speak here that he first saw it? Item, if God is wise, how can he
repent of what he has made? Why did he not see this sin or corrupt
nature of man from the beginning of the world? And why, then, does
Scripture give God temporal will sight and counsel? Is not God\'s
counsel eternal and that He cannot repent? The same is written in the
prophet Jonah, Cap. 3, 4, where God threatens to punish the Ninivites,
and yet forgives them when they repent. To such questions the sophists
have nothing else to answer, except that they say that Scripture speaks
in a human way, and that such things as seeing, repenting, etc., are
attributed to God by a figure. Therefore they argue about two kinds of
God\'s will, the will of the sign and the will of the good pleasure. The
will of benevolence, they say, is steadfast and unchangeable; but the
will of the sign is changeable; for he changes the signs when he wills.
Thus he has the

**[486 2 m 169-171. Interpretation of Genesis 6:5. 6. W. 1, 734-787.
487]{.underline}**

Circumcision is taken away and baptism is instituted 2c., since the will
of God\'s good pleasure remains the same for all eternity.

\(155\) I do not condemn this opinion, but it seems more simple to me
that the holy Scriptures speak according to the thoughts of men who are
in the church office. Therefore, when Moses says that God sees him and
repents of him, this truly happens in the hearts of those who are in the
ministry of preaching.), \"My Spirit will not continue to be a judge
among men\": since he does not speak of the Holy Spirit as he is in his
own natural being, or of the divine majesty, but of the Holy Spirit who
is in Noah\'s, Methuselah\'s and Lamech\'s hearts, that is, of the
Spirit of God who is in the ministry and guides the word through the
saints.

In this way God saw the wickedness of men and repented, that is, Noah,
who had the Holy Spirit and was a minister of the Word, saw the
wickedness of men and was moved to sorrow by the Holy Spirit when he saw
it: as Paul also says Eph. 4:30.That the Holy Ghost is grieved in the
saints by the wickedness of the wicked: For Noah being a faithful
minister of the word, and an instrument of the Holy Ghost, it is rightly
said that the Holy Ghost is grieved when Noah is grieved, and would
rather that man were not at all, than that he were so wicked.

Therefore, it is not the opinion as if God had not seen this from
eternity. He has seen everything from eternity. But just as the
wickedness of men now manifests itself with full force, so God reveals
it in the hearts of His servants or prophets. God is eternally firm and
steadfast in his counsel, sees and knows all things, but he does not
reveal this to the godly until his time, so that they may see it. This
seems to me to be the simplest understanding of this text, and Augustine
also agrees with it quite well.

But I always keep this rule, that I avoid, as much as I can, such
questions as draw us up to the throne of the divine majesty. And it is
much better to remain at the bottom of the manger of the Lord Christ,

who became man; for if one confuses himself with the Godhead, there is
much danger.

But to this text belong others like it, in which God is painted as if he
had eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands and feet, as Isaiah Cap. 6, 1.,
Daniel Cap. 7, 13. and other prophets saw in their visions and
revelations. For in such places the Scriptures speak of God no
differently than of a man. Therefore, the anthropomorphites were
condemned as heretics for having given the divine majesty the form of a
man.

160 If the thoughts of the anthropomorphs were so crude, they were
rightly condemned, for there is a manifest error in them. \"For a
spirit,\" says Christ Luc. 24:39, \"hath not flesh and bones.\" But I am
rather of opinion that I hold that the anthropomorphites thought as they
would like to pretend the doctrine to the simple in a simple-minded
form. For God is in His substance and essence quite unknowable and
incomprehensible. We can also not actually say what he is, if we wanted
to tear ourselves apart right away.

Therefore, God Himself condescends in such a form that we can grasp and
comprehend Him, and He shows Himself to us in parables, as in covers,
according to childish simplicity, so that He can be recognized by us to
some extent. Thus the Holy Spirit appeared in the form of a dove, Matth.
3, 16, not that he was a dove, and yet in such a coarse and simple form
he wanted to be recognized, accepted and worshipped; for he was truly
the Holy Spirit. So in this very place, although no one will say that
the voice that comes down from heaven is God the Father, yet in this
crude image, which was a human voice from heaven, he was accepted and
worshipped.

162\. that the Scriptures thus attribute to God the form, voice, works,
and attributes of a man 2c. not only serves to instruct the simple and
the weak, but we great and learned people, who are versed in the
Scriptures, must adhere to such rough parables, because God has
presented them to us and made Himself known to us by means of

**[488 L. II, 171-178. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 5. 6. W. 1, 737-7W.
489]{.underline}**

The angels also appear in human form, since one knows that they are only
spirits. But we cannot recognize spirits when they appear to us like
spirits, but we recognize the images.

This is the simplest way of dealing with such sayings. For what God is
in His nature we cannot discuss, but what God is not we can discuss,
namely, that He is not a voice, not a dove, not water, not bread, not
wine. And yet He shows Himself to us in such visible forms, deals with
us through them, puts these forms before us, so that we should not
become erroneous and frivolous spirits, who may argue about God, but
know nothing about Him, except that He cannot be comprehended in His
mere majesty. And God sees that this way of understanding Him is
impossible for us. \"For He dwells,\" as the Scripture 1 Tim. 6, 16.
says, \"in a light where no one can come.\" Therefore he has presented
such things to us, which we can comprehend and understand. Those who are
based on these things take hold of God rightly, since those who boast of
secret visions, revelations and illuminations and follow them are either
suppressed by the Majesty or remain in the thickest darkness, so that
they do not recognize God, Proverbs 4:19.

So the Jews also had their images, in which God showed Himself to them,
as: the mercy seat, the ark, tabernacle, pillar of cloud and pillar of
fire 2c. For in the 2nd book of Moses Cap. 33, 20. God says: \"No man
shall live who beholds Me.\" That is why he presents his image to us, so
that he shows himself to us in such a way that we can take hold of him.
Thus, in the New Testament we have baptism, the sacrament of the altar,
absolution and the ministry of preaching.

And such images are actually the will of the sign, as they are taught in
the schools, into which we are to look if we want to know God\'s will.
The other will, of pleasure, is the essential will of God or the mere
majesty that is God Himself: there we should not turn our eyes, for it
cannot be grasped. For in God there is nothing but divinity, and

His essence is the overflowing wisdom and almighty power, where reason
cannot reach at all. And what God has willed with this will of
benevolence, that he has seen from eternity.

166 But one should not inquire into this essential and divine will, but
abstain from it altogether, as from the divine majesty, which is
inscrutable, and which God has not presented to us in this life to know
or to comprehend, but has wanted to wrap it up and show it to us in
several images, as in baptism, word and sacrament. These are the divine
images and the will presented in one sign, by which he acts with us
according to our understanding: therefore one should look at these
alone. But the will of the good pleasure is to be left aside; unless it
be Moses, or David, or some other man equal and perfect to them.
However, these also saw the will of the divine good pleasure in such a
way that they did not take their eyes off the will that God reveals by
signs.

Now the will of the sign is called the effect of God, when he goes out
to us and acts with us through some external thing in which he has
wrapped himself, which we can understand; as there is the word and
ceremonies, which he himself has arranged. And this will, they say, is
not omnipotent. For even if God commands us through the Ten Commandments
what he wants to be done, it is not done. Thus Christ ordered his supper
so that faith in God\'s mercy would be strengthened in us, Matth. 26,
28, and yet many use it for judgment, 1 Cor. 11, 29, that is, without
faith.

Now I come back to the text. Moses says that the Lord saw the wickedness
of men and repented him. The scholastics interpret this thus: He sees
and repents of him, namely with the will of the sign and not of the good
pleasure or essential will.

But we say that Noah\'s heart was moved by the Holy Spirit so that he
understood that God was angry with man and wanted to destroy him. This
opinion can be

**[490 L u, 173-lw. interpretation of Genesis 6, 5. 8. W. 1, 73S-74S.
491]{.underline}**

and does not draw us into the disputations of the perfect power or
majesty of God, which find the most dangerous thoughts and disputations,
as I have seen in many. For first of all, such spirits are puffed up by
the devil, so that they think they have the Holy Spirit, and despise the
Word, even blaspheming it, and praising nothing else but spirit and
visions.

This is the first degree of error, when people leave God, who has
wrapped Himself in His images and become man, and seek mere God. But
when the hour of judgment comes and they feel God\'s wrath and God
judges and tests their hearts, the devil no longer blows them up;
therefore they despair and die, for they walk in the mere sun and leave
the screen and shade from the heat, Isa. 4, 6.

Therefore, let no one think of the mere Godhead, but beware of it, as of
hell and of the highest temptations of the devil. And we should all
diligently see to it that we remain with the signs in which God Himself
has revealed Himself to us, namely, in His Son, born of the Virgin Mary,
who lies among your cattle in the manger, in the Word, in Baptism, in
the Lord\'s Supper and Absolution. For in these images we see and find
the God whom we can tolerate and who comforts us, directs us to hope and
makes us blessed. The other thoughts of the will of good pleasure or of
the essential and eternal will kill and condemn us.

172 Although they do not actually call this will the will of good
pleasure. For this is called the will of good pleasure, which the gospel
indicates, and of which Paul says Rom. 12, 2: \"That ye may prove which
is the good, the acceptable, and the perfect will of God\"; and Christ
John 6, 40. 6, 40: \"This is the will of God, that whoever sees the Son
and believes in Him shall have eternal life\"; Matth. 12, 50: \"He who
does the will of My Father in heaven is My brother\"; Matth. 3, 17:
\"This is My will.

dear Son, in whom I am well pleased.\" This will of grace is rightly and
properly called the will of good pleasure and is the only counsel and
remedy against this will of sign or good pleasure, which the scholastics
discuss in the histories of the Flood and the Fall of Sodom.

For there is seen in both places a terrible wrath of God, against which
hearts cannot endure without this will of grace alone, that they think
that the Son of God was sent into the flesh to save us from sin, death
and the tyranny of the devil.

This will of the divine good pleasure has been from eternity and has
been revealed and shown in Christ and is a life-giving, friendly and
loving will. That is why it alone should be called a pleasing will. But
the good fathers pass by almost all the good promises and do not insist
on them, so they could be called voluntas beneplaciti, that is, the will
of good pleasure.

\(175\) Now that they teach and say that one should look at the will of
the sign, they do well, but it is not enough. For when we look at the
Ten Commandments, are we not terrified when we see and find our sins in
them? If these terrible signs of divine wrath, which are also the will
of the sign, are added to them, it is impossible for a heart to be
uplifted and comforted if it does not look into the will of God\'s good
pleasure (which we also call the will of God), that is, into the Son of
God, who shows us the heart and the will of His Father in such a way
that He is not angry with sinners, but has mercy on them for the sake of
His Son. 14, 9: \"Philip, he who sees me sees the Father.\"

Therefore, the Son of God, who became man, is that shell in which the
divine majesty with all its gifts shows itself to us in such a way that
there is no such poor sinner who may not come before God with certain
confidence that he will receive forgiveness and grace. This is the only
sight of the Godhead that can be seen in this life.

**[492 n. n, 175-177. Interpretation of Genesis 6:5, 6. W. I, 742-745.
493]{.underline}**

is easy and possible. Those who have departed in such faith will be
enlightened by power from above on the last day, so that they will also
see the divine majesty itself. But in this way we must come to the
Father, who is Christ Himself, who will guide us safely and not deceive
us.

The fact that the text says, \"The Lord repented that he had made man on
earth,\" I think is meant in the opposite sense, that God is not
thinking of such a man on earth, who is subject to sin and death, but of
a heavenly man, who is the master of sins and death. Such a man, he
shows that he loves him, but the earthly man he is hostile and intends
to destroy him.

**II.**

**And it grieved him in his heart.**

178 Thus God repented that it grieved him in his heart. For here is the
word azav, which he used above Cap. 3, 16, where he says: \"You shall
bear children with pain\"; item Ps. 127, 2: \"Bread with sorrow.\" But
this way of speaking must be understood according to the scriptural
habit, and not think that God has a heart or can feel pain; but when
Noah\'s, Lamech\'s and Methuselah\'s spirit is grieved, the scripture
says that God Himself is grieved. That we do not understand this sadness
from the divine being, but from Noah, in whose heart the feeling of the
wrath of God has worked and caused such sadness. For he feels with his
father and grandfather through the revelation of the Holy Spirit in his
heart that God is hostile to the world because of sin and wants to
destroy it; therefore they are grieved because of such impenitence.

This is the simple and right understanding. For if you want to
understand these words about the will of the divine being, that God has
decreed and ordained it from eternity, it is a dangerous disputation,
which can only be handled by spiritual people and those who are well
tempted in temptations; as Paul was, who

But we want to stand down and stay with simplicity, since there is less
danger involved, namely that Noah and the other fathers were grieved to
the highest degree, since the Holy Spirit revealed such wrath of God to
them. Such unspeakable groaning of pious people is attributed to God
Himself, for it comes from His Spirit.

180 We will see an example of this sighing later, Gen 18:23, in Abraham,
[who]{.underline} let himself in for the Sodomites and stood for them
like a wall, and did not let go of the matter until it had come to five
righteous people. For no doubt the Holy Spirit filled Abraham\'s heart
with many and innumerable sighs, whether he would serve the poor people,
that they might be preserved. And what does not Samuel do for Saul? He
cries and howls so long that God Himself must stop him and says to him:
\"How long will you suffer for Saul, whom I have rejected, so that he
will not be king over Israel?\" 1 Sam. 16, 1. So Christ, when He looks
at the city of Jerusalem, which was to be destroyed in a few years
because of sin, is moved and grieved, Luc. 19, 41.

181 And the spirit of prayer arouses such emotions in pious hearts. For
where it is, it takes care of the needs and misfortunes of others,
teaches, instructs and spares no effort, laments, sighs 2c. Thus Moses 2
Mos. 32, 32. and Paul Rom. 9, 3. desire to be banished for their people.

And so the most holy man Noah, with his father and grandfather, is also
distressed when he sees this terrible wrath of God. He does not rejoice
in the harm and destruction of the whole human race, but is distressed
and grieved to the utmost, while meanwhile the children of men live in
the greatest security, laughing, rejoicing and mocking him to boot; as
David also laments Ps. 109, 4: \"For that I love them, they are against
me; but I pray\"; and Paul Phil. 3, 18: \"I say with weeping.\" For what
else can holy people do when the world does not want to resist and be
converted?

**[494 L II, 177-179. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 6. W. 1, 745-748.
495]{.underline}**

And this is the constant form and shape of the true church, that it not
only suffers, is humiliated and trampled underfoot, but also prays for
those who afflict it, and seriously takes care of their danger and harm.
On the other hand, the closer they are to their damnation, the more
surely the wicked joke and rejoice. Therefore, when the hour of judgment
arrives, God again plugs his ears so that he does not hear even his dear
children when they plead and beg for the wicked; as Ezekiel Cap. 13:5
complains that no one can be found who will intercede for a wall for
Israel, and says that such an office belongs especially to the prophets.

But it is impossible for the wicked to pray. For this reason, no one may
avail himself of any prayer from our adversaries, the papists. But we
pray for them and set ourselves up like a wall against the wrath of God;
therefore they will undoubtedly receive through our tears and sighs
whether they might want to repent.

A terrible example is that God did not spare the first world, since
Noah, Lamech and Methuselah were placed between them as a wall. How will
it be now, when there are no such walls, that is, when there is no
church at all! For the same is always the wall against the wrath of God:
therefore it grieves and sorrows, agonizes, prays, pleads, teaches,
admonishes, because the hour of judgment is not yet present, but
nevertheless very near. But what else can she do, when she sees that
such service is in vain, but grieve fiercely for the sake of the ruin of
the impenitent? And did this increase the heartache of the pious
patriarchs, that they saw that a large number of their friends and
relatives would perish at the same time.

And Moses could not have described such heartache better or more clearly
than by saying that the LORD repented that he had made man. For above,
Genesis 1:31, when he describes the condition of man, that he was made
in the image of God, he says that God looked upon and considered all his
works that he had made,

and they would all have been very good. Therefore, there God takes
pleasure and joy in His creatures; but here He is of a different mind
and says completely the opposite, namely, that He is grieved and it
grieves Him that He created mankind.

Thus Noah and the other fathers were encouraged by the revelation of the
Holy Spirit. For otherwise they would have remained with the thoughts of
joy, and would have judged according to the first promise that God would
have pleasure and delight in all his works. And they would not have
thought that God\'s wrath could be so great that he would not only
destroy all the human race, but also all the animals under heaven and on
earth, which had not sinned, even the earth. For the earth, because of
man\'s sin, did not remain as good after the Flood as it was before.
Therefore some, as Lyra says, have written that through the Flood the
earth above has gone down by the breadth of three hands. So truly the
whole paradise was rejected and corrupted by it; so that we now live on
an earth that is completely cursed, compared to how it was before the
Flood after Adam\'s fall, which was also nothing compared to the
goodness in which it was first created before sin.

Therefore the holy fathers saw such distress by the revelation of the
Holy Spirit a hundred and twenty years before. But the wickedness of the
world was so great that it forced the Holy Spirit to be silent; and
Noah, without fear of the greatest danger, was not allowed to reveal
such threats, but spoke of such wrath of God to his father, grandfather,
wife and children. For the children of men have not been able to hear
and tolerate such things any less than the papists can now suffer it to
be said that they are the church of Satan and not of Christ. For they
also boasted of their ancestors, and set the promise of the seed against
Noah\'s preaching, and thought it an impossible thing that God should
thus destroy all men.

189\. so the Jews believed the prophets

**[496 k. ii, I79-18S. Interpretation of Genesis 6:6, 8. w. i, 743-752.
497]{.underline}**

and Christ Himself, because they thought they were God\'s people,
because they had the Temple and worship. Nowadays, the Turks pride
themselves on their victories, which they consider a reward for their
faith and religion, that they believe in One God: but they consider us
pagans, as if we believed in three gods. God, they say, would not give
us so many victories, land and people, if he were not gracious to us and
our religion did not please him. Just such a thought also blinds the
papists. They see that they are sitting in the highest honors, that is
why they consider themselves to be the church and are therefore not
afraid of any threat of divine judgment. That is why it is a devilish
argument and proof when people gloss over their sin with God\'s name.

190\. But if God has not spared the first world and the lineage of the
holy fathers, to whom the promise of the seed was proper, and if He has
preserved the very smallest and least of the rest, Turks, Jews and
Papists will boast of the name of God in vain. For God\'s word, says the
prophet Micah Cap. 2:7, says good things to those who walk blamelessly:
those who do not walk blamelessly, God\'s word is evil to them, and God
threatens them and corrupts them, regardless of the fact that they bear
the name of the church and are a great multitude. But the rest, which
walk aright, he upholdeth: but the world cannot be persuaded of this.

The descendants of the patriarchs, who perished in the Flood, will
undoubtedly have made a big deal of this proof of the majesty and
dignity of the Church and accused Noah of blasphemy and lying. For to
say that God wanted to destroy the whole world with the Flood is as much
to say (they thought) as if one said that God was not merciful, was not
a father, but a cruel tyrant. You say of God\'s wrath, Noah: is God such
a one who has not promised help and salvation from sin and death through
the seed of the woman? How can God\'s wrath devour the whole world? We
are God\'s people and have excellent gifts from God that He would not
have given us if He had been willing to be so swift and hostile.

to go with us. Thus, the wicked take upon themselves the promises of
God, and because they insist on them, they despise and ridicule all
threats.

192 But this is necessary and useful, that it be diligently considered,
that we strengthen ourselves against such fears of the safety of the
wicked. For the same thing that happened to Noah is happening to us. Our
adversaries give themselves the name that they are God\'s people, having
worship, grace and everything: again, they attribute to us everything
that is devilish. If we now punish them and say that they are
blasphemers and Satan\'s church, they rage against us with all kinds of
cruel tyranny. Therefore we weep and wail with Noah, and commit our
cause to the Lord, as Christ did on the cross (for what else can we
do?).), and wait until God will once hold judgment on earth, and let it
be seen that he loves the rest of those who fear him, and is hostile to
the great multitude of impenitent sinners, however high and much they
boast that they are the church, have promises and worship; as he has
corrupted the whole first world and turned the promise of the SaMen to
the poor and small rest of the multitude, as Noah and his children.

**Fifth part.**

**How Noah alone was found righteous, and the whole earth corrupt.**

**I.**

V. 8. **But Noah found grace in the sight of the Lord.**

These are the words by which Noah was restored to life. For he would
have had to die before such great wrath of the divine majesty, if God
had not given him this promise that he wanted to preserve him. Although
it is to be believed that even at that time, when he heard this promise,
his faith was weak and challenged. For no one believes how fainthearted
it makes one to regard God\'s wrath in this way.

194 Here again is a new way of speaking of the Holy Spirit, which
Gabriel, the heavenly messenger, also uses, as he speaks to the young
people.

**[498 2. n, 162-iK\" interpretation of Genesis 6:8-10. w. i, 772-755.
499]{.underline}**

Mary, Luc. 1, 30. says: \"You have found favor with God. This way of
speaking obviously excludes merit, and praises faith, by which alone we
are justified before God, that is, pleasing to God and pleasing Him.

V. 9. 10. **This is the generation of Noah: Noah was a godly man, and
without change, and led a godly life in his days; and begat three sons,
Shem, Ham, Japheth.**

Here the Jews not only begin a new chapter, but also a new lesson. This
text is a short history in which this patriarch Noah is especially
praised and extolled, because the other children of God all fall and
turn evil, he alone remains righteous and pious.

We must remember that there were many excellent men among the children
of God who lived with Noah for some five hundred years. For before the
Flood, people lived a very long time, not only as far as the children of
God were concerned, but also as far as the children of men were
concerned. Such people have come through so many years to excellent
experience: because from their ancestors they have learned much, have
also seen and experienced many things themselves.

197 Now that all these have become evil and corrupt, Noah stands there
alone, a true miracle man, who steers neither to the left hand nor to
the right, but keeps the right worship, keeps the right doctrine, and
lives in the fear of God. Therefore, there is no doubt that the wicked
and evil world must have been fiercely hostile to him and inflicted many
plagues on him, mocking and ridiculing him: Are you alone wise? Is God
pleased with you alone? and are we all wrong, or will we all be damned?
Therefore the righteous and holy man had to conclude that the others
would all err and be damned, but he alone would be preserved with his
family. And even though he concluded this for himself according to the
truth, it was still very difficult for him; therefore the holy man must
have wrestled with such thoughts in many ways.

198\. the wretched papists plague us now

and with this some argument that they say: Do you think that the fathers
have all erred? And it is true, it is difficult to say so, especially of
those who have been the best, as Augustine, Ambrose, Bernard, and the
other whole bunch of the very best marbles, who have ruled the Church
with the Word and have been adorned with the laudable name of the
Church, whose work we love and honor.

In truth, however, St. Noah, who alone is praised as righteous and
pious, was not reproached with anything more unbearable and severe,
especially because the children of men also wanted to have the name of
the church. They also, when the children of the fathers came to them,
thought that Noah was mad and foolish with his own, that he followed a
different doctrine and a different worship.

200\. now people\'s life is the shortest of all, and yet we see how high
human wit and understanding come; what do we think has happened since
life was very long, since people\'s wit and understanding were also
sharper and stronger? for now nature is much rougher and slower. And yet
such excellent people, who were adorned with so many gifts, became blind
and godless; as it is said afterwards, \"All flesh had corrupted its way
upon the earth.\" But Noah alone is righteous and pious.

201\. These two words may be distinguished, if one wishes, so that Noah
is called righteous for the sake of the first table, and pious for the
sake of the other table. For he is called righteous by faith toward God,
because he first believed the common promise of the seed of the woman;
then he also believed the special promise made to him alone, namely,
that the world would be destroyed by the flood and his family preserved.
But he is called pious because he walked in the fear of God, diligently
guarded against death and other sins, so that the wicked might defile
themselves against their conscience, and did not mind so much offense
from the most famous and wise people, who were most detrimental to
appearance and reputation.

**[500 L. n, 184-iss. Interpretation of I Moses 6, 9. 10. W. i, 7\"-7S7.
501]{.underline}**

This has been a great virtue. For now it seems impossible to us that a
man should set himself against the whole world and condemn all others as
evil people, who also boast of the church, the word and worship, but he
alone should consider himself God\'s child, pleasing to God. Therefore
Noah is a real miracle man, and he boasts of his great courage to Moses
by clearly saying: \"He led a godly life in his time\", as if he wanted
to say: since the very worst and most perverse boys lived.

203\. But above in Enoch\'s history I have said what it is to lead a
godly life, namely, to lead God\'s cause publicly. For being righteous
and pious is a testimony of a private virtue: but walking before God is
a public thing, namely, leading God\'s cause before the world, acting
God\'s word, teaching right worship 2c. That Noah therefore was not
righteous and pious for his person alone, but was also a confessor and
constant preacher, who publicly taught others of God\'s promises and
threats, did and suffered everything that a public person should do and
suffer, in that very worst and most perverse time.

\(204\) If I had seen such great people in the generation of the wicked
against me, I would have left my office out of despair. For no one
believes how hard it is for a man to stand against all the churches that
are one and hold one over another, and also against the judgment of the
very best of friends, to condemn them, teach against them, live against
them, and do everything. Which Noah did with marvelous constancy, who
was innocent before men and did not forsake the cause of God alone, but
boldly and undauntedly carried it out with violence among the very worst
people, until it was said to him, \"My Spirit shall judge no more among
men.\" And the word \"judge\" or \"to be a judge\" finely indicates the
attitude with which the wicked heard Noah when he preached to them.

205\. and Peter interprets finely what it means to walk before God, as
he 2. epist. 2, 5.

Noah calls a preacher of righteousness, not of men, but of God\'s
righteousness, that is, of the righteousness of faith in the promised
Seed. But what reward he received from the wicked for this preaching,
Moses does not indicate, but is content to say that he preached
righteousness and taught the right worship against the whole world, that
is, against the best, holiest and wisest people. Therefore, God will
have to prove many miraculous signs in him, so that the wicked did not
betray him and strangle him. For now we see and experience how much
anger, hatred and enmity a sermon preached to the people arouses; what
do we mean that Noah had to suffer, who did not teach for a hundred or
two hundred years, but for many more? except for the last hundred years,
in which God no longer wanted anyone to continue preaching to the
wicked, because it aroused them more and made them more and more angry.

206\. Therefore, from the nature and character of the world and the
devil, as well as from the apostles, prophets and our own experience, it
is easy to see what an example of patience and virtue Noah was, who was
righteous and blameless among the godless generation and lived a godly
life before God, that is, he ruled the church with God\'s word, and
after a hundred and twenty years, after which the world was to perish by
the Flood, he took a wife after this terrible threat and begat children.

It is also to be believed that he will have gone through the whole world
and taught and admonished everywhere about the right worship of God, and
therefore, after he had been prevented by the greatest effort and work,
he abstained from marriage because of great tribulation, as he waited
daily for a better and more pious world. But when he saw that this hope
had been in vain and had failed, and that God had indicated to him a
certain time when the world would come to an end, he first thought,
through the prompting of the Holy Spirit, to enter the marriage state,
so that out of it he would be able to live for the rest of his life.

**[502 n n, \'S6-18S. Interpretation of Genesis 6:9-11. W. 1, 7S8-760.
503]{.underline}**

nliest seed would remain for the new world. So the holy man raised up
the human race not only spiritually in the Word and righteous worship,
but also bodily through childbearing.

\(208\) Therefore, just as a new church arose in Paradise before the
flood through Adam and Eve, who believed the promise, so also a new
world and a new church arose from Noah\'s marriage state, which is, as
it were, a nursery of the world, which is to last until the last world
and the last judgment.

209\. But I have said above that the wicked were greatly offended at
Noah\'s marriage and matrimony and made a mockery of it. For how does it
add up that the world should perish in so short a time and yet Noah
still beget children in his five hundredth year? They took this for a
certain proof that the world would not perish by the Flood. Therefore
they have also begun to live more freely and boldly and to despise all
threats in the highest security; as Christ says Matth. 24, 38: \"In
Noah\'s time the people ate and drank\" 2c. For the world does not
understand God\'s counsel and will.

But how the sons of Noah were born one after another, I have said above.
Japheth was the firstborn, but Shem was born two years after Noah began
to build the ark, Ham also two years after. This is not clear enough,
but it is diligently indicated by Moses.

**II.**

**V. 11. But the earth was corrupt in the sight of God and full of
iniquity.**

Here Lyra disputes, perhaps from what the rabbis understand, that also
the birds and other animals have left their nature and have mixed with
various species. But I do not believe it. For in the animals the
creation or nature remains as it was created. They have not fallen
through sin, as man has, but they were created for this bodily life
alone. That is why they do not hear the word and are not concerned with
it.

the laws of the first and other tablets; therefore these words alone
shall be understood of man.

The fact that the animals also bore the punishment of sins and were
destroyed at the same time as man by the Flood was because God wanted to
destroy man completely, not only with body and soul, but also with
possessions, goods and dominion, so that he was created. As there are
examples of similar punishments in the Old Testament; Dan. 6, 24.
Daniel\'s enemies were thrown into the lions\' den with their wives,
children and the whole household. This is also what happened in Numbers
16:32 when Korah, Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up by the earth.
Christ also says the same thing in the Gospel of Matthew 18:25 about the
king who called the servant to be sold with his wife, children and all
that he had.

In the same way, not only men but also all their goods were destroyed by
the Flood, so that it would be a full and complete punishment of sins.
For the beasts of the earth and the fowls of the air were created for
man, and are the goods and chattels of man. Therefore, the animals
perished with them, not because they sinned, but because God wanted to
corrupt man in and with what he had on earth.

214\. But Moses clearly adds these words: \"The earth was corrupt in the
sight of God\", so that he indicates that Noah himself was considered
and regarded as a foolish and vain man in the sight of his world: on the
other hand, the world considered itself to be the most righteous and
holy, and thought that it had just and sufficient cause to persecute
Noah, especially as far as the first table and the service were
concerned. For the other table also has its color and glitter, but is
not to be compared with the first. An adulterer, thief or murderer may
remain hidden for a time, but not forever: but the sins of the first
table generally remain secret and hidden under the appearance of
holiness until God reveals them. For what is ungodly

**[504 L. n, I88-1S0. Interpretation of Genesis A 11. 12. W. 1,
780-70\". 505]{.underline}**

The one who is godless never wants to be godless or thought to be
godless, but strives to be praised as godly and holy, and decorates his
services in such a way that proper worship and religion is a stink and
filth in comparison.

The word schichet, to destroy, is very common and apparent in the holy
scriptures. Moses also uses it in 5. B. Cap. 31, 29: \"I know that after
my death ye shall perish, and go out of the way which I have commanded
you.\" And David, Ps. 14, 3: \"They are all corrupt, and all unfit.\"
But in both places it is actually spoken of the sins of the first table,
that is, those are punished who, according to appearance, are the most
holy, because they have false worship and false doctrine. Now it is
impossible that where there is false doctrine, ungodly life should not
follow.

216\] Because Moses says that the earth was corrupt in the sight of God,
he clearly shows and contrasts that the hypocrites and tyrants
considered Noah to be one who did not do anything right, but again they
taught and did what was right and holy. But the contradiction, says
Moses, is true: \"The earth\", that is the whole world or all men, \"was
corrupt\", that is, as far as the first table was concerned; for they
had no right word, no right worship. This distinction between the first
and second table is very pleasing to me and is undoubtedly indicated by
the Holy Spirit.

217 But the fact that Moses adds, \"The earth was full of iniquity,\"
indicates that it is always the case that where the word is lost, faith
is extinguished, and instead of the right services of God, the statutes
of men and self-chosen spirituality, as St. Paul Col. 2:8, 23 calls it,
follow there also iniquity, injustice and a shameful life.

218 The word chamas, sacrilege, actually means great violence and
injustice, as where all law and equity is suspended and everyone may do
as he pleases, and everything is done not with justice but with
violence. If this has been their life (one might say), how then have
they been able to retain the appearance or prestige of holiness and
righteousness?

tivity? Answer: Do you have such examples of the present lines before
your eyes? For what has the world ever seen more cruel than the Turks?
and yet they adorn all their cruelty and tyranny with the name of God
and religion.

Thus the popes have not only taken to themselves all the goods of the
world, but have also made the church full of great errors, blasphemies
and false doctrine, live in shameful fornication, separate the hearts of
lords and princes from each other when they want, and help to war and
much bloodshed: and yet they rightly want to have the name of the holy
of holies by force, boast themselves as governors of Christ and St.
Peter\'s successors.

Thus, under the name of holiness, the church and true religion, 2c. is
the highest sacrilege and violence. Since someone speaks against it, he
must soon be banished and condemned as a heretic and enemy of God and
the church. After the Roman popes and their followers, there is no
nation that insists and defies religion and justice more than the Turks.
Christians despise them as idols, but they consider themselves the most
holy and wise. But what is their life and religion but eternal murder,
robbery, stealing and other abominable gross sins?

Therefore the examples of the present time show us how these two things,
which are not otherwise comparable, can nevertheless stand and walk
together, namely, that with the highest religion are the highest
abominations, and with the appearance of righteousness the highest
violence and injustice. And is this also the cause that people become so
obdurate and sure of themselves, nor of the punishment they have earned
with their sins.

V. 12. **Then God saw the earth, and behold, it was corrupt; for all
flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth.**

222\. because the wrath of God is great, and now there is the
destruction of all flesh, except eight men, Moses describes this history
somewhat more extensively and

**[506n , iso-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 6:12. W. i, 763-766.
507]{.underline}**

This is repeated often, but it is not in vain, but has its emphasis.
Earlier (v. 11) he said that the earth had been corrupted: here he says,
as if in an ordinary court case, that God had seen this and intended to
punish. He thus paints, as it were, the order that God is wont to keep
when he does something.

At the present time, spiritual people can rightly judge the pope to be
the Antichrist and to rage against the Word and the kingdom of the Lord
Christ. But even those who recognize and judge this ungodly nature
cannot change it or defend themselves against it. For ungodliness
increases day by day, and contempt for godliness grows day by day. Then
they think: What is God doing? Why does He not punish His enemy? Is He
asleep and no longer cares for the world? For the pious are offended by
the fact that God is so lenient with His judgment; for they themselves
can do nothing to help the poor religion, and they see that God, who is
well able to do so, looks through the fingers of the raging and
blustering of the popes, who at the same time surely sin against the
first and the other table.

Noah also sees that the world has become full of injustice. Therefore he
whimpers and sighs to heaven to awaken God from his sleep to judgment,
as it were; as such sighs and lamentable words are many in the Psalms:
Ps. 10, 1: \"Lord, why are you so far away?\"; Ps. 13, 2: \"Lord, how
long?\"; Ps. 9, 14: \"Lord, look upon us, look upon our affliction\";
Ps. 7, 7. 9. 10: \"Arise, Lord, and judge my cause\" 2c.

Therefore it finally comes to pass, as Moses indicates here, that God
sees it and hears the cry of the saints, who can indeed judge the world
(for \"the spiritual judges everything,\" 1 Cor. 2:15), but cannot make
it better. For when the ungodly is adorned with the appearance of
holiness, it cannot be punished at all, nor can it be made better; just
as tyranny, when adorned with the appearance of righteousness and
prudence. For it is not new that those who take another\'s wife,
daughters, house, land and property by force are still just and holy
people.

as I have also said above about the papacy.

226\. therefore this is the other degree, that after the saints of the
wager have seen and judged ungodly beings, God also sees the same: as he
says afterwards Gen. 19, 13. of Sodom: \"The cry of Sodom has come up to
me\", and above Cap. 4, 10. of Abel: \"The voice of your brother\'s
blood cries out to me.\" But before God sees it, there is always the
groaning and sighing of the pious. But before God sees it, the groans
and sighs of the pious always precede it. This is what Moses wants to
indicate here by the word: \"God saw,\" namely, that God had finally
seen the affliction of the saints and had heard their cry, that finally
heaven had become inches; so that God, who until now had posed as if He
saw nothing, and who seemed as if He were helping the wicked to advance,
awoke as if from a sleep. He had probably seen everything much earlier
than Noah, because he sees into the hearts and cannot be deceived by
false appearances of holiness, as we are: but now that he intends to
punish, Noah only feels that he sees it.

227 Today we are also plagued by the greatest and most outrageous
wickedness. For our adversaries, out of pure courage, condemn the known
and known truth, stand at our necks, and shed the blood of the saints
out of diabolical nonsense; and yet, they advocate such public
blasphemies, robbery and murder against the kingdom and the name of God,
that they themselves cannot deny it, as if it were the highest
righteousness. Because they fight for their tyranny, to preserve it,
they also measure themselves against the name of the church. But what
else can we do here but cry out to God that he will sanctify his name
and not let his kingdom be destroyed, nor his fatherly will be hindered?

But the Lord is still asleep and does not yet see such great ungodly
beings, for he does not yet indicate that he sees them, but leaves us
tormented and tortured with the most horrible spectacles. That is why we
are still in the first degree, and may be able to escape from this

**[508 m. 193-1SS. Interpretation of Genesis 6:12, 13. w. 1, 766-771.
509]{.underline}**

In our time it may well be said here: \"The whole earth was ruined. But
the other degree will also come in its time, so that we can conclude
with certain confidence that not only we, but also God sees so great an
ungodly life and is hostile to it. For although God, according to His
patience and longsuffering, long feigns not to see many things, He will
nevertheless exalt His title, that He will judge the earth with
righteousness, Ps. 96, 13.

229\) How hard and difficult such delay is for the pious is shown by the
complaints of Jeremiah Cap. 12, 1. ff. and 20, 7. ff. For in them the
holy man comes so far through impatience that he blasphemes God, until
finally it is said to him that the king of Babylon will come and punish
the unbelieving despisers. Then Jeremiah sees that GOD looks on earth
and is a judge in it.

The following saying is very frightening, in which it is generally said
that all flesh on earth has corrupted its way, and since God has looked
upon the children of men, he has not found either among the oldest, nor
among the youngest fathers, whom he could have delivered from corruption
and remedied. This is even more terrible to hear, if one thinks a little
more and more diligently about the first world, and does not value it
out of the wretched rest that we still have. For as everything that
grows out of the earth was better and more delicious then: so we may
think that the majesty and splendor of our princes, and the appearance
of holiness and wisdom of the popes, are nothing compared with the
appearance of godliness, righteousness, and wisdom that was in the first
world among illustrious men. And yet the text says that all flesh has
corrupted its way, except for the one Noah with his children, that is,
they were all godless people and lived in idolatry and false religion,
but hated the right worship with the promises of the seed, persecuted
their preacher Noah, who proclaimed and proclaimed forgiveness of sins
through the given seed, and threatened with eternal damnation those who
would not believe in it.

**Sixth part.**

**How God decided to punish the first bet; how He commanded Noah to
build the box and made a covenant with him.**

**I.**

V. 13. **Then God said to Noah, \"The end of all flesh has come before
me, for the earth is full of their iniquity; and behold, I will destroy
them with the earth.**

After Noah and his people had long cried out and complained about the
wickedness of the world, God finally showed that he would also see and
punish the same wickedness. In our time we also hope for this outer
trial or degree; and there is no doubt that there will be some to whom
the future destruction of the world will be revealed; unless that same
destruction will be the last day and the last judgment, which I wish and
desire. For we have seen enough calamities in this short and evil time
of our life: ungodly people adorn their shame and vices with the name of
holiness and righteousness; as also happened in Noah\'s time. Therefore
we must not wait for repentance or conversion. Since it came to this
degree in Noah\'s time, a final judgment is pronounced, which the Lord
indicated above, saying that his spirit should no longer be a judge, and
that it repented him that he had made man.

But reason cannot believe nor fully understand this anger. For behold,
how this text is not at all like what is said above. Above, Genesis
1:31, we heard that God had seen all that he had made, and it was very
good; he had also blessed men and animals to multiply; he had subjected
the earth and all its goods to man: Man subjected the earth and all the
goods of it; and which is the greatest, he gave him: also a promise of
the seed of the woman and eternal life: has thus not only appointed the
household government and police, but also a church.

**[510 s. ii, ISS-IS7. Interpretation of I Genesis 6:13. W. i, 771-774.
511]{.underline}**

done. How is it then that the first world, which was founded by the
Word, as Peter 2 Epist. 3, 5. 6. was founded, is therefore destroyed by
water?

Therefore, there is no doubt that the children of men, when Noah
preached about the future and general destruction, reproached him with
all these things, and publicly blamed him for lying, namely, that the
household government, the police and the church were appointed by God,
so that God would not completely reverse, abolish and destroy His order
and statutes; so that man would be created to multiply and to beget
children and to rule on the earth, therefore he would not be destroyed
by the water.

234 As the papists urge us with this argument, Christ will be with his
church until the end of the world, Matth. 28, 20, and they will not
overcome the gates of heaven, Cap. 16, 18. They boast and proclaim this
with their mouths full, and think that it is impossible that they should
sink. The little ship of Peter, they say, may suffer a little trouble
and sway through impetuosity, but it cannot be sunk and subdued by the
waves.

Such security and defiance existed even before the Flood, and yet we see
that the whole world has been corrupted. They boasted that God\'s
ordinances were eternal, and that God had never again abolished or
completely changed what he had once created. But see how it has gone
out, and you will find that they have failed, but Noah alone was true.

236 Where the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit does not come, it is
impossible that a man should not be overcome by this argument. For will
you not make God unstable and fickle if you conclude that He wants to
destroy His creatures completely? And yet God reveals this to Noah
himself, that he will not let the end come upon a part of the flesh or
of the earth, but upon all flesh and upon the whole earth. For would it
not be terrible enough if one part of the earth, after three were made
of it, were threatened with its destruction? But over

The fact that the whole earth and all people are raging so cruelly can
be seen as contrary to God\'s order and opinion, who said that
everything is very good. Therefore, this is higher than human reason can
understand or comprehend.

But what is the cause of such great wrath? None other, because of it
here the text says that the world is full of iniquity. How is this such
a strange cause? He says nothing about the first tablet, but only refers
to the other. As if he wanted to say, \"I do not want to say anything
about me, that they are hostile to my name and word, blaspheme and
persecute; they themselves live among themselves in all disgrace,
neither the house government nor the police are ordered rightly; but
everything is done by force, but nothing by law and justice. Therefore I
will destroy both men and earth.

Thus we see in our time that our Lord God does not yet allow Himself to
be angered by the abominable abuse of the mass, which has been a
terrible abomination and has filled the whole world, as well as by false
doctrine and other sins and vices that have been taken for religion. But
because the people live among themselves in such a way that neither the
police nor the home rule works properly; item, because so great avarice,
so many kinds of deceitfulness and injustice are so rampant: so everyone
must see and conclude that God will urge and force Germany to punish,
even to completely turn back.

This is full of grace and love, that God complains more about the evil
and violence, so that His members are pressed and weighed down, than
about what happens to Him. For here we see that he is silent about it,
since he threatens not only mankind but the whole earth with
destruction.

240 For by the flood both things happened: First, man\'s strength became
weak and low; and second, much of his goods, together with the earth,
departed. For the fruits that grew on the trees afterward were not at
all like the former; but before the flood the grapes were better than
afterwards melons, citrine apples, or poppies.

**[512 \". n. is7-iss. Interpretation of I Genesis 6:13-15. W. i,
774-77.\" 513]{.underline}**

merances. Thus the pears were more delicious and nobler than now and the
spices. It is also credible that there was more strength in a man\'s
finger than in his whole arm. Thus reason and wisdom were far more
excellent; but because of sin God not only punished man, but also his
goods and dominion, so that this wrath might be a lesson and warning to
the world to come. But how does this destruction come about? So it
happens that God takes the water and destroys everything everywhere. Now
it is known with what violence this element is wont to rage; and
although the air is also harmful and poisonous, it does not always
poison the trees and roots. The water, however, not only tears
everything down, not only uproots the trees, but also takes [much from
the]{.underline} earth and changes the soil, so that even the most
fertile fields are spoiled by salty earth and sand, Ps.

> 107, 34. So this has been as it were a destruction of the first world.

But the present world will be afflicted by another punishment, as the
colors in the rainbow indicate. For the lowest color, which is
apparently recognizable and has a certain stroke, is water color. In the
Flood, the waters raged in such a way that the punishment nevertheless
had its number and dimensions, and the earth, after the sinners were
destroyed, was again given to the rest of the pious people for their
dwelling. But the outermost ring of the rainbow, which encompasses far
and has no ended place, is fire color, by which element the whole world
is to burn. But this destruction will be followed by a better world,
which will remain eternally and serve the pious. This can be seen as if
God had painted it in the rainbow.

**II.**

V. 14 **Make thee a box of fir wood, and make chambers therein, and
pitch them within and without.**

First of all, God thinks about how to preserve the small remnant that is
begotten from the small seed, the three sons of Noah.

For Noah did not father more children. This is a great indication of
God\'s mercy toward those who walk in His ways.

Some understand the word for a spruce, some for a fir, some for a cedar
tree; therefore it is difficult to guess what it actually is. But it
seems that such wood is chosen for the box either because it is light,
or because it is fat and sticky, so that it could float on the water
more easily and the water would pass through it less.

244 Kinim are called nests or chambers and different oerters according
to various kinds of animals; for bears, sheep, deer, horses 2c. have not
lived in one place with each other, but each species has had its own
special chamber or container.

But what bitumen, which we call pitch, was for a thing, I don\'t know.
In our country, the ships are plugged with bitumen and tow. Pitch is
used against water, but it burns easily. But we don\'t have such glue,
which could last in the water; that\'s why I don\'t mind that some take
it for pitch.

But here one might ask: Why does God command everything so specifically
and diligently, since it was enough ordered that Noah should make a box?
For how a dinah is to be built and what kind of space belongs to it,
reason sees well for itself, as many magnificent works of the builders
testify. Why then did God teach Noah so diligently about the length,
width and height of the box and how he should build it? So that after
Noah does everything according to what God tells him and prescribes (as
Moses built the Tabernacle according to the pattern from the mountain),
he can believe all the more strongly and surely that God wants to
preserve him and his people, and that he cannot mistrust the work and
the building that God Himself tells him how to build. This is the reason
why God commands him to do everything so diligently and carefully.

V.15. **And make it so: three hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide,
and thirty cubits high.**

**[514 8. n, ins-40l. Interpretation of Genesis 6:15, 16. w. 1, 776-779.
515]{.underline}**

Here we have a beautiful exercise from geometry and arithmetic about the
shape and size of the box, of which the teachers have judged in many
ways. Some write that the shape was quadrangular; some that it was
attached at the top, as almost all our houses in Europe are. But I
believe that it was square. For the Orientals knew nothing of pointed
buildings and lived in square ones; as can be seen from the Gospel Marci
Cap. 2, 4. that they walked on the roofs; and was almost so also the
figure of the temple.

248 After that, there is also a dispute about the difference of the
chambers and about the upper, middle and lowest place (because the text
says about such division and difference), which part each kind of the
animals inhabited. But of it one can say nothing certain. But it seems
to be credible that Noah had the uppermost place with the birds, the
middle one the clean animals and the lowest one the unclean ones.
Although the rabbis say that the lowest place was used to collect the
filth. But I think that the dirt and filth were thrown out of the
window. For after such a bunch of animals has been in the box for more
than a year, the filth has to be carried out.

249 And Augustine also states this from Philo against Faustus, that
according to geometrical calculation the box had the proportion of the
human body. For if a man lies on the earth, his body is ten times longer
than it is high, but six times longer than it is wide. So three hundred
cubits are six times fifty and ten times thirty cubits.

250 This is then applied to the body of the Lord Christ, that is, to the
church, which has one door, that is, baptism, through which both the
clean and the unclean enter. Although the church is small, it rules the
world and will preserve the world for its sake, just as the unclean
animals are preserved in the box. The others also drew it upon the body
of the Lord Christ, which had a wound in the side, as the chest had a
window. But although

Although these are not particularly artificial allegories, they are
harmless and there is nothing erroneous about them; they can also be
used outside of debate to emphasize and decorate the text.

**V. 16: You shall make a window on the top of it, one cubit wide. You
shall put the door in the middle of its side. And it shall have three
bottoms, one at the bottom, the other in the middle, the third in the
height.**

Behold, how diligent a master builder God is, and how He actually
prepares and orders all the oerths of the building. The word zohar does
not actually mean a window, but midday light. And is asked here: whether
there was not more than one window in the box, or their more? Because in
this language it is usual that one understands many, if one says of one.
As: \"I will destroy man from the earth\"; here God does not speak of
one, but of many people. But methinks it was only one window, through
which man\'s dwelling had light.

The Latin text is very obscure, so that one cannot understand what he
who translated it meant. And I think it is entirely likely that he was
guided by the figure of a ship, as they are now, so that the people
usually sit in the lower parts. So one cannot understand what he says
about the door, since one knows for certain that there was a window a
cubit wide in the upper part and a door in the middle of the side of the
box; just as Eve was created in the middle of the man\'s body. But the
whole building had three layers or differences, the uppermost, the
middle and the lowermost, and the uppermost chamber or difference had
light from the day through the window.

But one might say, What kind of window must it have been, or how could
it have remained in such constant and violent rain? For it did not rain
there, as it usually rains, because within forty days the waters had
risen and increased so that they were fifteen cubits high above all the
mountains. That is why the Jews say that the same window was filled with
water.

**[516 - L. II. 201-203. interpretation of Genesis 6:16, 17. w. 1.
779-782. 517]{.underline}**

The stable was closed, so that the light went in. But it seems to me to
be in vain that one would particularly care about it or ponder about it,
because therefore godliness or the kingdom of Christ is in no danger, if
we cannot know some things of this area, which has been the work of God.
Although I do not see what is dark in this, so you understand that the
window was in the upper layer in the side.

It is certain that the door was thirteen or fourteen cubits high from
the ground, for the box stood and walked in the water for ten cubits;
for it carried a great load, namely all kinds of animals and food, more
than was needed for more than a year. This is enough of the simple and
crude form of the box. For without the width and height, Moses shows
nothing more than that it was three-layered and had a door and a window.

Other innumerable questions we want to leave here: as, what they had for
air in the box? For such a large body of water must undoubtedly have
given off a great and noxious stench, especially as it fell. Where did
they draw the water they used? For no water can be kept fresh and pure
for a whole year. Therefore, for the sake of fresh water, the sailors
often had to go to nearby harbors. How did they manage to scoop out the
basic soup, which stinks so badly?

256 We will leave such and such incidental things, which are common and
customary to shipmen, because otherwise there is no end to the
questions; and we will be satisfied with this narration of the text,
namely, that it seems credible that bears, lions, tigers, and other wild
animals were kept in the box below. In the middle, however, stood the
tame animals, and with which it has been to deal, at the same time with
the victims, which one can not keep in places, in which no desire goes
at all. In the first place, however, were the people with the domestic
animals and birds. We should be satisfied with this.

V.17. **Then, behold, I will cause a flood of water to come upon the
earth, to destroy all flesh under heaven in which there is a living
breath. Everything that is on earth shall perish.**

Above he threatened the human race in general that it should perish;
here he indicates in which way it should happen, and that he wants to
use a new punishment for it and to destroy everything by the deluge. The
world did not know anything about this punishment until this day. For as
can be seen from the prophets, pestilence, famine, war and wild animals
are common punishments. By pestilence men and cattle die; so by war the
earth is destroyed; for those who are to build it are taken away. But
whether theurung or hunger does not seem so cruel, it is nevertheless
the most miserable misery and distress. We know almost nothing of the
fourth plague in our country. Although any one of these plagues would
have been sufficient for the punishment of the human race alone, God has
yet sent a new punishment upon the first world, so that all flesh in
which there is breath would be destroyed.

258 And because this punishment was unheard of before, the wicked
believed in it all the less. For they thought: If God is angry, can he
not punish the disobedient with sword or pestilence? For through the
Flood the other animals would also be destroyed, which have not sinned.
God will certainly have none of the world to do in mind.

259 But that he might tear such unbelief out of the heart of Noah and
the other God-fearers, he repeats twice the pronoun I, and says: \"I, I
will cause to come. Then he declares that he will destroy all flesh that
is under heaven and on earth. For here he takes out the fish, whose
strength and power is increased by water. Therefore these words belong
to it, so that thereby God\'s great wrath is indicated, by which humans
lose not only body and life, but also their rule over the whole world.

**[518 n, AA-r\". Interpretation of Gen. 6, 18. W. 1, 7S2-78S.
519]{.underline}**

**III.**

**V. 18. I will establish a covenant with you, and you shall go into the
casket with your sons, with your wife, and with your sons\' wives.**

This consolation was indicated by Moses when he said that Noah had found
grace with the Lord. And this was necessary not only so that Noah would
not despair in such a terrible wrath of God, but also so that his faith
would be started over this punishment, which was to pass horribly
through the whole world. For no one could easily believe that the whole
human race would be destroyed. Therefore the world considered Noah to be
the most foolish of men to have believed this, and laughed at him for
it, and no doubt had strange and various sayings about his building. In
order that his heart might be started in such great distresses, God
spoke to him so often and now also remembers the covenant.

But the teachers ask: What kind of covenant was this? and Lyra answers
thus: that God had made him a promise that he would protect and defend
him from the godless people who had threatened him with death.
Burgensis, however, says that this covenant should rather be understood
from the dangers in the water, in which God wanted to protect and
preserve him. Some think that it means the covenant of the rainbow,
which God made with Noah afterwards.

But in my opinion he speaks of the spiritual covenant or of the promise
of the seed, which should crush the serpent\'s head. Which covenant also
the tyrants had; but since they abused it for the sake of hope and
godlessness, they fell out of it; as afterwards the Jews lose their
gifts and perish, since they take carnal thoughts from God, from the
law, worship and temple. But God assures Noah of this covenant, so that
he will certainly conclude and believe that Christ will be born from his
family, and that God, in His great wrath, will nevertheless bring a
multitude of people together for the sake of His people.

The church is the only church in the world that can remain a church.
Thus, this covenant includes not only the physical protection and
protection, of which Lyra and Burgensis speak, but also eternal life.

263 Therefore this is the opinion: These hopeful despisers of all
threats and promises shall be punished by me. For first of all I will
take away from them the protection and confidence which they have in my
covenant, that they may perish without all covenant and grace. But the
same covenant will I give thee, that thou shalt be preserved not only
from the power of the waters, but also from death and everlasting
damnation.

But he expressly says: \"with you\", and names neither sons nor wives,
whom he also wanted to receive, but names only Noah, from whom this
promise of the seed came to his son Shem. Therefore this is the other
promise of Christ, which is taken from all other Adam\'s children and
attributed to the one Noah and promised.

After that, this promise was made clearer and clearer, and God went with
it, as it were, from the lineage to the species, and then from the
species to the individual person. For from the whole lineage of Abraham
the promise came to the one David, from David to Nathan, from Nathan to
the one virgin Mary (who was like a dead stem or root of Jesse), in whom
this promise or covenant is completed and fulfilled. And because there
was such a great unspeakable wrath of God, this establishment of the
covenant was very necessary.

266 But here also the special profession is to be noted, since God says:
\"You shall go into the box with your sons\" 2c. For without this
special profession, they would never have been so bold as to go into it.

How terrible it is that out of the whole human race only eight persons
are chosen to be preserved! and yet Ham, the third son of Noah, is
rejected, who is counted and named here by the mouth of God among the
elect and the saints; yes, he is also protected with the others.

**[520 D- n, \"\"-207. interpretation of Genesis 6:18-20. W. i, 7\"-7M.
521]{.underline}**

and preserved, and is in no other position than his father Noah. For if
he had not believed and called at the same time as him, and had not
feared God, he would certainly not have been preserved in the box; and
yet he is rejected afterwards.

Here the sophists argue about election or providence, which happens
according to God\'s purpose. But I have often warned against abstaining
from thoughts and speculation about mere majesty. For just as it is
impossible for such thoughts to be right and true, so they do not serve
salvation at all; rather, we should think of God as He reveals and
offers Himself to us in the Word and the Sacraments, and should not draw
such examples from the secret providence by which God decides and orders
everything in Himself from eternity; for we cannot attain to this with
our thoughts and hearts, and see that they conflict with the revealed
will.

\(269\) What then shall we (someone might say) conclude and think of
such examples? Answer: Nothing else, except that they are prescribed for
us to put the fear of God in us; and we are not to think that we cannot
fall again out of God\'s grace and mercy, which we have once received;
as Paul also admonishes in 1 Cor. 10:12: \"Whoever lets himself think
that he is standing may well see that he does not fall. Therefore we are
to use such examples to humble ourselves, and not to exalt ourselves, or
to be slothful in that which we have received; but to stretch ourselves
toward that which is before, as Paul says to the Philippians in 3 Cap.
V. 13, and not to think as if we had received everything in full, 1 Cor.
4, 7.

270 For our enemy is evil, very swift and fierce, but we are weak and
carry this great treasure in earthly vessels, 2 Cor. 4:7. Therefore we
should not boast as if we were freed from all danger, but sigh to God as
if we were in the greatest danger, because we see that such holy people
have fallen again by safety from the grace received and long possessed.
Thus one disputes from such examples with benefit: the

but despise such things and pursue the high things of the providence
according to God\'s purpose, they themselves drive their hearts to
despair, which are already inclined to it by themselves.

**Seventh Part.**

**Of the animals and of the food that Noah took into the box; likewise
of Noah\'s obedience.**

**I.**

**V. 19, 20: And thou shalt put into the box every kind of beast of all
flesh, a pair of each, male and female, that they may live with thee. Of
the birds after their kind, and of the cattle after their kind, and of
every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind; of
them all a pair shall go in unto thee, that they may live.**

Here, however, a dispute arises, as it is wont to do when one looks at
the histories according to usage and other accidental things. For here
it seems as if the text is contrary to each other, because here it is
said of a pair, but afterwards in the beginning of the 7th chapter of
seven and seven. After that Lyra quarrels with one whom he calls Andrew,
and who meant that Noah had decided fourteen animals in the box, because
here it is written: \"Take to you seven and seven each of the pure
cattle. I agree with Lyra, who says that Noah took seven of each kind
into the box, three males and three females, and then the seventh, which
was also a male, which Noah could have used for sacrifice.

272 Now that the text says that Noah put into the box a pair of each
kind, this must be understood only of the unclean; as such is enforced
by the 7th chapter. For there must have been a greater number of clean
animals; seven of each kind were put into the box.

But here we must say something about the difference between these words:
living animals,

**[522 II, 207-209. interpretation of Genesis 6:19, 20. w. 1. 78S-791.
523]{.underline}**

Animal and cattle. Although these words are often used without
distinction, the Scriptures also use them with distinction at times: as
in Genesis 1:24, \"The earth brings forth living creatures. V. 24: \"The
earth brings forth living creatures\"; item V. 20: \"The waters are
filled with living creatures. There it is a general designation, by
which is meant everything that lives on earth and in the water. It
includes chajah, remes, behemah, although one is often used for the
other without distinction.

274 Moses calls the cattle here behemoth, but the four animals, Ezekiel
Cap. 1, 5, are summarized under the name chajoth, which word actually
means wild animals, as we call them, which do not eat hay or anything
else that grows from the earth, but eat meat, as there are lions, bears,
wolves, foxes. Behemoths are animals that live on the hay and herbs of
the earth, as sheep, oxen, deer, roe deer.

Remes is everything that creeps and walks, and this word comes from
ramas, which means to tread. And if we compare ourselves to the birds,
we are also remasim; for we also walk and tread the earth, like the dogs
and other animals. But actually by this are meant the animals that tread
and do not raise their heads. For the animals that crawl and which we
therefore call reptiles, that is, crawling animals, have a special name,
and are called scherazim, as is evident from the 3rd book of Moses, and
this word comes from scharaz, that is, to move, and is subsequently
placed in the 7th chapter, v. 8. The little word oph is known and means
a bird.

This is the difference between these words or names, although, as I
said, it is not observed in some places. But all this is not to be
referred to any other time than to the time after the Flood; otherwise
it would follow that such wild and cruel beasts would also have existed
in Paradise. However, let no one doubt that before the sin, because man
was commanded to rule over all the animals on earth, there was unity not
only among men, but also among the wild animals with man.

277 Although it can be clearly proved from the first chapter that the
wild animals were created together with the others, their kind and
nature were changed for the sake of man\'s sin, so that those who should
have been tame and harmless animals are now wild and harmful after sin.
This is my opinion; although we cannot indicate and conclude anything
certain about the life before sin, because we have lost it; we can,
however, make up stories and make assumptions about it.

But one might say: If the nature of animals is thus changed for the sake
of sin, how was Noah able to conquer the animals, especially the wild
and cruel ones? A lion can certainly not be forced, as well as tigers
and leopards and what are more such monstrous and strong animals. To
this, one answers that the animals have miraculously gathered in the
boxes, and this seems to me also credible. For if they had not been
forced by God\'s command to go into the box, even though Noah had to use
special skill to do so, he could not, as a man, have been so strong that
he could have forced such wild animals. And the text indicates both of
these things; for first he says, \"Thou shalt put them into the box\";
then he says, \"Of them all, a pair each shall go in to thee.\" If this
had not happened miraculously, there would have been many more of them
than pairs and seven.

That they therefore find themselves with pairs and with seven of
themselves is a miracle and a sign that they have noticed the wrath of
God and the terrible misery that was to come. Just as even unreasonable
animals have a certain foreboding and foreknowledge of future changes
and accidents and, as if moved by compassion, often whimper over a human
being who is in obvious danger. As is seen in dogs and horses, which
understand their masters\' danger and give signs that they feel the
same, the dogs with whimpering, the horses with great trembling and
sweat. Yes, it is not uncommon for wild animals to take refuge in people
in danger.

**[524 L. II, 209-211. interpretation of Genesis 6, 19-21. W. 1,
7SI-794. 525]{.underline}**

If there is otherwise such a feeling and sensation in the unreasonable
nature, what wonder is it that they willingly gather to Noah here, after
they are warned in such a way by God of the future danger? For the text
indicates that they came willingly: as history testifies and experience
proves, that when either vestilence or a great war is present, the
wolves, the very wildest animals find, fall not only into the villages,
but also sometimes even into the cities and have refuge in man and seek,
as it were, their help with humility.

**II.**

**V 21 And thou shalt take unto thee all manner of meat that is eaten;
and thou shalt gather it unto thee, that it may be food for thee and for
them.**

Because the flood was to last for a whole year, it was necessary for
Noah to be reminded by the Lord to gather food from the herbs and fruits
of the trees, so that men and other animals could live. Although there
was a great wrath, so that everything that grew and came from the earth
had to perish and be destroyed, God\'s goodness shines forth even in
such a terrible accident, that he makes provision for man and other
animals, so that they are preserved and through their preservation the
species are preserved. But just as the chosen animals, in order that
they might be preserved in the box, were strong and healthy, so also by
God\'s providence they had such food as was convenient to their nature.

And as far as man is concerned, it is known that at that time he did not
use meat for food, but only plants of the earth, which were far better
before the Flood than they are now, after the earth is very spoiled by
the salty water.

Therefore, one sees and feels God\'s providence here, by which counsel
the wicked are punished, but the pious are preserved. But it is
astonishing that because God punishes the wicked, he does not destroy
the whole of nature, but graciously preserves it.

Providence does so that seed is preserved for the world to come.

284\. But if God could have easily preserved Noah and the animals
through a whole year without food, as He did Moses, Ex. 24, 18, Cap. 34,
28, Elijah, 1 Kings 19, 8, and Christ, Matth. 4, 2.He created all things
(for this is even greater and more miraculous) from nothing: yet, as
Augustine finely said, He governs the created creatures in such a way
that He leaves them their course and order, that is, God uses certain
means and performs His miraculous works in such a way that He
nevertheless uses the service of nature and natural means for this
purpose, so that we apply Augustine\'s saying to our commerce here.

He also requires of us that we not reject the means and instruments of
nature (for that would be tempting God), but that we use the means God
has provided and created for us with thanksgiving. For if a hungry
person expects food and drink from heaven, and does not want to create
it for himself or ask for it from others, he would be committing sin;
just as Christ tells the apostles to eat what is set before them, so
Noah is commanded here to use proper means to gather food, and God does
not tell him to wait until food and drink are miraculously sent down to
him from heaven in a box.

The life of the monks is nothing other than a temptation from God, for
they cannot abstain and still remain without marriage. Just as they
abstain from some foods that God has created, so that they may be taken
and used with thanksgiving by the faithful and those who recognize the
truth that all creatures of God are good, and nothing is to be rejected
that is accepted with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy 4:3, 4. 4, 3. 4. So also
one may well use medicine; yes, one should use it, for it is a created
means of preserving health by it, Sir. 38, 1. ff. So also one should
study good arts and languages and, as Paul says 1 Tim. 4, v. 4. 5.

**[526 2- o, su-2\". Interpretation of I Moses 6, 21. 22. W. 1, 794-797.
527]{.underline}**

Thanksgiving received or sanctified by prayer.\"

God could have preserved Noah in the middle of the water; as St. Clement
is said to have had a cell in the middle of the sea: yes, as the people
of Israel, Ex. 14, 22, were preserved in the middle of the Red Sea, and
Jonah, Ion. 2, 1, was preserved in the body of the whale. He did not
want to do it, but wanted Noah to use wood and trees, and human skill to
be practiced.

Since you cannot have such means and creatures, or they cease, you must
either suffer or expect help from God: as the Jews did, standing at the
sea, with the enemy behind them on their necks, and no skill nor human
counsel could help them any further; so they either hoped for miraculous
salvation or certainly had to die, Ex. 14, 10. ff.

**III.**

**V. 22. And Noah did all that God commanded him.**

This way of speaking is very common in the Scriptures. And this is the
first text in which Noah\'s obedience to God is praised under such
words; below, however, it is often repeated: Moses or the people did
everything that the Lord had commanded them. Noah is praised as an
example, because he did not have a dead faith, which in truth is not a
true faith, but a living and active one, because he obeyed God\'s
commandment. And because he also believes what God promises and
threatens, he diligently carries out all that God commanded him to build
the box, to gather the animals into it, and to eat the food. In this
Noah\'s faith is especially praised, that he stays in the right middle
road and does not add to God\'s commandment, nor change it, nor take
away from it; but just stays with it, that he hears that God commands
him.

For this is the most common and at the same time the most harmful
pestilence in the church, that one changes that which God has commanded,
or

order something more about it. For just as there is only one right
course and middle place on which we are to walk, so those who keep too
much to the left side sin, because they do not do or despise what God
has commanded. But those who keep to the right side and do more than God
has commanded, as Saul did when he spared the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 15:9,
sin also and more than those on the left; for there is added praesumptio
pietatis, that is, such a delusion that one does well and godly in it.
And since those on the left cannot excuse their error, they think they
have done very well.

And this case is very mean[.]{.underline} For God is wont to command
mean, lowly, ridiculous, and at times even annoying things. Reason,
however, takes pleasure in what is apparent, and either despises the
common thing, or accepts it with displeasure: as the monks despised
domestic works, and chose others that had a better appearance. And
because the common man hears that in the gospel common works are
praised, he despises the gospel as a common and bad doctrine, in which
there is nothing special nor praiseworthy. For what seems to be great
teaching when one teaches that servants should obey their masters,
children their parents? Which then learned papists not only despise, as
everyone is aware of it beforehand and it has been taught by others
before, but also ridicule it, and look for something special, which is
either taken for wisdom, or has an appearance that it is difficult and
therefore praiseworthy. So mad and nonsensical is human wisdom.

292 But as it is commonly said that one should not look at who he is who
says something, but at what is said, because even those who teach others
lack and err in some things, so one should reverse this rule when
dealing with God\'s commandment and right obedience. For here one should
not look at what is said or commanded, but at who is the one who says
it. For if you want to look at what is said in God\'s commandments, and
not at who says it, you will easily stumble; as the

**[528 L. n, 214. 215. Interpretation of Genesis 6, 22. W. 1, 7S7-7S9.
529]{.underline}**

The example of Eve, Genesis 3:6, shows. For this one, since she does not
consider who he is who commands her, but only looks at the commandment,
she considers eating an apple a trivial thing. But see what harm has
come to the whole human race.

But he that looketh on him that commandeth, considereth the greatest
thing, even that which seemeth to be the least. The papists consider it
a small thing to be an authority, husband or wife, to raise children 2c.
But experience shows that these are the greatest works that human reason
cannot understand. And I see that the most holy and the most spiritual
have at times stumbled horribly. Therefore, if we look at the Lord, it
will be easy to find that although what God commands seems to be a mean
and lowly thing, it is nevertheless the most high and cannot be kept or
fulfilled by any man unless he is helped to do so by God.

For this reason the papists, who look only at outward appearances and
veneer, like a cow at a new gate, may well belittle domestic and
political works, and dream that they do other and much more perfect
works; but truly, because they are shameful adulterers, blasphemers,
thieves, and disgracefully squander and murder the goods of the church,
they bear living witness against themselves that they cannot at all
attain nor keep these low and mean commandments of the rule of men and
the world.

What then is this holiness of which they boast so greatly? It is that
they eat no meat for some days, commit themselves with certain vows, and
choose for themselves special works. But, dear one, tell me, who has
commanded you to do this? No one. Therefore, they ask nothing about what
God has commanded and ordered to be done.

but arrange other things over it, of which God has commanded nothing.

Therefore this rule should be kept with great diligence, that we regard
not what is commanded us, but who is he that commandeth us. He who does
not do this will often take offense at the work that seems either small
or inconvenient. But let us praise God as wise and gracious, and take it
for granted that everything He commands is very wise and best commanded,
even though reason judges otherwise.

The papists do harm to this wisdom of God, because they despise the
works commanded by God as little and presume something better and more
difficult. Therefore, God cannot be reconciled with such works, but is
rather angered by them, as the example of Saul, 1 Sam. 15:9 ff. shows.
Saul thought that God was too foolish, lazy and cruel to destroy the
Amalekites with all their possessions; therefore, he found a softer and
more convenient counsel and kept the cattle for sacrifices: but what was
this but to consider himself wise, but God foolish?

Therefore Moses is right here to praise the obedient Noah and to say
that he did everything God commanded him. For this is to consider God
wise and kind. He did not dispute about the work, as Adam, Eve, and Saul
did to their great detriment; but followed the majesty of Him who had
commanded him, and he was satisfied with that, even though he was
commanded to do things that were clumsy, impossible, and inconvenient.
He closed his eyes to all such annoyance and passed by, relying only on
what God had commanded him. Therefore, this is a well-known text,
according to hearing, but according to doing and keeping, it is known to
few and is very difficult.

**[530 s. II. SI\". 217. Interpretation of Genesis 7, 1. W. 1, 800-301.
531]{.underline}**

**The seventh chapter.**

**First part.**

**How Noah was commanded to go into the box, and proved obedient to the
same.**

**[V. 1. And the LORD said unto Noah, Go into the box, thou, and all thy
house.]{.underline}**

I. Now that the great building of the box is built and finished, God
tells Noah to go into it, because the time of the flood, of which the
Lord had told him a hundred and twenty years ago, is now at hand. This
is all so that Noah would understand that God would take care of him,
and not only that, but also that he would have, as Peter says in 2
Epistle I, 19, a rich and abundant word, so that his faith would have
strength and comfort in such distress. Because he had told the world
about the flood for longer than a hundred years, he was undoubtedly
challenged and afflicted by it in many ways.

In addition, this wrath, as I have often said, was terrible and great,
and a human heart, especially in the first world, in which there were
more pious people than now, could not comprehend or understand that God
would destroy the entire human race, excluding only eight people,
through the Flood. Therefore, Noah, as a holy, righteous, kind and
compassionate man, will have often experienced many a struggle in his
heart, and will not have heard the voice of the Lord without great
sorrow, so that he threatened all flesh with destruction. For this
reason, it was necessary for God to comfort and strengthen the faith of
a fearful and sorrowful man with a rich word, so that he would not fall
into doubt.

3 For the Lord to call him to go into the box is as if he had said to
him, \"Do not doubt, it will surely be done.

and the time has already come for me to bring my punishment on the
unbelieving world. But you shall not tremble nor be afraid (as faith
also becomes very weak in the saints at times), I will take care of you
and your house. Such a thing would have been impossible for us to
believe, since we must necessarily conclude that everything is possible
for God to do.

But here again Moses keeps his way of speaking, that he says: \"The Lord
spoke. And I am particularly inclined to think that these words were not
spoken from heaven, but were spoken to Noah by a man. For although I am
not opposed to the idea that such things could have been revealed to him
by an angel or the Holy Spirit, yet if it can be said that God spoke
through men, then it should be done in honor of the ministry. Thus I
have said above that many things of which Moses writes that God spoke
them were spoken through Adam. For even if God\'s word is spoken by a
man, it is nevertheless truly God\'s word.

\(5\) Since Methuselah, Noah\'s grandfather, died just this year when
the flood came, it does not seem inconvenient to me that we consider
this to have been Methuselah\'s last voice (for Lamech, Noah\'s father,
died five years before the flood) to his grandson and, as it were, his
testament, that he may have said to him on his deathbed: Dear son, as
you have hitherto been obedient to the Lord and have waited in faith for
this wrath, you have also experienced that God has faithfully protected
and preserved you against the wicked: so you shall not doubt in the
future, the pious God will take care of you. For now it is time for the
end to come, and not only my end, which is an end of grace, but of the
whole human race, which is the end of the world.

**[532 n. n, 217-220. Interpretation of Genesis 7, I. W.i. \"u-M7.
533]{.underline}**

This is the end of the wrath. For after seven days shall the flood
arise, of which thou hast so long spoken unto the world, but in vain. So
I consider these words to be spoken by Methuselah himself, but they are
attributed to God because the Spirit of God spoke them through
Methuselah. And so I gladly interpret such things, where it can be done
(as here in this place), in honor of the ministry of preaching. For
since it is certain that Methuselah died this very year when the flood
came, one can safely think that these were his last words to his
grandson Noah, who heard his words and accepted them as if they were
God\'s words.

006 The Jews also have their peculiar thoughts concerning these seven
days, that these seven days should be given in honor of the hundred and
twenty years of Methuselah, that his seed might mourn him: neither is
there any harm in such thoughts; for his pious generation shall have
done that which is due.

\(7\) However, the foregoing understanding of the ministry is not only
credible, but also useful. For it is certain that God does not always
speak miraculously and by special revelation, especially where the
ordinary ministry of preaching is concerned, which he has ordained for
the purpose of speaking to men, teaching, instructing, comforting and
admonishing them.

8\. and God has earnestly commanded His word to parents, as Moses often
says, \"You shall say these things to your children,\" Ex. 13, 14; then
to the teachers in the church, as Abraham says Luc. 16, 29: \"They have
Moses and the prophets, let them hear the same.\" For where the office
of preaching is, we are not to wait for any revelation, either inwardly
or outwardly, or else all the states of life would be confused; but so
it shall be: in the church the preacher shall teach, in the
council-house the authorities shall rule, the house-rule shall be
ordered by father and mother. For these are all the offices of men
ordained of God: therefore they shall be used, and no other revelation
shall be looked to.

\(9\) But I am not opposed to Noah hearing the Lord after Methuselah\'s
death.

talk. For God speaks to people in two ways: First, and commonly, through
the public ministry of preaching, that is, through the parents and
teachers in the church; second, through inward revelation or the Holy
Spirit. But this he does only in special dealings and very seldom.
Therefore we should know that we should not abandon the word and wait
for new revelations, as the enthusiasts do. For this is where erroneous
spirits come from, who then confuse the world with their dreams, as the
example of rebaptism shows.

**For I have seen thee righteous before me at this time.**

\(10\) This is certainly a terrible picture of the first or \"former
world\", as St. Peter calls it in 2 Epistle 2:5, and it can be seen as
if he compared something special to our world with this word. For what
more abominable thing can be said than that we hear here that Noah alone
is righteous before the Lord? And there is a similar picture of the
world in the 14th Psalm, where it is said in v. 2. 3. that the Lord
looks down from heaven on the children of men, and sees if anyone is
wise and asks after God. \"But they,\" he says, \"have all gone astray,
and are all unfit; there is none that doeth good, not one.\"

11\) And this judgment of the world rhymes well with the saying of
Christ Matth. 24, 38. 39; because the last times are to be like the time
of Noah, Christ says Luc. 18, 8: \"When the Son of Man comes, do you
think that he will also find faith? Therefore it is terrible to live in
such a wicked and godless world. Now is still, praise God, because we
have the light of the Word, a golden time. For in our church the
sacraments are in proper use; pious and God-fearing preachers teach
God\'s word loud and pure; the authorities, though weak, are not yet so
bad that they cannot be hoped to improve. But Christ\'s prophecy speaks
of a terrible time, namely, that it will come to pass that when the day
of the Lord is at the door, there will be no righteousness in the world.

**[534 L. n, 2S0-2W. Interpretation of Genesis 7, 1. W. 1 , 807-809.
535]{.underline}**

The teachers who have been created will be nowhere to be found, and the
church will even be suppressed by the wicked. We are also threatened
with similar advice from our adversaries. For the pope and his ungodly
rulers are determined that the ministry of preaching should be abolished
altogether, and that everyone should be allowed to believe what he
wants; but the righteous preachers should all be suppressed or corrupted
and kept from perseverance with gifts and presents.

\(12\) Therefore, we should pray all the more diligently for our
descendants and work earnestly so that the teaching may be inherited by
them purely and righteously. For if there had been more godly teachers
in Noah\'s time, it might have been hoped that more pious and righteous
people would have been found. But because there were so few of them,
that Noah alone is praised as righteous, it can be assumed that the
pious teachers were either strangled or let themselves be led to heresy
and idolatry, so that Noah, \"the preacher of righteousness,\" as St.
Peter calls him in 2 Epistle 2:5, remained righteous alone. And after
the rule of the authorities was turned into tyranny, and the rule of the
house was disrupted by adultery and fornication, how could the
punishment have been omitted any longer?

\(13\) We also have to wait for such a danger, since the last times will
be like the time of Noah. And the pope and bishops spare no effort so
that the gospel may again be dampened and well-established churches may
be disturbed. Thus the world strives with all its diligence for such a
time that would be like and similar to Noah\'s time, in which the bright
light of the gospel would be extinguished and everyone would live in
error and darkness. For when the preaching will be abolished, neither
faith, nor prayer, nor the righteous use of the sacraments will be able
to exist.

14 Moses writes here that the previous world had such a form at the time
of Noah, since it was, as it were, the youth of the world and the best
part, and everywhere the most important of all.

The people who were the finest and, for the sake of their long lives,
the most skilled and experienced. How will we fare in this nonsensical
age of the world? Therefore, we should not put off caring for our
descendants, but pray for them daily.

\(15\) Just as the first world was highly corrupt, it was also subjected
to terrible punishment, so that not only the adults, who had angered God
with their sins, perished, but also the innocent youth, who neither
understands nor knows what is right or left. And no doubt many of them
will have been deceived by their simplicity. But God\'s wrath makes no
distinction here, but assaults and corrupts the old with the young, the
witty and understanding with the simple-minded.

16 Such a terrible punishment also moved and caused St. Peter, the
apostle, that he led out like a mad or possessed man with such words,
which we still cannot understand to this day; for thus he says 1 Epist.
3, 19. 20.: \"Christ, made alive according to the Spirit, went in the
Spirit and preached to the spirits in prison, who did not believe, since
God once waited and was patient in the days of Noah, when the ark was
prepared, in which few, that is, eight souls were kept by the water\"
2c.

This is certainly a strange judgment and almost a foolish speech, so
that the apostle has presented this terrible spectacle, as it can be
seen. For Peter indicates with these very words that there might have
been an unbelieving world to whom the deceased Christ preached after his
death. If this is true, we cannot doubt that Christ would have brought
Moses and the prophets to the same prison, so that he would make a new
and faithful world out of the unbelieving world. St. Peter\'s words are
actually based on this opinion, although I do not want to say anything
certain about it.

18 Nevertheless, there is also no doubt that those whom he calls an
unbelieving world are not godless despisers and tyrants, of whom it can
certainly be said that they are damned.

**[536 L.II, SW SSt. Interpretation of Genesis 7, I. W. 1, 809-812.
537]{.underline}**

if they had perished in their sins. But it can be seen that he calls the
young children and others, whom their simplicity has prevented from
believing, an unbelieving world. For they have been carried away and
carried away by the world\'s adversities, not unlike a strong river, so
that they have perished at the same time, and only eight souls have been
preserved.

19 In this way Peter strongly emphasizes the great and terrible wrath of
God, and yet at the same time praises the patience of God, that he did
not deprive those of the saving word who at that time did not believe or
could not believe, because they waited for God\'s patience, nor could
they be persuaded that it would come to this, that God would put the
whole world into such terrible punishment.

\(20\) But how this came about we do not know. But this we know and
believe, that God is marvelous in his works and is able to do all
things. He who therefore was able to preach alive to the living was also
able to preach after his death to the dead. For he hears, feels and
grasps everything, even though human reason cannot understand such
things. But it is no disgrace to us if we do not know some of the
secrets of the Scriptures, for the apostles had their own special
revelation, and anyone who would dispute much about it would be
presumptuous and foolish.

\(21\) Such a revelation is this also of Christ, that he taught the
souls of those who perished at the time of the flood. On this not badly
can be drawn the article in the faith that Christ has gone to hell. St.
Paul also had a revelation of paradise, of the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12,
2. 4. and other things, which are no disgrace to us, even if we do not
know them. But it would be presumptuous of anyone to be regarded as
knowing it. St. Augustine and other teachers also have many speculations
when they speak of such things: but who would not believe that the
apostles had such revelation, which Augustine and others did not have?
Now we come back to the text.

\(22\) As I said, this is a terrible picture of the world, that God
shows that He has seen the one Noah righteous before Him, and remembers
neither the little children nor others who were innocently deceived. But
we should notice the little word \"before me\". For this indicates that
Noah was not only justified as far as the other tablet is concerned, but
also as far as the first tablet is concerned, that is, that he believed
in God and sanctified His name, preached and called upon Him, thanked
God and condemned false teaching 2c. For to be righteous before GOD is
to believe in GOD, fear GOD, not. To say mass or to help souls out of
purgatory, to become a monk 2c. as was taught under the papacy.

\(23\) And this word is also to condemn the former world, because it
despised the works of the first table, and was also evil and corrupt at
the other. For Noah laughed at them and mocked them like a fool,
condemning his teaching as heresy, yet he ate and drank in safety and
lived well and joyfully, Matt. 24:38. Therefore Noah was not righteous
before the world, but a condemned sinner.

24 Therefore God, or his grandfather Methuselah, comforts him with this
word, that he should not turn to the blind and ungodly judgments of the
world, nor ask what the world is like or what it says, but that he
should close his eyes and ears and pay attention only to God\'s word and
judgment, so that he may believe that he is righteous before God, that
is, that he is pleasing and pleasing to God.

\(25\) And truly this was a great faith of Noah, that he could believe
such a word. I, for one, could not have believed it; for I feel how hard
it is when all men\'s judgments go against one alone and condemn him.
How we are condemned not only by the pope, but also by the
Sacramentarians, Anabaptists, and other innumerable judgments. But this
is all a joke and child\'s play, if one compares it with the righteous
Noah, who, without his children and pious grandfather, does not find a
single person in the whole world, who is condemned either by his
religion or by his religion alone.

**[538 6- ll, 224-22S. Interpretation of I Moses 7, 1-3. W. 1, 81S-A5.
539]{.underline}**

life. We have, praise God, many churches that are at one with us, and
our pious princes do not refuse any danger to which one must submit for
the sake of protection of doctrine and religion. Noah did not have such
patrons and protectors, but in addition had to see that his adversaries
had been idle in quiet peace and had had good lazy days and pleasure. If
I had been there, I would truly have said, \"Lord, if I am righteous and
please you, but they are unrighteous and do not please you, how is it
that they are so well off and have everything? Why doest thou do them so
much good in all manner of things? whereas I, with mine own, have all
manner of trouble, and am almost forsaken of all help? And what can I
say, I would have to despair in such distresses, if God did not give me
the spirit that Noah had.

\(26\) Therefore Noah is a very glorious and beautiful example of faith,
who steadfastly, like a hero, stood against the judgment of all the
world, and could believe that he was righteous, but the rest of the
world was wrong.

27 When I consider the noble men Johannes Huss and Jerome of Prague, I
must marvel at their undaunted courage and steadfastness, that these two
have been allowed to stand against the judgment of the whole world,
against the pope, emperor, bishops, princes, colleges and all schools in
the entire empire.

\(28\) And it is very useful to look at and contemplate such examples
often. For since this battle with the world is strengthened and
sharpened by the prince of the world, who dares to strike despair into
the heart with his fiery arrows, we must be prepared not to give way to
the fierce enemy, but to say with Noah: \"I know that I am right before
God, even though the whole world condemns me as a heretic and unjust and
falls away from me. For so the apostles also fell away from Christ and
left him alone, Matth. 26, 56, but he says: \"I am not alone\", Joh. 16,
32. So the false brothers left Paul, 2 Tim. 4, 16. Therefore this is not
a new or unusual thing.

Danger. Therefore, one should not despair even in this, but remain bold
and undaunted over the pure doctrine, as it also curses and condemns the
world.

V. 2, 3: **Of all the clean livestock, take to you seven and seven, the
male and his female. But of the unclean cattle take one pair each, the
male and his female. And like unto them of the fowls of the air, seven
and seven, the male and his female; that seed may live upon the face of
the whole earth.**

\(29\) It seems that God takes a special pleasure in talking to Noah, so
he is not satisfied with telling him once what to do, but repeats one
thing in one word, which reason considers useless talk. But to such a
heart that wrestles and struggles with despair, nothing can be too much
nor enough for it to be informed of God\'s will. God looks at this
effect of a tempted heart and keeps repeating the same thing, so that
Noah can understand from this rich conversation and many words that he
not only feels abandoned, even if the whole world has abandoned him, but
also has a kind and favorable God who loves him so much that he almost,
as it seems, cannot get enough of talking to him. This is the reason why
the same thing is repeated here. But I have said above how God spoke to
Noah, namely not from heaven but through a man.

\(30\) As for grammar, this place shows that habehemah means not only
cattle, that is, the larger animals, but also the smaller ones that are
used for sacrifice, such as sheep, goats, and the like. For the way of
sacrificing was not first invented or ordained by Moses, but has always
been in the world, inherited and passed on from the patriarchs to their
descendants; as the example of Abel in Genesis 4:4 shows, who offered
sacrifices to the Lord from the firstlings of his cattle.

31\. by the way, I have said above at the end of the sixth chapter, how
it is to be compared and rhymed together, that God here means to take
into the box \"seven each\", above

**[540 k- N, 22S-228. interpretation of 1 Vtose 7, 2-12. W. I, AT-8S0.
541]{.underline}**

but \"one pair each\" alone. Therefore it is not necessary to repeat.
Because Noah was miraculously preserved, he thought he had to add the
seventh individual animal to the three pure pairs, so that he could
thank God after the Flood for His gracious help and salvation.

**V. 4. For yet seven days will I cause it to rain upon the earth forty
days and forty nights, and I will destroy from the face of the earth
every living thing that I have made.**

Here you see how diligently God assures Noah and makes him certain of
all things. He appointed seven days; after these, he said, the rain
would follow forty days and forty nights. But he uses special, emphatic
words, saying, \"I will cause it to rain\"; for it was no ordinary rain,
but at the same time the windows of heaven and the depths were opened
(v. 11), that is, first much water poured down from heaven, and then
also a great force from the earth. For it must have been a great
quantity of water that went up fifteen cubits above the highest
mountains. Therefore it was no ordinary rain, but a rain of the wrath of
God, so that God wanted to destroy \"everything that has a being\" on
earth. For because the earth was corrupt, the Lord also corrupts it, and
because the wicked contend against the first and the second table, God
also contends against them with heaven and earth.

Therefore, this history is a certain proof that although God is patient
and long-suffering, He does not always leave the wicked unpunished. For
since, as Peter says in 2 Epist. 2, 5, \"He did not spare the former
world,\" He will much less spare the popes or emperors who persecute His
word. How much less will he also spare us who blaspheme his name,
because we do not live according to our profession and faith, but sin
wantonly against our conscience every day! Therefore, we should learn to
fear God and accept His word with humility and be obedient to it,
otherwise the punishment will also seize us, as Peter says.

**V. 5-10 And Noah did all that the Lord commanded him. Now he was six
hundred years old when the waters of the flood came upon the earth. And
he went into the coffer with his sons, and with his wife, and with his
sons\' wives, before the waters of the flood: and of the clean cattle,
and of the unclean, and of the fowls, and of all the creeping things
that creep upon the earth, there went into the coffer unto him in pairs,
male and female, as the LORD commanded him. And when the seven days were
expired, the waters of the flood came upon the earth.**

34 This can be understood from the foregoing. And with this, Noah\'s
faith is praised, that he obeyed God\'s command and entered the ark with
his sons and their wives with constant faith. God could have preserved
him in countless other ways; He did not use this way, which seems
foolish, as if He knew no other; for what could be impossible to Him who
preserved Jonah in the midst of the sea and in the belly of the whale
for three days? Jon. 2, 1. ff. \"Now by this manner is praised Noah\'s
faith and obedience, whom this way to receive, pointed out from heaven,
nothing vexed, but accepted it with simple faith.

**Second part.**

**How the flood broke in and devastated everything.**

V. 11, 12: **In the six hundredth year of Noah\'s age, on the
seventeenth day of the second month, that is, the day when all the
fountains of the great deep broke out, and the windows of heaven were
opened, and rain fell upon the earth forty days and forty nights.**

35 Here we see that Moses is very rich and superfluous in words and
always repeats the same thing to the point of annoyance. For how often
does he remember the animals? How often does he say that Noah went into
the box? How often does he say that Noah\'s sons went into the box with
him? But this alone must be judged.

**[542 k. II, 228-W1. Interpretation of I Moses 7, II. 12. w.I, SSV-SW.
543]{.underline}**

Let spiritual people do this, for they alone know and see that the Holy
Spirit does not repeat anything in vain.

Others, however, who are weak in spirit, may think that this is why
Moses so often repeats and imagines the same thing, that when he wrote
this, God\'s anger was so intense in his heart. For grieved and upset
hearts like to repeat one thing; as David, 2 Sam. 18, 33, repeats the
complaint of his son Absalom. So this repetition here indicates that
Moses had taken these things deeply into his mind and was deeply
distressed about them. For this image of wrath hovers so much before his
eyes and ears that he cannot refrain from it; he must think of it often,
even with the same words.

\(37\) Poets and historians do not do this, but they present a thing
with various effects, they present it in a large and extensive way, and
they have many words. But Moses uses short words, but repeats them
often, so that the reader, after so much recollection of such important
things, may think for himself, and not see and read in others, but
experience in himself the true affects or movements of the heart.

\(38\) It can be seen that Moses, with such constant repetition, not
only wanted to portray a picture of his heart, which was most grieved at
the description of these things, but also that Noah, full of the Holy
Spirit and ardent love, was grieved and sorrowful to death over the
future great disaster, and after seeing that he could neither advise nor
help, could do nothing else but mourn and lament such distress. For he
has seen the certain destruction that should befall the wisest, noblest
and bravest of men. So David mourns his son Absalom, because he cannot
help him to live, 2 Sam. 18, 33. And so Samuel mourns, because he sees
that Saul is finished, 1 Sam. 16, 1.

39 Therefore, this is not a vain tautology or repetition, for the Holy
Spirit does not drive vain and unnecessary words, as the coarse and
sated spirits think, who read the Bible soon when they read it.

But the Holy Spirit has herewith indicated to the reader that he should
not think that he is concerned about a little thing with these words.
And yet Moses, even in such repetition, indicates some things that are
not found in all the Gentile Scriptures, such as that he writes that
Noah entered the ark in his six hundredth year in the other month and
seventeenth day of the other month.

\(40\) This is the subject of dispute here: When did the year begin?
There are two delusions about this. The first is that the beginning of
the year is the joining of the sun and the moon, which occurs first
before the equinox in spring. Therefore in the 2nd book Moses Cap. 12,
2. the same moon is called the first. If the Flood came in the other
moon and on the seventeenth day, it came almost at the end of April,
that is, at this time, when the year is most beautiful and the world is
green again, the birds are singing, the cattle and animals are happy and
cheerful, and a new form of the world appears after the harsh winter.
But it was all the more frightening that death and destruction of all
things would come, since one hoped for joy and, as it were, a new life
for all creatures. And to these thoughts rhyme also the words of the
Lord Christ Matth. 24, 38. where he compares the last time of the world
with the time of Noah and says of eating and drinking, free and other
signs of joy.

The other opinion of the beginning of the year is that it begins with
the new moon, so first before the equinox in the autumn is, when one has
collected everything from the country. But they put the beginning of the
year here because Moses calls the same moon the beginning of the year.
And this beginning of the year they call the beginning of the civil
year, but that at the equinox in spring they call the beginning of the
ecclesiastical year; for Moses\' ceremonies and celebrations last from
that time until day and night are equal in autumn.

Now Moses speaks of the common year,

**[544 L.H, S3I-W3. Interpretation of Genesis 7, 11. 12. W. 1, 82S-8W.
545]{.underline}**

so is the deluge!) invaded in the autumn moon or October, which opinion
Lyra is also. And it is true, the autumn and winter is more convenient
for the rule because of the wet signs. In addition, because Moses writes
afterwards that Noah had left the dove in the tenth moon, which came
again and brought a green olive branch, so it can also be seen as if it
is right, if one sets the beginning of the Flood in October.

\(43\) But I do not like this reckoning of the Jews, that they make two
beginnings of the year. For why do they not take four beginnings?
Because there are four times in the year, distinguished by the equinoxes
and the solstices; therefore the beginnings of these times must be
distinguished. Therefore, it is much safer to follow the order that God
has made: according to it, April, or the new moon, is the first month
after the equinox in spring. For that the Jews also put a beginning of
the year in the autumn, because the equinox in the autumn of the year is
called the end, they do this out of ignorance; for Moses calls the same
time of the year the end for no other reason than that the work in the
field had come to an end and all the fruit had been harvested and
gathered.

\(44\) Therefore this is my opinion, that the flood came in the spring,
when everyone took comfort in the new year and hoped for it. For the
death of the wicked is such that they fall to the ground when they say,
\"There is peace, there is no danger,\" 1 Thess. 5:3. And nothing
hinders such a mind that is written afterward of the green olive branch;
for some trees are green for and for, as the box tree, the firs,
spruces, cedars, laurels, olive trees, palm trees 2c.

\(45\) Now what is this that Moses says about the wells of the great
deep being broken open; item, about the windows of heaven being opened?
For such things are not read at all in all the Gentile writings, though
they have searched out the secrets of nature with great diligence. But
you must distinguish here so that you understand the depths of the earth
for another thing, the cloudbursts

or window of the sky for another and the rain also for another. Rain is
common, but the windows of heaven and the depths being opened is an
unusual and tremendous thing.

Here the teachers are almost all silent and do not interpret anything.
But we know from holy scripture that God, through his word, has
appointed and prepared a place for man and other animals to dwell in the
dry land above the water, contrary to nature. For it is against nature
that the earth floats above the water. For if you throw a ball of earth
into the water, it will soon sink; but the dry land floats above the
water by the power of the word, by which the sea has its purpose, as
Solomon says, Proverbs 8:29, and Job, Cap. 38:11. 38, 11. And where by
the power of the word the water would not be kept within its purpose and
circle, it would break out and devastate everything. Therefore our lives
are protected at all times and miraculously preserved by the Word; as
the floods over certain regions prove, that is, when at times a whole
city or country is drowned by a body of water, as a testimony that we
would have to fear and feel such danger every day if God did not protect
us in particular.

\(47\) As the water is under us and under the earth, so is the water
above us and above the heavens. Which, if it fell by its nature, would
in a moment be consumed by water. The clouds hover over us as if they
were attached; and how much great terror they cause when they let
themselves down at times! But what would happen if they all fell down?
As they would fall down according to their nature, if they were not
fastened by the word and kept in their place.

\(48\) Thus we are surrounded by water everywhere, and have nothing more
to protect us than a roof or covering made up of the softest matter of
all, that is, the air we breathe. This carries the clouds and holds up
such a great load of water, not because it is so by nature, but because
of God\'s command or the power of the Word.

**[546 L.n, WS-W5. Interpretation of Genesis 7:11-16. W. 1, 820-828.
547]{.underline}**

\(49\) When the prophets look at such things, they marvel at them, for
this is both contrary to nature, first, that such a great burden floats
and flies and yet does not fall. But we, who are as it were blinded by
the daily habit of such things, do not see them, nor do we wonder at
them. That we are not covered every moment with water, which is under
and above us at the same time, we have to thank the divine majesty,
which arranges and maintains the creatures so wonderfully and for this
reason is to be praised and glorified by us.

50 This is the reason why Moses says here with a diligent and clear word
that these were broken out. For he wants to indicate that they were
closed by divine power and, as it were, sealed with a seal of God, as
they still are today; God, however, did not open them with a key, but
tore them out by force, so that the sea, as it were, overflowed. covered
everything with water. But let no one think that God had a hand in this,
because it is said here that he broke open the depths. For the Scripture
speaks according to our understanding and indicates that God has imposed
it and no longer stopped the waters, nor increased them with the word,
but has let them go out and rage freely according to their nature. That
is why the sea was overflowing, so that it seemed to be overflowing.

It is said that in Hülle, which is in our neighborhood, a salt well
called the German Spring is said to swell and rise so violently for some
time that it overflows where it is not drawn. It is also said that at
one time the city of Halle was ruined by such a violent outpouring of
this well. If a well was able to do this, what do we think happened when
the sea and all the waters poured out such a quantity of water? That is
why the people were rather hurried, because they became aware of the
danger. For where could they have fled, when all the waters poured out
so mightily?

52 Not only has this happened, but the windows of heaven have been
opened, which were closed before the same time, as Moses indicates with
this word.

They are the same as they are today. The world may have thought that
such an opening was impossible, but its sins have made it possible.

53\) Moses calls windows nothing else than openings of the sky. For when
it rains now, it seems as if the water penetrates, as it were, through
the pores of the clouds. But at the time of the Flood, it did not go
through the pores, but out of the windows with all its might, as if a
great barrel of water were poured out with violence and suddenly, or a
hose of water were broken in two. Moses also uses the words so that it
appears and seems to us to be so.

For this reason, water has penetrated the earth with all its force, both
from heaven and from the lowest depths of the earth, until finally the
whole earth has been covered with water and the fertile whole earth has
been corrupted by the salty water. One does not read anything of this
kind in other books or writings: only the holy Scriptures indicate that
this happened to the world, which thus surely sinned, and that through
God\'s goodness the waters hanging on the clouds are still stopped
today, which otherwise by their nature could do nothing but fall with
great force, as happened in the Flood.

V. 13-16. **On the same day Noah entered the box with Shem, Ham and
Japheth, his sons, and his wife, and his sons\' three wives, and all
kinds of animals after their kind, and all kinds of cattle after their
kind, and all kinds of creeping things that creep upon the earth after
their kind, and all kinds of birds after their kind, and everything that
could fly, and everything that had a foot; All these went to Noah into
the box of pairs, of all flesh, having a living spirit within; and these
were male and female of all flesh, and went in as God commanded him.**

55 Here Moses begins and makes wonderful words, so that such an
abundance of words might well hurt tender ears, that he repeats the same
thing so often and, as it can be seen, without any fruit. He does not
have enough of it, that he says in general \"all kinds of things\".

**[548 L II. WS-2S7. Interpretation of Genesis 7:13-16. W. 1, 828-831.
549]{.underline}**

Birds\", but makes three kinds of birds. Among these is zipor, which is
commonly understood to mean a sparrow. But this text sufficiently
indicates that it is a generic word for all or even many birds, so it is
undoubtedly taken from their song or voice, Zi, Zi. Thus he also makes
three kinds of animals. After that he also uses many words in the
description of the Flood. He says that the waters took over, grew and
covered the whole earth. And since he then tells what followed such
waters, he is also of many words: \"All flesh\", he says, \"perished\";
\"All that had edema died\"; \"All was destroyed\" 2c.

\(56\) But I have said above that Moses repeats the same thing against
his custom, so that he forces the reader, as it were, to stand still and
to recognize and consider such a great thing a little more diligently.
For this is such a wrath, which no one can sufficiently consider or
interpret, that it destroys not only man but all his possessions and
goods. Therefore he wants this wrath to awaken the hardened sinners who
feel no sin.

Therefore these are not idle or forgiven words, as industrious and
spiritless readers consider them to be; but they provoke us to the fear
of God, and present the matter to us as clearly as if we saw it before
our eyes: that by contemplating such a great wrath we may be humbled and
begin to fear God earnestly and to refrain from sins. For it can be seen
that Moses did not write such things without many tears. For he sees
this spectacle of divine wrath so completely with his eyes, heart and
mind that he cannot refrain from it; he must repeat it often. He does
it, however, without a doubt with the intention that he may leave such
thorns in the hearts of pious readers, which stimulate and drive them to
the fear of God without interruption.

\(58\) But it is useful for us to picture this thing before our eyes and
to look at it for a long time. For how do you think it would have made
sense to us if we had come into the box and seen how the water was
violently closing in on all sides?

and the poor people swim so miserably in the water and perish without
all help and salvation? But we should think that Noah and his sons were
also flesh and blood, that is, such people who (as he says in the
Comedy) thought that everything that is human could also affect them.
Now they have sat in the box forty days, before the box was raised from
the earth. In such a time everything was destroyed, which had lived on
the earth from humans and animals. They saw such misery with their eyes:
who would doubt that they were not moved by it in the most extreme and
violent way?

\(59\) Now the box floats in the water an hundred and fifty days, in the
wind, in the waves, and in the water, not having a harbor and a ford,
nor a man\'s company. Therefore they are now and then beaten and driven
by the water and wind, as if they had been expelled and cast out of the
world. Is it not a miracle that these eight people did not die of fear
and sadness? But surely we have stony hearts and are sticks and stones
ourselves, that we can read such things with dry eyes.

\(60\) What is the crying, wailing and weeping when we stand on the
shore and see a boat overturned and the people in it miserably drowned?
Now there is not one boat overturned, but the whole world in the water,
which is not only full of grown men and old men, but also of young
children; nor are they all wicked and ungodly men, but also many simple
women and virgins, who have all perished at the same time. Therefore we
should consider that this great affliction moved Moses to speak so many
words, so that he might also give us cause to consider such great things
diligently. And Noah had such wonderful faith that he was able to
comfort himself and his family with the hope of the promised seed, and
indeed he considered this promise greater than that the whole world had
perished.

**V. 16-24 And the Lord closed behind him. Then the flood came up forty
days.**

**[550 8. 11, 287-280. interpretation of I Moses 7, 1624 . w. 1,
831-838. 551]{.underline}**

**And the waters increased, and lifted up the box, and carried it above
the earth. So the waters overflowed and grew very much on the earth, so
that the box rode on the waters. And the waters overflowed, and
increased so much upon the earth, that all the high mountains under the
whole heaven were covered. Fifteen cubits high the waters went over the
mountains that were covered. Then all flesh that crept upon the earth
perished, of hangers, and of cattle, and of beasts, and of all that
moveth upon the earth, and of all men. Everything that had a living
breath in the dry land died. So everything that was on the face of the
earth, from man to beast, and to creeping things, and to the hangers
under the heaven, was destroyed from the earth. Only Noah remained, and
all that was with him in the box. And the waters stood upon the earth an
hundred and fifty days.**

The box stood for forty days on a level ground, but at the same time the
waters increased so that they carried the box upward, so that it floated
in the water for a hundred and fifty days. This was indeed a long
voyage, full of mourning and weeping. Nevertheless, Noah comforted
himself with his people of faith and did not doubt God\'s goodness,
after they had recognized his care for them in the construction of the
box, in the provision of food and other necessary things, and finally
also in the fact that he had closed the box for them after the flood
became violent.

\(62\) But here there is a question: How is God true, who has subjected
the earth to man to build and to rule over it? For God did not create
the earth to lie desolate, but that it should be inhabited and bear its
fruits to man. But how does this rhyme with this will of the Creator,
that he corrupted the whole human race down to eight souls? I do not
doubt that this argument will have moved both the Cainites and the
godless descendants of the generation of the pious, so that they did not
give Noah, when he preached about the Flood, the same reasoning.

have believed. For how is it consistent that God says to Adam and Eve:
\"You shall reign on the earth\"; but here he says to Noah: \"The water
shall become mighty and destroy all people\"? That is why they
considered Noah\'s preaching ungodly and heretical.

63\) As the prophets\' writings testify, the priests and kings did not
believe the threats of imprisonment by the Assyrians and Babylon, for
they knew the glorious promises, such as: Psalm 132:14: \"This is my
rest forever; here will I dwell, for it pleases me\"; item Isaiah 31:9:
\"This is my hearth and fire.\" Therefore they considered it impossible
that the city or the temple should be destroyed by the Gentiles. And the
Jews, however poor and miserable they are, still hold fast to this day
to this promise, that they are God\'s people and heirs of the promise
made to Abraham and the fathers.

64\. so the pope blows himself up with the promises that happened to the
church, as Matth. 28, 20.: \"I am with you always, to the end of the
world\". Joh. 14, 18: \"I will not leave you orphans\"; Luc. 22, 32: \"I
have prayed for you that your faith may not cease\" 2c. Although he sees
and feels God\'s wrath, he is so entangled and captivated by these
promises that he lets himself and his people dream that his seat and
power will remain firm and unshaken. That is why the papists defy us
with the name of the church and put themselves off to all kinds of
happiness and welfare, as if they could force God to provide them with
such a church as they desire and dream of.

Therefore, this question is right here: How does the Flood, by which the
whole human race is corrupted, coincide with God\'s will, who created
human nature, with the promise or gift of dominion? And what is answered
to this question may also be answered to the other by the Church,
namely, that God remains true and sustains and governs His Church, but
in such a way that the world neither sees nor understands.

**[552 D- n. 240-242. interpretation of Genesis 7:16-24. W. 1. 83S-83S.
553]{.underline}**

nor understands. He lets the pope at Rome with his own in this delusion
that he is the church, lets him be sure of it and use his majesty and
great name; but in truth he has cast him out of his church and rejected
him, because he rejects the word and performs idolatrous services.

But God has chosen another church that accepts His word and flees
idolatry, but is oppressed with the cross, scorn and shame, so that it
is not considered a church, but a heresy and a school of the devil. Thus
St. Paul says Rom. 2, 17, that the Jews do not fear God, but boast of
the law and of God, and yet deny God, revile and anger Him. But because
the Jews, who boast as if they were God\'s people, do so, God is
building a church for Himself from the Gentiles, who boast of God
rightly and truly and accept His word.

67\. But who will therefore prove God false by preserving the church in
a different way than men desire or know? The promises of Jerusalem and
the preservation of the Temple were the same. These same promises were
not revoked when Jerusalem and the Temple were destroyed by the
Babylonians. For God had foreknown at that time another Jerusalem and
another temple in the Spirit and by the Word, as Jeremiah Cap. 29, 10.
11. prophesied that after seventy years the people should come again and
at the same time rebuild the temple and the city. Therefore the temple
and the city were destroyed before the Jews at that time, but not before
God, who promised in word that they would be rebuilt.

68 And so the argument of the Jews is true, that God will not leave the
city and the temple. He does this in a different way, because the Jews
thought that their city would not have to be destroyed because of the
promise: \"This is my rest forever\", Ps. 132, 14. But God lets it be
destroyed because he punishes the sin of his people, and nevertheless
cares for his church and protects it, since the pious are reinstated by
King Cyrus and build the temple again.

69\. so in the beginning of creation the

Here, it is abolished by the Flood not for eternity but for a time, and
yet it is not abolished altogether. For although most of the world
perishes, man nevertheless remains a lord over everything on earth and
will also preserve the same dominion for man. Although it does not
happen in such a quantity as the world thought and wanted, it still
happens in a few persons, that is, in eight souls, which the world did
not think of.

Therefore, God\'s promise did not fail, but God kept what He promised.
But he did not keep it in this way, as the world would have kept it. For
he destroyed the sinners, but preserved the righteous, though they were
few, and like a seed, which God afterwards multiplied in many ways.

The papists should look to such a judgment of God. For it teaches that
God does not let the crowd, nor force, nor even his own promise hinder
him from punishing the sin of the impenitent. For otherwise God would
have spared the first world and the lineage of the patriarchs, to whom
He had given the dominion of the earth. But now he destroys them all and
preserves only eight souls.

Would it be a miracle if he were to do the same with the papists? who,
though they boast of their age, worthiness, multitude and power, yet
because they trample on and persecute God\'s word, God will reject them
and choose another church that will humbly submit to his word and
willingly accept the benefits of the Lord Christ, which the pope\'s
church proudly and defiantly despises out of presumption of its own
merit.

Therefore, one should not trust in the present, which he has and which
is also promised in God\'s word. But one should look to the word and
rely on it alone. Those who do not do this, but fall away from the word
and rely on the present, even though they are great, mighty, and very
much, will not go unpunished for such apostasy, even though they are
strong, great, and mighty; as is shown by the Flood, the imprisonment of
the Jews, and the death of the Jews.

**[554 n. n, 242-244. interpretation of Genesis 7:1, 6-24. W. 1 ,
836-S3S. 555]{.underline}**

their calamity and misery this day, as well as the seven thousand men in
the kingdom of Israel.

This argument that the multitude or the great hemp is not the church is
strong enough. So one should not look at how holy the origin was, who
their ancestors were, what they had and were given to them by God. But
one should look at the word alone and judge from it. For those who
accept it are truly the ones who will remain forever like Mount Zion,
Ps. 125:1, even though they are very few and the most despised in the
eyes of the world. As Noah was with his children; by whom, though they
were few, God gave man the truth of the promised dominion, though he had
not a foot wide upon the earth.

Our opponents insist very much on this argument. They abandon the word
and look only at the crowd, appearance and persons. Now the apostles
prophesied that the Antichrist would be a respecter of persons, would be
bound to the great multitude and antiquity, but would hate God\'s word
and falsify the promise, and strangle those who clung to the word, 2
Thess. 2, 3. 1 Jn. 2, 18. 2 Jn. v. 7. Revelation 20, 8. 9. Do we then
want to take such for the church?

For the Church is the daughter born of the Word of God: Word of God, and
is not of the Word. Therefore, whoever abandons the word and falls on
the reputation of the people, he no longer remains the church and is
blinded, and neither the crowd nor the force helps him. So again, those
who keep the word, like Noah and his followers, are the church, even
though they are very few in number and only eight souls. So today the
papists are superior to us in numbers and precede us in reputation; but
we are not only blasphemed, but must also suffer many things. So that we
must have patience until the judgment comes, in which God will make it
clear that we are His church, but the papists are the church of the
devil.

77 Therefore, keep this rule, which is written in 1 Sam. 16:7, where the
Lord says to Sa.

muel: \"Look not on his form, nor on his great person; I have rejected
him. For it is not how a man looks. A man looks at what is before his
eyes, but the Lord looks at the heart.\"

\(78\) Therefore, we should not ask how great and mighty the pope is,
who boasts that he is the church and insists on the succession of the
apostles, on his majesty and majesty; but we should look at the word. If
he accepts it, we are to consider him the church; but if he persecutes
it, we are to consider him a serf of the devil.

79 This is what St. Paul says in 1 Cor. 2:13, 15, that the minister
judges everything. For if I alone were in the whole world, having and
keeping the word, I alone would be the church, and could judge the rest
of the whole world rightly, that it should not be the church. For though
they have the power and the ministry, yet they have it without the word,
and have nothing in the truth. But we, who have the word, have thereby
also all things, though we have neither goods nor power. Therefore,
popes, cardinals, and bishops should either come to us or never boast
that they are the church, which cannot be without God\'s word, since it
is begotten by the word alone.

80 We are therefore very hostile because they say of us that we have
fallen away from the old church. Again, the papists boast that they have
remained with the church and want to subject everything to the same
judgment and knowledge. But they accuse us unjustly. For if we want to
confess the truth, we have fallen away from the Word while we were still
in their church. But now we have returned to the Word and are no longer
apostates.

\(81\) And though they rob us of the name of the church, as they think,
yet I retain the word, and through it all the ornament and adornment of
the true church. For he who has the one who created all things must also
have the creature. And so Noah remains a lord of the world, even though
the waters overwhelm and destroy the earth. For though he loses what is
good, yet he may be said to retain all things, because he retains the
word by which all things were created.

**[556L . II, 244-24S. Interpretation of Genesis 8, 1. W. 1, 838-843.
557]{.underline}**

**The eighth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of Noah\'s condition in the box, and how the flood stopped.**

**I.**

V. 1. **Then God remembered Noah, and all the animals, and all the
cattle that were with him in the box.**

Now that the terrible wrath has come to an end and all flesh has been
destroyed with the earth, the promise which God made to Noah and his
sons above, that they would be the seed of the human race, has come to
pass and will be fulfilled; and there is no doubt that they will have
waited very anxiously for this promise. For to live by faith is the very
hardest life; as Noah and his sons lived, who simply, as we see, clung
to the sky. For the earth was covered with water, that they had no
ground to stand on; but there was only the word of promise to hold them
up in such power of the water.

\(2\) When the flesh is out of danger, it considers faith to be a very
small thing, as the disputations of the papists also show. Therefore
they choose seeming and hard works, and toil in them. But look at Noah,
who is surrounded by water and almost covered with it: no works will
save him, but only the trust in the mercy of God, to which the words of
the promise brought him.

3\. this difficult and hard state of Noah is darkly indicated by Moses
with the word: \"God remembered\". For with this he indicates that Noah
had been led around in the water for such a long time and had drifted
from time to time that it seemed as if God had completely forgotten him.
Who then in such a struggle and train of thoughts

(namely, when the splendor of divine grace is removed and we stand in
vain darkness or God\'s oblivion), who experience that living in the
word alone or faith is much harder and more difficult than if one were a
hermit or a Carthusian monk. \'

4 Therefore it is not a vain word that the Holy Spirit says that God
remembered Noah. For it indicates that from the day Noah entered the
box, nothing was said to him, nothing was revealed. Nor did he see any
ray of divine grace shining, but kept only the promise he had received,
while the waters raged and frolicked around him, as if he had surely
forgotten him. His children, cattle, and all the animals in the box were
in such danger for a hundred and fifty days. Although the holy seed
overcame all danger through the abundant power of the spirit, it did not
happen to him without pain and distress of the flesh, without weeping
and great fear and trembling, which even the unreasonable animals felt,
as I fully believe.

\(5\) And thus they were oppressed by two troubles. For the Flood, which
swallowed up the whole human race, could not have happened without great
anguish and sorrow on the part of the pious, especially since they saw
that so few remained. In addition, it was a hard thing to be led around
in the water for almost half a year without any comfort from God.

For this is to be considered no small thing, that Moses says that the
Lord remembered Noah, which is a figure from grammar and indicates as
much as that God has placed Himself as if He had forgotten Noah, when in
truth He cannot forget His saints. For to live in such thoughts and thus
also to feel as if God had forgotten you is something that a grammarian
does not understand,

**558 L. n, p46-248. Interpretation of Genesis 8, I.W. 1, 843-84\".
559**

what it is. It must be the most perfect saints who can understand it and
persevere in faith to the forgetful God (that I thus say). That is why
the Psalms and the whole Bible are full of such lamentations, in which
the saints admonish God to get up, to open his eyes, to hear, to make
known.

\(7\) And at times the monks, who were a little more experienced than
others, have experienced this challenge. For they have called it the
delay of grace, which one can feel even in light temptations. For where
the heat that is in young people is not soothed by God\'s Word and the
Holy Spirit, it is quite unbearable. In the same way, the impatience and
revengefulness in the male age cannot be overcome at all, unless God
draws it out of your heart. How much easier it is to fall into the
darkness of despair or into the ropes and dangerous thoughts of
misguidedness in other serious temptations, when the delay of grace is
felt!

\(8\) Therefore we should not be so quick to pass over these words as if
they were spoken only according to grammar, as the rabbis think, but we
should look at the heart and the emotions: so it will be found that Noah
had inexpressible groaning, that he felt despair and yet still kept a
little faith and overcame the flesh. As Paul therefore complains in 2
Cor. 12:7 about Satan\'s angels, we should think that Noah also felt
such arrows or thorns in his heart, and often argued with himself in
this way: Do you think that God alone loves you so much? Do you think
you will finally be rescued, because the waters are continually
overflowing and it seems as if these great clouds can never be emptied
of water?

\(9\) What was the crying, lamenting and weeping when such thoughts came
into the weak hearts of the poor women? Therefore Noah, even though he
himself was grieved and distressed to the point of death, had to comfort
and uplift them almost against his own heart and conscience.

10\) That it was neither a joke nor a game, that they were so long in
the

They have to have locked boxes, see unspeakable violence of rain and
water in front of their eyes and now and then be driven in it and swim.
Then Noah felt a forgotten God; as Moses indicates when he says that God
finally remembered Noah and his children.

\(11\) And though they have overcome this feeling by faith, yet they
have not been able to overcome it without great trouble of the flesh.
Just as a young man who lives chastely overcomes his lust, but not
without difficulty, effort and work. But because here the danger was
greater than all the circumstances forced him to argue with himself
whether God would also be merciful and remember them: therefore, even
though they overcame such hardship, it did not happen without terrible
struggle and effort. For the flesh, being weak in itself, can tolerate
nothing less than such a God who does not remember us but has forgotten
us. For if we are so minded by nature that we become puffed up and proud
when God remembers us. What wonder is it that we become fainthearted and
despair when God allows us to see and feel as if he has rejected us and
allows us to suffer and experience all kinds of misfortune?

Therefore we should know that in this history an example of faith,
patience and constancy is held up to us, so that those who have God\'s
promise should not only learn to believe and trust in God, but also know
that constancy is necessary for them. But constancy cannot be without
great struggle and strife, and Christ calls us to this in the New
Testament, where he says Matth. 24, 13: \"He who perseveres will be
saved.

\(13\) And this is the reason why God hides Himself for a time, so that
we may think that He has forgotten us, that He has stopped with grace,
as is said in schools. But just as in this temptation not only the
spirit but also the flesh suffers, so also when God again begins to
remember us, the flesh feels His grace, which before, when the
temptation was

**[560 L- n, S4S-SV0. interpretation of Genesis 8:1-4. W. i, 8i\"-8is.
561]{.underline}**

still lasted, was only in the spirit and very weak.

\(14\) Therefore, this word, \"God remembered,\" indicates that there
was great sorrow in men and animals throughout the time of the Flood.
Therefore, there had to be great patience and strong courage so that
Noah and the others could endure God\'s forgetfulness, which is
otherwise unbearable for the flesh without the spirit, as well as other
temptations, although slight and minor. Although it is true that God
always remembers His own, even when He is thought to have forsaken them,
Moses wants to indicate here that He has remembered His own, so that
they have felt it, that is, with a sign and public proof of what He had
promised them beforehand in Word and Spirit. This is the most important
lesson of this whole chapter.

**II.**

**V.1-3. And he caused the wind to come upon the earth, and the waters
fell; and the fountains of the deep were stopped up, and the windows of
heaven, and the rain from heaven was poured down; and the waters
departed from the earth continually, and abated after an hundred and
fifty days.**

\(15\) Above Moses told three ways by which the flood raged; for at the
same time the fountains of the deep were opened, and the windows of
heaven were opened, and rain fell. When these things ceased on the
hundred and fifty-third day, it became calm again, and God remembered
Noah again, and he and his sons and their wives and all the animals were
refreshed after such great and prolonged fear and terror. For if a
tempest on the sea, which lasts for about two days, drives the shipmen
to despair, how much more difficult it was for Noah and his family that
they had to let themselves drift around for half a year!

\(16\) Now here is a question: How did the wind come upon the earth
while it was still completely covered with water? For it is nothing new
that the winds make dry, especially those coming from the morning.

which are called hollow winds and which Virgil calls scorching winds
because they dry the spawn; which Hosea also remembers Cap. 13, 15. This
is easy to answer. For the text says that the wind came upon the earth,
that is, upon the waters, until the waters were dried up and the earth
could be seen again; as in the 2nd Book of Moses, Cap. 14, 21, it says
that the Red Sea was dried up by a dry wind. For even if God could have
done this without wind, he still likes to use the means that are
arranged for this.

\(17\) So Noah lived in darkness until now, and saw nothing but the
waters falling in with cruel violence and raging. But now the light of
the sun is seen again, and the winds come from all sides to make dry,
especially the wind of the morning, which dries up and consumes the
water. In addition, there are other means, namely, that the sea does not
continue to break out and go over the earth, but takes the waters, which
it has given up, back to itself; thus the windows of the sky are also
closed again.

These are outward and tangible signs so that God may comfort Noah and
prove to him that He has not forgotten him at all, but remembers him.
And this is a useful and necessary lesson, that even when we are in
danger and need, we should certainly wait for God\'s help, who will not
abandon us if we persevere in faith and wait for His promise.

**V. 4. On the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the caste settled
on Mount Ararat.**

19\. forty days the water had grown before the box had gone up. After
that it floated in the water for a hundred and fifty days. It floated in
the water for a hundred and fifty days and was tossed about by the winds
and the waves, as if God had forgotten Noah. Finally the water began to
recede and the box rested.

\(20\) Here the Jews dispute about the number of months: but what is it
that one can

**[562 n. II, 25, 0-ÄU. Interpretation of Genesis 8, 4-9. W. 1, 849-851.
563]{.underline}**

What is the reason why we are lukewarm about unnecessary things,
especially because the rabbis do not pretend to be very skilful and
formal? It is much more necessary that we investigate which is the
mountain Ararat. And here almost all the teachers agree that it is the
mountain in Armenia near the largest mountains in Asia Minor, Caucasus
and Taurus. But it seems to me more credible that it is the highest of
all mountains, the Imaus, which separates India. For if one compares
this mountain with the other great mountains, they are hardly like
warts. And that the box stood on the top of this mountain is a sign that
the water sank and decreased for almost three whole months, until the
other mountains, which are not so high, were discovered as Lebanon,
Taurus, Caucasus, which are, as it were, the feet or roots of Imaus; as
the mountains in Greece are, as it were, arms of the Alpine mountains
and reach as far as our Harz forest. For whoever looks at it and
observes it diligently will find that the mountains are attached to each
other in a strange way and reach together.

\(21\) Josephus writes of the mountains in Armenia, and remembers that
pieces of the box were found there in his time. But no one will blame me
if I do not believe him everywhere or call me a heretic for it.

V. 5: The **waters continued to flow and recede until the tenth moon. On
the first day of the tenth moon, the tops of the mountains appeared.**

\(22\) Above (v. 4) he said that on the seventh moon the waters fell in
such a way that the box stood on the mountain Ararat. After that, in the
third moon, the tops of the smaller mountains began to appear; so that
Noah could see from Mount Ararat, as from a high vantage point, the tops
of the other mountains, such as Mount Taurus in Asia, Mount Lebanon in
Syria 2c. These were all signs that God remembered Noah.

**After forty days Noah opened the window of the box he had made**,

**and sent out a raven, which flew back and forth until the water dried
up on the ground.**

This belongs to the history. The secret interpretation, however, we want
to save up to his time. And here a question has caused the negligence of
him who translated the text. For in the Hebrew it does not say that the
raven did not come again, as Jerome translated it; therefore it would
not have been necessary to think of a cause why it did not come again,
namely, that it found carrion in all places, and for the sake of such
superfluous food it did not come again, as they pretend.

024 And Moses held the contradiction, and said that the raven that was
let out came again, though it was not taken again, and shut up in the
coop, as the dove was. And Moses says that Noah let the raven out for
this reason, so that he could find out whether the animals would again
walk on the earth and have food. But the raven did not carry out its
discharge diligently, but flew off and on for joy that it had been freed
from its prison in the box and could now fly happily in the open sky,
and despised Noah. The Jews show their unclean minds everywhere, like
pigs. For they say that the raven was afraid because of his wife and was
worried about her and suspected Noah because of her. O unclean spirits!

V. 8. 9. **Then he sent forth a dove, that he might know whether the
waters were fallen upon the earth. But the dove did not find a place to
rest its foot, so it came to him in the box, for the water was still on
the face of the whole earth. Then he put out his hand and took it into
the box.**

\(25\) After Noah lacked hope in the raven, which now flies from time to
time out of presumption, but brings no sign of how things are on earth,
he takes a dove and thinks that it will deliver his message more
diligently. Although the text almost forces us to believe that this is
the case,

**[564 L. II, 253-255. Interpretation of Genesis 8, 8-14. W. 1, 851-854.
565]{.underline}**

as if Noah had let these two birds out at the same time for a time, so
that he could have two witnesses from whom he would notice and learn
what he wanted. But the raven, which now plays with pleasure in the open
sky, does not want to go back into the box, although it flies around.
The dove, however, who shies away from eagles and unclean eagles, comes
back and lets himself be taken. This, as we will hear, will give a fine
allegory of the church.

**V.10-12 Then he waited another seven days, and again he sent forth a
dove out of the box. It came to him at vespers, and behold, it had
broken off a leaf of oil, and was deceiving in its mouth. Then Noah
heard that the waters had fallen on the earth. But he waited another
seven days, and sent out a tan, which came not again to him.**

The dove is a faithful messenger, therefore it is sent out once again.
And Moses diligently describes how the waters gradually disappeared and
fell, until at last the earth with the trees became without water and
was stripped bare. That the dove now brings an olive branch, we are not
to consider that it did it out of its wit or skill, but that God has
thus arranged and ordered it, since he wanted to indicate ever more
clearly to Noah that he remembered him and had not forgotten him at all.
Therefore, Noah himself and the others who were locked in the box with
him had a special sign on this oil leaf, by which they were comforted
and received certain hope that they would be released from their prison.

\(27\) Here the Jews fiercely dispute where the dove found this olive
branch, and some say in honor of their fatherland that it was taken from
the olive mountain in the land of Israel, which mountain God spared so
that it was not washed away by the Flood, like the rest of the earth.
Other Jews, however, being wiser and more reasonable, refute such lies
and do right by them, and prove it thus: If this should be true, then
this olive branch could not have been a sign from which Noah

could have noticed that the waters had decreased. The others fable that
the dove was let into the paradise and brought the branch from there.

\(28\) Now I have given my opinion of paradise, and such talk and lies
are not worthy to be more diligently refuted; but it is better that they
should be spoken of thus, namely, that it happened miraculously and
supernaturally. For a dove has not so much skill that it should break
off a branch and lead it to the box, that Noah could understand from it
that the waters had become smaller. According to God\'s order, all this
happened. For at the same time other trees also had leaves, especially
those that were somewhat long and came out of the water sooner. But if
you count an olive tree against other trees, it is short: therefore it
served well, so that Noah could have a sign from it, understand and
conclude that the waters had fallen, the wrath of God had ceased, and
the earth had returned to its state in which it had been before the
flood. But he recognizes this more certainly when he lets the dove out
for the third time and it does not come back again, because it not only
had its food on the earth, but was also able to nest and wander on it.

**In the six hundred and one year of Noah\'s age, on the first day of
the first month, the waters of the earth dried up. Then Noah took the
roof off the box and saw that the ground was dry. So the earth became
completely dry on the seventh and twentieth day of the second month.**

29 We see from this that Noah was in the box for a whole year and ten
days. For on the seventeenth day of the next moon he went in, and when
the year was up, he came out on the seventh and twentieth day of the
same moon. Therefore poor Noah had to live longer than a whole half year
with his children and the same wives, in the highest sadness and God\'s
oblivion.

**[566 k. II, MS-M. Interpretation of Genesis 8:13-17. W. 1, 854-\^58.
567]{.underline}**

After that God showed him with other and other signs one after the other
that he had not forgotten him, until finally, when a year and ten days
are over, he is again set as Lord over the earth and the sea. For on
this day of the other moon, the earth was not only rid of the Flood, but
also became dry. This is the story of the Flood and how the waters fell
again. After this terrible wrath now follows an abundant light of grace,
as indicated by the sermon that God Himself preached to Noah and now
follows.

**Second part.**

**We Noah get command to go out of the box; how he sacrificed to GOD,
and how GOD decided not to curse the earth anymore.**

**I.**

**Then God spoke to Noah and said, \"Come out of the box, you and your
wife, your sons and your sons\' wives with you. Every beast that is with
thee, of all flesh, of all fowl, and of all cattle, and of all creeping
things that creep upon the earth, come out with thee; and be ye moved
upon the earth.**

So far, Genesis has only narrated and described this divine work.
However, although God\'s works are not silent, but report and paint
God\'s wrath before our eyes, so that we can see it, God comforts us
much more powerfully and strongly when he also gives us a verbal word in
addition to his works, which the eyes do not see, but the ears hear and
the heart understands through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. As God
has thus far indicated by his work that he has reconciled and, as it
were, turned a wrathful God into a gracious and merciful God, because he
drives the water under himself and makes the earth dry, so he now
continues and confirms this comfort with his word, and speaks kindly to
Noah, and tells him to come out of the box with the other men and
animals.

\(31\) And this is the text that we often use in our teaching, and not
without cause, and conclude that it is not proper for us to do anything,
especially in the presence of God and in worship, where it is not proper
for us, and this is called the word of God. So Noah went into the box
above, when God told him to go in: so he goes out again, when he told
him to go out. He does not follow superstitious thoughts; as we see in
the Jews, who, once they have been commanded to do a temporal thing,
want to keep it forever, as if it were necessary for salvation.

\(32\) Thus Noah might have thought, Behold, I have built the box by
God\'s command, I have also been preserved therein, since all men
perished; therefore will I abide therein, or keep it for a temple and
place of worship; for it is sanctified by God\'s word and the indwelling
of the saints, or the church. But the godly man does none of these
things. For God\'s word commanded him to go forth, therefore he follows
it; and since at the time of the flood the box had done its work, he
lets it remain, and considers that he and his children must henceforth
dwell on the earth. So we are not to do anything without God\'s word,
but are to keep ourselves in the holy profession, that is, in the one
who has God\'s word and commandment. For whoever undertakes anything
without God\'s commandment works in vain.

\(33\) But in contrast to this is the example of Noah, which follows
soon after, who, without God\'s command, sets up an altar and offers
burnt offerings of clean animals to the Lord. If this was due to Noah,
why should it not be due to us to choose some services? And the papacy
has proved itself well in this, which has devised works and services
without measure and manner above one another, according to its liking in
the church. But one should keep this common rule and teaching that
everything that is not of faith is sin, Rom. 14:23, but faith cannot be
separated from the word; therefore everything that happens without
God\'s word is sin.

**[568 \" n. M-s\". Interpretation of Genesis 8, 15-17. W. i, sss-ssr
569]{.underline}**

\(34\) There is a certain danger in following the example of what the
fathers did. For as the persons are unequal and different, so also is
their office or profession unequal, and according to their various
professions God also requires various works. That is why the epistle to
the Hebrews Cap. II, 3. ff. very masterfully draws the various works of
the fathers to one faith, as indicating that each one in his profession
should not follow the works of the holy fathers, but their faith.

For this reason, the individual and special works of the holy fathers
should not be held up as examples, so that everyone would think that he
should also do them; just as the monks want to imitate St. Benedict\'s
fasting, St. Francis\' dress, and St. Dominic\'s shoes 2c. For this is
to make monkeys, who can do one thing, but without understanding. Thus
they pretend these works, but know nothing of faith.

In Genesis 22:2 Abraham was commanded to sacrifice his son. The
descendants then took this as an example to follow and therefore made
the world full of innocent blood. In the same way, the serpent of brass
was worshipped and sacrificed before it, 2 Kings 18:4, and both parts
protected themselves with the example of the ancestors and answered for
it: but because they did such services to God without the Word, they
were condemned.

\(37\) Therefore, we should know that without God\'s commandment we
should not do or perform anything. For since the profession is various,
we cannot and should not all do the same work. How foolish would I be if
I let myself be heard to say that I must follow the emperor\'s example
and prescribe laws for others? How ungodly would I act if I wanted to
argue that I had to follow a judge\'s example and condemn some to the
gallows or the sword? Therefore, one should not look at each man\'s
work, but at his faith. For the faith of all the saints is a common
faith and one and the same, even though the

Works are quite diverse and very because of each other.

\(38\) Therefore, beware that you think that because Noah built an
altar, it is fitting for you to do so. But follow the faith of Noah, who
thought it right to show himself to a God so kind and gracious as to
understand his good deed and be grateful to him for it. So do not follow
Abraham in sacrificing your son, but in believing God\'s promise and
obeying His commandments; as in this opinion the epistle to the Hebrews
masterfully draws the examples or works of the fathers to faith, and
indicates that we should also follow it, Heb. 11:2 ff.

**II.**

39\. there is another way to answer this, namely that Noah had a command
to build the altar and sacrifice on it. For this way of sacrificing God
considered it good that he had brought pure animals, which served for
sacrifices, in great numbers hot into the box. So also Noah did not have
to withdraw from the priesthood, which in the previous world, as
considered good by God, had come to him through the right of inheritance
of the firstborn. Thus Adam, Seth, Enos and others had also been
priests, from whom the priesthood had inherited and fallen from Noah.

40 Therefore Noah not only had the power and freedom to sacrifice as a
priest and prophet, but he also had to do it because of necessity, and
because of his profession he did what he did. But since the profession
is not without the word, he erected an altar according to the word and
command of God and sacrificed on it. If, in the same way, a monk can
show that his office and profession make it possible for him to put on a
cap, call on the Mother of God, pray a rosary, and do such things, we
will also praise his life. But because he has no profession of it,
because the word does not precede and he is not in office, then all
monks\' lives and all their deeds are rightly reproached and condemned.

**[5708 . n, 2\"!\"-Au. Interpretation of Genesis 8, 15-20. W. i. \"i-M.
571]{.underline}**

Finally, since there is a lack of everything else, there is still the
argument a posteriori (from success), that is, that God was pleased with
Noah\'s work. Although these arguments and proofs a posteriori are not
so certain and strong, they can still be valid in the case of such
excellent and special men. For though it may be seen that they do
something of which they have no commandment, yet they are not rejected
by God, but please him, and are certain in their minds that they do not
sin in it. However, this is not seen until God makes it clear that he is
not displeased with them. Such examples are many, and we also see that
God has put up with some of the works of the Gentiles.

Therefore, this opinion should remain firm and certain, that one should
do everything according to God\'s commandment, so that we can actually
conclude in our conscience that we are commanded by God to do such
things. Those who run in such a state or profession, which pleases God,
do not run in vain, nor do they fall into the air, as those who have no
barriers in which they are commanded to run, and therefore have no hope
of small death, 1 Cor. 9, 24. ff. But now I come back to the text. Noah,
together with his sons and their wives, is commanded to go out of the
box and to lead all kinds of animals to the earth, so that all his works
may be sanctified and put into the Word. Now follows primarily from the
animals.

V. 17-19 **Be fruitful and multiply on the earth. So Noah went out with
his sons, and with his wife, and with his sons\' wives; and with them
all manner of beasts, and all manner of creeping things, and all manner
of birds, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, came
forth out of the box, every one to his own kind.**

43 Because the Lord says afterwards in the 9th chapter v. 1, how Noah
and his sons should multiply and be fruitful, therefore I consider it
that he speaks here only of the multiplication of the unreasonable
animals. And concludes here from these words Lyra foolish thing, namely,
that at the time of the Flood the intercourse forbidden, but now after

Noah had come out of the box, had been allowed again, because the Lord
says here: \"Go out of the box, you and your wife.\" Such are the
thoughts of the monks, not of God, who does not look at fornication, but
at procreation. For the same is God\'s creation. But fornication is a
poison, poured into nature by the devil because of sin.

\(44\) Moses has many words here just to show and illustrate how joyful
Noah\'s heart and the hearts of his people were after God told them to
leave the box and return to the wide earth. But in this narration of the
animals and their kind he keeps a different order and distinguishes them
according to their kind, so that one may see how God alone looks at the
increase or production of fruit. And no doubt this will have been a
lovely spectacle, that among the animals, when they were all let out of
the box, each one knew its species or its kind and afterwards found
itself again in its usual place: Wolves, bears, lions 2c. into the woods
and groves; but the sheep, goats and pigs to the field; dogs, chickens,
cats 2c. to the people.

V. 20 **Noah built an altar to the LORD, and took of every clean beast,
and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings upon the altar.**

\(45\) This is a clear text, showing that Moses did not make the
sacrifices at first, but gathered them together and put them in order,
as they were used by the fathers, and were inherited from one to
another: even as the law of circumcision was not written by Moses at
first, but came and was taken from the fathers.

46 Since he remembers the sacrifice of Abel and Cain above (Cap. 4, 4.
5.), he gives the same sacrifice a name and says that it was a minchah,
a sacrifice. Here, however, the burnt offering is remembered for the
first time, which was completely set on fire. This, I say, is a clear
proof that the law of sacrifices was also before Moses. But therefore
remember

**[572 n. 2S1-264. interpretation of I Moses 8, 20. 21. w. 1, 8SS-8SS.
573]{.underline}**

The first thing Moses says here is that he wants to bring such ways and
customs, kept by the fathers, into order.

**V.** 21. **And the Lord smelled the sweet odor.**

47 Here it is indicated that God accepted Noah\'s sacrifice, which he
did as a priest according to the example of the holy fathers. But one
should diligently note the difference in the way of speaking. For above
he spoke of the sacrifice in such a way that the Lord had held himself
to it or had looked at it; here he speaks that the Lord had smelled a
sweet odor, and afterwards Moses often uses this way of speaking. And
the heathen also have reproached them, as when Lucian laughed at
Jupiter, that he had been amused with your steam, or with the smell of
roasting flesh.

\(48\) But actually this word does not mean a smell of sweetness, but a
smell of rest. For the word nichoach, which means rest, comes from the
word nuach, which Moses used above when he said (v. 4) that the casket
had stood or rested on Mount Ararat. Therefore, the smell of rest means
that God had rested from His wrath at that time, had let go of the wrath
and had been reconciled or, as we say, had been well satisfied.

\(49\) Here one might ask: Why did Moses not say that God had kept to
Noah and his burnt offering, but simply said that the Lord had smelled a
smell of rest? which is truly annoying and shameful, since it does not
praise the person for his faith, but praises only his work. To this, all
others answer almost in the same way, that the Scripture here speaks of
God in a human way; for men delight in a sweet smell. But it seems to me
that this way of speaking has another cause, namely, that God was so
near that he smelled the odor. For Moses wants to indicate that this
sacrifice was pleasing to God. Solomon Proverbs 27:9 says, \"A pleasant
odor gladdens the heart\"; and physicians sometimes make the half-dead
recover through a pleasant odor; as again

to a horrible stench of nature is very repugnant and often beats them
down.

50 Thus one can say here that God was angered by the horrible stench of
sins and godlessness, and was now, as it were, refreshed again, since he
saw that this single priest had sent himself to sacrifice, and proved
with a sign that he was grateful, and also testified with a public work
that he was not godless, but had a God whom he feared and honored; for
this is where the sacrifices actually went 2c. Just as God has hitherto
been pleased to destroy the human race, so now he is pleased to increase
it again. Thus Moses uses such a way of speaking for our sake, that we
may take hold of God\'s grace and learn that he is such a God who
delights to do us good.

**III.**

**And spoke in his heart.**

51 Moses wants to indicate that God did not speak this negligently or
above, but most sincerely; for in Hebrew it reads thus, that God spoke
to his heart.

**I will no longer curse the earth for the sake of mankind.**

God speaks here as if He were repentant of the punishment He had
inflicted on the earth for man\'s sake, and as if He were punishing
Himself for having raged against him in such an abominable manner; as
Moses says above that He was repentant for having made man. But this is
not to be understood as if there could be a change in God\'s will or
counsel, but it is a comfort to us. For this is why he blames and
punishes himself, so that he may again encourage and guide the small
group, so that they may be sure that God will be merciful again.

\(53\) And such consolation was very necessary for the frightened hearts
that had now seen God\'s great and terrible wrath. Because it could not
have been without it, their faith will often have become weak over the
contemplation of such great wrath, so God is forced, as it were, to give
His blessings to the people.

**[574 L. II, 264-26\". Interpretation of Genesis 8, 21. W. 1. 888-870.
575]{.underline}**

He will not use his words and deeds in such a way that their hearts can
expect nothing but grace and mercy. Therefore, he now speaks to them, is
with their sacrifice, shows that he is pleased with it, punishes his
counsel and agrees that he will no longer do such things; and in sum, he
now takes on and is a different God than he had been before: not that
God is changeable, but that he wants men, who were now engulfed in
almost the same thoughts of wrath, to have a different mind and spirit.

\(54\) And they that have been in spiritual temptations know well how
much it is needful that certain and strong consolation should be
persuaded into the hearts, that they may at last be brought to the hope
of grace, and forget wrath. Often a whole day, or even a whole month,
cannot be sufficient for this; but just as a disease cannot soon be
cured, but requires a long time: so also such wounded hearts are not
helped so soon, nor with one word alone. Because God sees this, he tries
many ways to bring the frightened hearts back to a certain hope of
grace, and also punishes himself and speaks to his heart; as Jer. 18:8
says, where he promises that he will repent of the misfortune he thought
to do to them when they turn from their wickedness.

55\) It should also be noted that he says, \"I will no longer curse the
earth,\" for he is speaking of a general curse or destruction, and not
of a partial destruction, when he destroys countries, cities or
kingdoms. For he does this as a warning to others; as Mary sings Luc. 1,
52: \"He pushes the mighty off the throne.\"

**Third part.**

**Of original sin and the natural powers of man.**

[V. 21: **For the thoughts of man\'s heart are evil from his
youth.**]{.underline}

This is a clear and bright text about original sin. And which the same
small

They truly err, like blind men in bright sunshine, and do not see what
they do daily and experience in themselves. For behold the youth, how
strangely sin comes forth at the earliest age! What a multitude of rods
we must have before we can be put in order and kept in discipline!

When one has grown a little too old, he soon becomes more unruly, and we
feel such a pestilence in ourselves that can neither be controlled nor
resisted, namely, a fierce fornication and lust pestilence. If one now
takes a wife, it follows that he becomes tired of her and desires others
with rage. If one is commanded to an office or a regiment, there is soon
a great multitude of all kinds of vices, such as envy, ambition,
arrogance, greed, avarice, anger, and ill will.

58\) As it is said in the German proverb that sins grow up with the
years and that the longer one gets the angrier, the older one gets the
poorer (and are these all such gross and clumsy sins that one can easily
recognize and grasp them): what then shall we say of the inward sins,
that there grows in the heart unbelief, certainty, contempt of God\'s
word, false and godless delusions and thoughts 2c.?

\(59\) And yet they are thought to be excellent theologians, and want to
be, who sophistically diminish original sin. But it is true that so many
and so great sins and vices cannot be spoken of so lightly, for it is
not a minor disease or affliction, but the very highest disorder and
naughtiness, which the rest of the creature, except the devils, does not
have.

\(60\) But have they who make original sin base a testimony of the
Scriptures, on which they can defy it? Here let us look at Moses; he
does not say here, as I also indicated above in chapter 6, that
fornication, tyranny or other sins are evil, but he says that the
reasoning of the human heart is evil, that is, all skill, wisdom, human
reason with all its faculty, which reason uses when it wants to be and
act best. For though we do not condemn domestic and political works, we
do not condemn them.

**576 L.ii, SM-2W. Interpretation of Genesis 8:21. W.i,s7o-s7s. 577**

The same good works, however, are used by the human heart for its own
glory, self-interest or tyranny, either against the neighbor or against
God.

\(61\) Thus, one cannot paint this text with such a color that one would
want to say that the people who perished in the Flood were like this;
rather, God says in general that the human heart is like this. Thus
there were no other people at that time but those who were preserved in
the box, and yet God says that the mind of man is evil.

62 Therefore no one is excluded here, not even the saints. For what this
evil thinking is, is shown afterwards in the third son Ham; so the other
brothers were also nothing better by nature; but this is the only
difference, that the others keep the hope of forgiveness of sins through
faith in the promised seed, and do not follow the evil thinking of their
heart, but resist it through the Holy Spirit, who is then given to fight
against this wickedness and naughtiness of nature and to overcome it.
Therefore, because Ham follows after this nature, he is completely evil
and becomes completely lost. But because Shem and Japheth fight against
it in the spirit, they are not so evil, though they are evil; for they
have the Holy Spirit to fight against the wickedness, and therefore are
holy.

Furthermore, it seems here as if God could be accused of being unstable.
For when he wants to punish man above, he shows the cause of his counsel
and will, and says that the reasoning of the human heart is evil: but
here, when he wants to promise man mercy, so that he will not use such
anger against him henceforth, he refers to the very same cause.
Therefore this seems to a wise man to be a foolish action and not to
rhyme with divine wisdom at all.

But I like to avoid such a high thing and let the idle spirits worry
about it. Therefore, I will gladly be content with the fact that this is
said here according to how we are minded and can understand it, namely,
that God herewith wants to indicate that he has already

be reconciled and not be angry any more. For this is what parents do:
when they have punished the disobedient children according to their
merit, they then give them good words again and reconcile them, so to
speak. And such inconstancy is not only not to be punished, but also
praiseworthy; for it serves for the children, that they do not
therefore, because they are afraid of the rod, also become hostile to
the parents. I am content with this solution, because it encourages us
to believe. Whoever knows something better, may also present it.

Therefore, this text should be diligently remembered, because it clearly
shows that man\'s nature is corrupt. For such knowledge of the corrupt
nature is especially necessary and cannot be rightly understood without
the grace and mercy of God. And for this reason the sophists are worthy
of being enemies. So we also justly complain about the one who
translated this text and gave cause for such error by translating that
the thoughts or thoughts of the human heart are not evil, but inclined
to evil. For from this the sophists take cause; they falsify the sayings
of Paul, in which he says that we are all children of wrath, Eph. 2, 3,
that we all sin, Rom. 5, 12, and are under sin, Rom. 3, 9. For this is
how they conclude from this text: Moses does not say that nature is
evil, but inclined to evil. This inclination or inclination is in the
power of free will and does not force or, as they say, coerce man to
evil.

Then they seek cause and proof for this opinion and say that in man,
even after the fall, the will is good and reason is right; for the
natural powers have remained intact not only in man, but also in the
devil; and finally they direct to this opinion the saying of Aristotle:
Reason strives for the best. Thus one finds a trace of such thoughts
also in the Fathers, who, from the 4th Psalm, where the prophet says v.
7: \"Lord, raise above us the light of your countenance,\" make a
distinction between the higher part of reason, which reflects on God,
and the lower part, which is concerned with external and worldly
affairs.

**[578 D. II. 26S-S70. Interpretation of Genesis 8, 21. W. 1, 873-87.\"
579]{.underline}**

bypasses. And Augustine also feels like making such a difference, as I
said above, when I discussed the fall of man.

But if a little of God\'s knowledge had remained unchanged and whole in
man, we would be much different people than we are now. Therefore, the
blindness of the sophists is exceedingly great, who forge such clear
sayings of St. Paul. For if they would think about this saying, as it is
in the Latin Bible, and consider it with a Christian heart, they would
truly stop applauding such an evil thing. For he who says that the
senses and thoughts of the human heart are inclined to evil from youth,
says neither a bad thing nor a small thing, especially because Moses
said in the 6th chapter (v. 5.) that all the thoughts and aspirations of
the heart are only evil forever, that is, they are busy with evil and
all the intentions, thoughts, aspirations and aspirations of the heart
are directed toward evil; just as an adulterer who burns with
fornication feels no less evil desire and stimulation and can strive for
nothing else with his thoughts, even if he lacks opportunity, person,
time and space. Thus, says Moses, nature is always directed toward evil.
How then can the natural powers be intact, if man is always inclined and
directed to evil?

68 If, therefore, the sophists were as favorable to the holy doctrine
revealed in the writings of the prophets and apostles as they are to
their teachers, who pretend to free will and the merit of good works,
they would certainly not have allowed themselves to be led away from the
truth for so little cause, namely, for the sake of a little word, and
conclude and pretend against the Scriptures that the natural powers are
perfect, and that man by his nature is not under wrath and condemnation.
Yet it is evident from them that they have also seen and understood such
an unskilful thing. For although they pretend that the natural powers
are intact, they say that grace must be added to them, which makes
pleasant, that is, they have taught that God is not satisfied with such
natural piety or perfection of man.

It is not possible to let it be, because it was determined and ennobled
by love.

\(69\) But what need is there to argue any longer against its nonsense,
since we know that the Hebrew text does not say that the mind or thought
of the human heart is inclined to evil, but that the mind of the human
heart is evil from youth?

70\. But Moses calls reason, as I have said above, with the will and
understanding as it is, even though it thinks about God, and also
practices the most honest works, whether in housekeeping or policing.
For it is always contrary to God\'s law, is in sin, is under God\'s
wrath, and cannot by its own powers be delivered from this affliction;
as Christ says John 8:36: \"If the Son makes you free, you are free.\"

If you want to describe man correctly, take the definition and
description from this text and say that a man is a rational being,
endowed with reason, and has a heart that writes poetry. But what does
it seal? Moses answers: It writes evil, namely against God or God\'s
commandment and the people. Thus the holy scripture gives people a
reason that is not idle, but is always writing something. This same
writing, however, is called evil and godless; on the other hand, the
philosophers call it good, the sophists call it intact and perfect
natural powers.

\(72\) Let this text be diligently remembered, and against the
blasphemers, the sophists, let it be well set forth, that Moses saith
that the imagination of the human heart is evil. For it clearly follows
that if it is evil, the natural powers are not perfect or intact, but
insane and corrupt. For God did not create man evil, but completely
pure, healthy, holy, who knows God, with right reason and good will
toward God.

Since there is clear evidence that man is evil and turned away from God,
who would be so foolish as to say that the natural powers in man have
remained intact? For that is just as much as saying that the nature of
man is

**[580 D- n. 270-272. Interpretation of Genesis 8:21. W. I, S7S-S78.
581]{.underline}**

still intact and good, since we learn from so many examples and
experience in ourselves that it is highly corrupt.

\(74\) From this vile and ungodly saying have come many other dangerous
sayings, some of which are also obviously false and ungodly. For
example, they say that if a man does as much as is in him, God will give
his grace without fail. With this teaching they have awakened the
people, as if with an army drum, to prayer, fasting, mortification,
pilgrimages and the like. For this is what the world was persuaded to
do: if people did as much as they could by nature, they would deserve
mercy, si non de condigno, tamen de congruo, that is, even if God did
not owe them eternal life, he would still have to be merciful and kind
to them. For they called meritum congrui a good work that was not done
against but according to God\'s law. For a wicked man does not deserve
reward for his evil works, but punishment. But they called meritum
condigni not a mere good work, but one that a man does when he has come
into grace with God and God must reward him by right for his good works
with heaven and eternal life.

\(75\) Like this is also the saying of Scotus, that man can love God
above all things by the ability of his mere natural powers alone. For
the reason and summa of this saying is that the natural powers are
intact. And so he concludes: \"A young man loves a maiden who is a
creature; he loves her so fiercely that he puts himself and his life in
danger for her. So a merchant loves money and goods so diligently and
fiercely that he subjects himself to innumerable dangers of death for
the sole purpose of gaining something. Therefore, if one loves creatures
so great, which are far below God, how much more can a man love God, who
is the highest good! Therefore, one can love God even with mere natural
powers.

This is a beautiful consequence, and even a Franciscan monk cannot know
or do it better. For it indicates that such a great Doctor is still

does not know what it is to love God. For nature is so corrupt that it
no longer knows God unless it is enlightened by the Word and the Holy
Spirit. How can it love God without the Holy Spirit? For it is true, as
it is said: What one does not know, one does not love or desire.
Therefore, nature cannot love God whom it does not know, but it loves
the idol and the dreams of its heart. Moreover, it is so entangled and
caught up in the love of creatures that even though it has already
recognized God from the Word, it still does not respect His Word and
despises it, as we see in people now and in our times.

Therefore, such clumsy and blasphemous sayings are a certain sign that
scholastic theology is completely transformed into a philosophy that has
no true knowledge; but because it does not know the Word, it also knows
nothing of God and is in darkness. For just as Aristotle and Cicero, who
are the highest in this way, teach much about virtue and praise it
greatly because of its civil purpose, that is, because they see that it
is of great use in the domestic and worldly regiment, but of God they
teach nothing, that one should mean his will or commandment more than
one\'s own or the common good (for those who do not have the Word know
nothing about such a will of God): Thus the scholastics have been caught
up in philosophical dreams alone and have made them their own, but have
retained neither knowledge of God nor of themselves; that is why they
have fallen into such terrible errors.

78 And certainly the fall is easy and soon, if one has gone away from
the word. For the splendor and appearance of outward political virtue
pleases and pleases people exceedingly well: as Erasmus makes Socrates
almost a perfect Christian; and Augustine praises Marcus Attilius
Negulus beyond measure because he kept faith even with his enemies. For
truth is the most beautiful of all virtues, and is praised most highly
in this person because he also showed love for his fatherland.

**[582 L. II, S7r-S7\". Interpretation of I Moses 8, 21. W. 1, 878-881.
583]{.underline}**

which is also a special virtue and is to be praised greatly.

79 For one finds many excellent people who do not have such praise of
truth: as indeed Themistocles did not have it, although he was a heroic
man and also very useful to his country and served it much. That is why
Augustine admires Regulus; for he sees that reason and right will are in
the highest degree in the man, that is, as high and great as they can be
in this nature. What then is lacking, or what is evil in this? The work
in itself can truly not be punished.

Answer: First, there is no knowledge of God in Regulus. And even if he
does right, a theologian can still punish the reason why he does it. For
under this nobility of serving and helping his fatherland, there is also
ambition and the desire for fame, so that he may despise his life in
such a way that he may thereby have eternal fame and honor among his
descendants. If one wants to look at the outward appearance and
appearance, then it is a glorious, praiseworthy and beautiful work; but
before God it is a shameful idolatry, because he attributes the honor of
this work to himself; and who wants to doubt that there were not also
other vices in this ambition? Therefore Attilius cannot prove this
highest virtue of truth, love and service against his fatherland
otherwise than in full and senseless lust for evil. For that he robs God
of his honor and ascribes it to himself is evil and wicked: but that it
is called God stolen and robbed, reason cannot see.

Therefore, the virtues of the pagans should be distinguished from the
virtues of the Christians. It is true that in both parts God moves and
drives the hearts to goodness; but such divine movements are corrupted
in pagan men of virtue by the craving for fame and ambition. Now, if an
eloquent man were to emphasize the active cause here, but pass over and
conceal the evil or final cause, he could truly give the matter a good
shape and greatly adorn and decorate this miserable froth and shadow of
virtue, especially if he were to speak of the

The actual essence and purpose of the action is not taken into account.

But a dialectician can easily see that it is a false and colored thing.
For he sees that causa formalis (i.e. the cause that gives the action
its value) is missing. For where God is not recognized, there is also no
righteous will against God. Thus he also sees that the final cause is
bad and evil; for there the end, toward which every good work should be
directed, is not rightly considered, namely obedience to God and love
for one\'s neighbor. But what kind of virtue is this that lacks all
other motives except the natural one, which is only suffering, in that
the heart is moved and driven to believe the enemy? For, as I have said,
even the wicked have such impulses, and they are virtues if they are
done for the benefit and service of the fatherland; but if they are done
for its harm and hindrance, they are vices, as Aristotle teaches.

I say this so that those who are in charge of theology may take careful
note of this text, because it says so clearly and so baldly that nature
is corrupt. For it seems to us that what appears and is regarded as
virtue in the pagans is hardly a shadow and dead image of it, as if it
were a contradiction, namely, that in nature something has remained
unchanged and perfect. Therefore, one must diligently see to it that
these things are properly distinguished.

The reason Moses adds \"from youth\" is that wickedness is hidden in
youth and, as it were, sleeps. For the same time of youth, reason and
the will are asleep, and we have only animal and unreasonable desires
and stimulations, which pass away like sleep. For when we have scarcely
passed the age of five, we seek idleness, play, lewdness, and all manner
of pleasure: but discipline we flee, obedience we cast from us, and are
hostile to all virtue, especially to those most noble and highest, truth
and justice. For at this time reason awakens, as it were, from a deep
sleep, and stands up some pleasure, but still

**[584 L. II, 274-278. Interpretation of Genesis 8:21. W. I. SA-Wt.
585]{.underline}**

not the right pleasure; also sees some vices, but they are not yet the
highest, to which she gains pleasure.

But when reason has grown up, as it were, and some vices have come to
some strength, there is also fornication and the shameful burning of the
flesh, gluttony, gambling, quarreling, brawling and fighting, murder,
theft and all kinds of sins. And just as the parents needed a rod, so
the authorities must have bonds and prisons to ward off the evil nature.

But who does not see what vices are found and displayed when one has
grown up and reached manhood? Because there fall over a heap to:
Avarice, greed, pride, infidelity, envy 2c. And the same vices are all
the more harmful, as much as this age is more cunning to cover and adorn
such vices. Therefore, it is not enough for the authorities to have the
sword, but they must have hellish fire to punish so many and such great
sins. That is why it is said in chapter 6, v. 5, that the heart of man,
or the thoughts of man, are evil forever, or every day and at all times;
and here it is said that they are \"evil from their youth.

Although the Latin translation uses a mild word, it says enough, because
it says that man\'s heart is inclined to evil; as Terentius says that
the nature of all men is not inclined to work, but to laziness and vice.
But those who want to use this word to diminish original sin with it,
the experience of all men reproves them, but of the heathen and the
ungodly much more. For if spiritual people, who have divine help from
above, can hardly ward off their sins and keep them in check, what can a
man do without such help? And if divine help fights and struggles
against the prison of the law of sins, Rom. 7:22, 23, what folly is it
to dream that the natural powers are intact and perfect without God\'s
help?

Therefore reason in itself does not point and drive to the good, so also
the

The will does not know for itself what is right, as the blind philosophy
disputes, which does not know where these horrible temptations to sin
come from in boys, young fellows, and old people; therefore it excuses
them, and calls them only hastiness or affects and passions, does not
call them malice, which is in nature.

\(89\) After this, it calls the same stimuli in great men, who moderate
and govern them, virtues; but in others, who let their lusts run riot
and indulge in them, it calls the same vices, which really means not
knowing that nature is evil. But the holy scripture agrees with
experience and says that the heart of man is evil from his youth. For
experience teaches and shows that even the saints can hardly keep
themselves and often fall into gross sins, precipitated by such
wickedness of nature.

90 The word neurim means the age when man first begins to use reason,
which is almost the sixth year. Just as neurim means young men and boys
who serve their parents and teachers until they reach manhood. But it is
good that we all remember the same age of youth, and consider how gladly
we have obeyed parents and teachers, and how diligent we have been in
learning; or how patient we have been when parents have punished us for
our courage. For who is there among us who has not preferred to go for a
walk, to play, to engage in idle chatter, rather than to go to church at
the command of parents?

91\. But though such a thing may be changed by discipline, or may be
resisted to some extent, yet it cannot be entirely torn out of the
heart, as it proves to be when we are grown up. For this old verse is
true: He who is an angel in youth becomes a devil in old age. God does
indeed drive some to natural good movements, but the same happens
through nature: as that Cyrus is driven to restore the services and
preserve the church. But this does not come from nature. For where God
is with His Holy Spirit, there is no longer the poetry of the

**[586 L. II. 276-278. interpretation of Genesis 8:21, 22. w. i.
884-887. 587]{.underline}**

human heart, but the mind of God, for God dwells there through the Word
and the Holy Spirit. Moses does not speak of such here, but only of men
apart from the Holy Spirit, who are evil even where they are best.

**And I will no more smite all that liveth, as I have done.**

He speaks here clearly of the general smiting, as happened through the
Flood. But it does not follow from this that he also wants to refrain
from a partial smiting and to remain silent about everyone\'s sin. So
the last day also has its exception, in which not only everything that
lives there will be struck, but also the whole creature will be
destroyed by fire.

V. 22: **As long as the earth stands, seed and harvest, frost and heat,
summer and winter, day and night shall not cease.**

From this text, the Jews divide the year into six parts and count two
moons to each part, as Lyra also indicates here in this text. But
methinks that Moses speaks simply of the promise that one should not
fear a general Flood from now on. For at the time of the flood there was
such confusion that there was neither sowing time nor harvest, and in
such darkness of rain and clouds one could not well distinguish day and
night; for we see that when dark clouds go up in the sky, it also
becomes dark on the earth. But how much darker it must have been, since
one saw in the water, as in a mirror, the darkness of the clouds
everywhere!

94Therefore this is the simple opinion that God promised Noah here that
it should come to pass again that the earth in its

The first thing is that the land will be used as it was, that the
devastation of the sinlstulh will cease, and that the land will be sown
again; that the rows will go in their order, and that the harvest will
follow the seed, and the summer will be followed by winter, and the heat
by cold, according to due order.

95 And this text is also to be remembered against the common delusion of
the signs that are to come before the last day. For they make eclipses,
not knowing for how many days; they also fantasize that a whole seven
years before no woman will bear children anymore 2c. But here the text
says: \"It shall not cease day or night, summer or winter.\" Therefore
the natural changes will remain and will never be darkened by an eclipse
a whole day absolutely.

The fact that he also adds, \"As long as the earth stands,\" is not in
vain. Because with it he wants to indicate that these days of the earth
will once end and will follow days of the sky. As long as the days of
the earth stand, the earth will also stand and these changes of the
times will remain. But when the days of the earth shall cease, all
things shall also cease, and the days of heaven shall follow, that is,
the eternal days, which shall be one Sabbath after another, Isa. 66:23,
in which we shall not be permitted to do bodily work or to prepare food,
for we shall be as the angels of God, Marc. 12:25. But our life shall
be: To know God, to delight in God\'s wisdom and to see God Himself
before our eyes. This life we attain through faith in Christ, in which
the eternal Father, through the merit of His Son and our Savior Jesus
Christ, with the help and assistance of the Holy Spirit, graciously
sustains us. Amen, Amen.

**[588 L. II, 278-sso. Interpretation of Genesis 9, I. 2. W. 1, 886-891.
589]{.underline}**

**The ninth chapter.**

**First part.**

**From the blessing, so that God blesses Noah and the whole human race
after the Flood.**

**I.**

**V. 1. And God blessed Noah and his sons, saying, Be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the earth.**

This was truly a necessary consolation after the entire human race,
except for eight souls that were preserved, had been destroyed by the
Flood. For here Noah recognized that he had a gracious God, because he
did not leave it at the first blessing, so that he had blessed the human
race in the creation of the world: but here he blessed Noah anew, so
that he would by no means have to doubt that he would again give him
children and increase his race. And this promise was all the more joyful
to him, because God had already clearly promised him that he would not
let such severe punishment pass over mankind from now on.

\(2\) So this chapter finally confirms the marriage state anew, since
God, by His word and commandment, gives man and woman together, and does
this so that the world may be filled with people. For since God was
angered by the sin of fornication before the Flood, it was now
necessary, for the sake of the horrible examples of wrath, to show that
God is not hostile to the proper union of man and woman, nor does he
condemn it, but wants the human race to be propagated by it.

3\. from this Noah had a certain proof and sign that God truly loved
man, wished him well, and had now put away all wrath, because He wants
man to be propagated by the union of male and female.

If he had not put up with this state, he could have raised it from
stones, Matth. 3, 9, as the poets fable about the Deucalion. Therefore
the marriage state is praised and glorified by this text, that not only
the house and world government flows from it, but also the church.

\(4\) That it is here objected that Noah was already at the age that he
was no longer able to beget children, as also the Scripture does not
remember that he subsequently begot children, therefore this promise was
in vain: to this I answer that this promise did not happen to Noah
alone, but also to his children, item, to the whole human generation;
and nevertheless this hope of the generation also belongs to the
grandfather Noah.

\(5\) So this text also belongs to us, that we learn from it and take it
for granted that children are a gift of God and come only from God\'s
blessing; as also the 127th Psalm v. 3 indicates. The pagans, who are
uninstructed in the Word of God, believe that the increase of the human
race happens partly by nature and partly by chance, especially because
people often do not have children, who are considered most convenient
for this purpose. Therefore, they do not thank God for the gift, nor do
they accept the children as God\'s gifts.

**II.**

**V. 2: Let your fear and dread be upon all the beasts of the earth,
upon all the fowls of the air, and upon every creeping thing that moveth
upon the earth; and let every fish of the sea be delivered into your
hand.**

These are words by which the dominion of man is increased, and it seems
as if it were said for the abundance of comfort. For although after
creation all animals were subjected to man, yet the

**[590 D.H, WV-2S2. interpretation of Genesis 9:2. \' W. I, M1-8W.
591]{.underline}**

we do not read that the animals were so afraid of man and fled, as Moses
indicates here. But the reason for this is that up to now the animals
have not been ordered to death and food for man, but man has only been
like a civil lord over the animals and not their strangler or eater.

But here they are subjected to man as a tyrant, who has full power to
kill them or to let them live. Because a heavier servitude is imposed on
them, but a greater and more serious dominion is granted to man, the
animals must be more afraid and terrified of man. As we can see, even
the tame animals are not easily taken; for they feel man\'s serious
dominion and their danger goes to their hearts by nature, which did not
happen before this command of the Lord, as I believe it to be. For
hitherto they have used the animals only for work, for which they have
served, and for sacrifices, not for food or nourishment. And this
strengthening or increase of dominion also belongs to the fact that God,
as by a special privilege which the patriarchs did not have, shows that
he is favorable and good to man.

8 Therefore, one should not consider this benefit, by which man is given
the rule over the animals, as insignificant. For it is a special gift of
God, which the heathen, who do not have God\'s word, do not know, and we
enjoy this gift most of all. For when such a command was spoken to Noah,
and this right was given to him, there was no need of it. For then few
people had the whole earth, so they had fruits of the earth
superfluously enough, and there was no need to add the flesh of animals
to it. But now we could not feed on the fruits of the earth alone, if we
had not been granted this great blessing, that we might eat the flesh of
animals, birds and fish.

009 Therefore this word ordereth the meat-bank, and putteth on the spit
rabbits, and fowls, and geese, and adorneth and filleth the table with
all manner of dishes. And necessity makes people witty and skillful, so
that they do not eat alone.

hunt the wild animals, but also raise other cattle in the Hans with
diligent care, which they use for food. God therefore makes himself a
butcher in this place, as it were, for he slaughters and strangles the
animals that serve as food by his word. So that he repays the great
sorrow, which the pious Noah had in the flood, and rewards it with rich
comfort; because therefore he intends to take care of him the better.

\(10\) Therefore, we should not consider it as if it happened
accidentally, as the pagans think and consider that it was the custom to
slaughter cattle for and for; but it is ordered, or rather permitted, by
God\'s word. For without sin, no animal could have been strangled if God
had not clearly permitted it in His Word. Therefore, it is a great
liberty that a man may freely and with impunity strangle all kinds of
animals that are useful for food and can be eaten. And if only one kind
of animal were ordained for such use, it would still be a great boon.
How much greater a gift it is that all animals that are useful for food
are generally allowed to man!

\(11\) The wicked and the heathen understand not these things; neither
do the philosophers know them. For they hold that this custom has been
at all times. But we should truly value and magnify such things, to make
our consciences secure and free over this use of creatures, created and
permitted by God, namely, that there is no law forbidding to eat them.
Therefore, there can be no sin in its use, as the shameful popes have
blasphemed the church in these things as well.

\(12\) With these words man\'s dominion is increased and the
unreasonable animals are subjected to man\'s service until death.
Therefore they fear and flee from man for the sake of this new and
previously uncommon order in the world. For Adam it would have been an
abomination to strangle a little bird for food. But now that the Word is
added, we understand that it is a

**[592 2. n, 282-28\". Interpretation of Genesis 9, 2. 3. W. 1,
89:3-896. 593]{.underline}**

The special blessing of God is that God has thus fed and ordered the
kitchen with all kinds of meat. He will also order the cellar after
that, when he will show man how he should plant and build wine.

Therefore, these are certain and excellent testimonies that God is no
longer hostile to man, but favorable. And this history provides us with
examples in both parts, that just as God\'s wrath is unbearable when it
comes to pass, so is His grace and mercy, when it begins to shine again,
without measure or end. And God\'s goodness and mercy are more abundant
and abundant because they are of God\'s nature, since anger is actually
a work that is contrary to God\'s nature and that he does against his
nature when man\'s wickedness causes him to do it.

**V. 3 Everything that moves and lives, that is your food; like the
green herb I have given you all of it.**

14 There is a question here. Earlier (Cap. 7, 2.) Moses indicated the
difference between the clean and unclean animals; here, however, he
speaks of all animals without distinction and in general. Did God also
permit the unclean animals to be eaten by man? For that he says:
\"Everything that moves and lives on earth\" is said in general. Now
there are those who believe that the people of Noah\'s time used all
kinds of animals, both clean and unclean, for food. But I understand it
differently. For since the distinction between clean and unclean animals
has been made above and is diligently repeated in the Law, I believe
that, as far as food is concerned, man alone used clean animals, that
is, those that were sacrificed.

\(15\) That therefore these words, spoken generally, may be understood
with distinction, \"Every living thing that moveth,\" that is, among
clean animals, \"shall be your meat. For nature is afraid of snakes,
wolves, ravens, mice, and rats, although some peoples have used them for
food and enjoyed them. Therefore, the terror and fear of man goes over
all the animals on earth, so that they

a man may kill. But from this it does not follow that he eats from all.
And it can be seen as if Noah also used only the pure ones, which, as he
knew, could be sacrificed alone.

\(16\) Here, however, something else occurs that makes us think more,
namely, how terror and fear of man can go over all animals, because
wolves, lions, bears, wild pigs, tigers eat men and men are frightened
of them: just as we flee from all snakes as soon as we have seen them.
What shall we say to this? Is God\'s word untrue? Answer: Even if we
flee from such animals for the sake of danger and are terrified of them,
it is still true that the fear of man remains above them. For when even
the wildest animals first see a man, they are frightened by him and
flee. But when they are finally angered, they overcome because of the
strength of their bodies.

\(17\) But why are they frightened, one might say, since they are
stronger? Answer: They know that man is gifted with reason, which
overpowers all animals. For even elephants, lions and tigers can be
tamed by man\'s skill. Therefore, what man cannot accomplish with his
strength, he accomplishes with the art, strength and agility of reason.
For how else would it be possible for a child of ten years to herd and
govern whole herds of cattle, or to steer a horse, which is a
particularly brave and strong animal, wherever it wanted to go, and to
force it sometimes to run and sometimes to tread slowly? All this can be
done by human skill and not by strength. Therefore, these are clear
enough signs that the fear of man remains in the animals, whether they
do harm to man when they are irritated and enraged, and therefore are
feared by man again.

\(18\) And I doubt not that in the days of Noah, and of the fathers
after him, the terror of the beasts was greater, because righteousness
had gone forth, and sins were fewer. Since the

**[594 L. 11. 284-286. Interpretation of I Moses 9, 3. 4. W. 1, 896-899.
595]{.underline}**

Since the holiness of life and piety fell, and sins increased, this
blessing also departed, and the animals almost began to be the
punishment of sins; as Moses in the 5th book Cap. 32, 24, God threatens
to send the teeth of the beasts among them. And how has been such a
cruel plague in the wilderness of the fiery serpents half, 4 Mos. 21, 6!
In the 2nd book of Kings in 2 Cap. V. 24, it says that bears tore apart
the boys who mocked the prophet Elisha. Why did not the fear of man
remain in the animals? Why did they rage so against man? Was not sin one
of the causes?

\(19\) As I also said above that new punishments are found when new sins
increase; as in our time there are unusual diseases and plagues, such as
the sweat addiction and similar new plagues. In 1542 locusts did great
damage in the countryside in Poland and Silesia 2c.

20 Thus God has promised seed time and harvest, heat and frost, and yet
He thus decrees our sins, that in lines the seed and harvest are
disturbed and spoiled by uncomfortable weather; as in the year 1540
there was a great drought, and for the next two years after that there
was almost uninterrupted rain. Because of this, the world is now the
worst, what wonder is it that blessings are taken away from us, and in
their place come curses and calamities, that the animals that should be
terrified of us men if we were pious, now frighten and harm us?

021 The land of the Sodomites was in times past as a paradise, but
because of sin it is become a lake of sulfur. And they that have seen
the same place say that there grow the most beautiful apples; but when
they are cut open, they are full of ashes and a foul stench within. The
cause is that they have not recognized the gifts and blessings of God,
but have misused them according to their will and pleasure. To this end,
puffed up by such blessings and goods, they have blasphemed God, and

persecuted his saints. Therefore the blessing has been taken away from
them, and everything has become full of cursing. This is the correct
answer and resolution of this question, that although there are some
signs of terror before man in the wild animals, we are rather afraid of
them and they harm us.

\(22\) I have no doubt that in this land around Wittenberg the very
worst people lived in ancient times. For where else would the sandy and
barren soil have come from? And the names of the towns and villages
indicate that Jews have lived here. For where wicked men dwell, there
also the earth corrupts in time by God\'s malediction.

In Bruges, in Flanders, there was a famous port in the past, but since
the time when they held King Maximilian prisoner, the sea has receded,
so that there is no longer a port. The same is now said of Venice. And
it is no great wonder that, in addition to the innumerable sins of the
great and mighty cities, there is also the protection and defense of
idolatry and the persecution of the Gospel.

**V. 4. Eat not the flesh alone, which yet liveth in his blood.**

\(24\) What we have heard so far has been a purely domestic matter. Now
here the Lord gives a commandment concerning the police and the common
law. For since it should be as little a sin to slaughter an ox or a
sheep for food as it would be to break off a flower or a herb in the
field, one had to be concerned that men would abuse such freedom, which
God had granted them over the animals, and would also take advantage to
shed men\'s blood. Therefore, God gives a new law that one should not
shed the blood of men, and also restricts the freedom from eating flesh,
for he does not want one to eat flesh unless he has first been cleansed
of the blood.

\(25\) But this text is very obscure in Hebrew: therefore the teachers
also had many thoughts, which are superfluous to relate here. For this
rule

**[596 L. II, 2SV-\^8S. Interpretation of Genesis 9, 4. 5. W. I,
S9S-90S. 597]{.underline}**

I am absolutely convinced that in the holy scriptures the words should
serve the things and not the things the words. Therefore, I do not
dispute the judgment and discretion of those who interpret the words
according to their affects and want them to serve the thoughts so that
they can read the Scriptures.

Therefore, let us first look at the grammar. Nephesh actually means a
life

animal, as there are oxen, sheep, men 2c. For it means not only
something corporeal, but something that has body and life; as when
Christ says John 10:15, \"I lay down my life for my sheep,\" by which he
means nothing other than the bodily or natural life. But bazaar is
called flesh, which is a piece of a gross element, and yet has its life
and pulse, not of the body, but of the soul. For flesh, or the body in
itself without the soul, is nothing but a block or stone; but when it is
animated and moved by the soul, the moisture and all that is in the
animal is moved.

Now here the Lord forbids that one should not eat such a body, which
still has a living soul that moves and stirs, as the pond eats the
chicks, the wolf the sheep, not slaughtered, but alive. God forbids
cruelty here, and thus restricts the freedom to strangle, so that it
should not be done unreasonably, as animals strangle one another, since
one eats the bodies or their limbs alive: but that the slaughter should
be done as it is done in sacrifices before the altar, since an animal
was slaughtered without cruelty, and was sacrificed to the Lord, when it
was well washed off from the blood. This, I think, is the simple and
right opinion, which is also followed by some \"from the masters of the
Jews, namely, that we should not eat raw meat, with the limbs still
wriggling; as it is fabled of the monstrous blasphemers and Cyclopes
that they eat living animals and men.

**V. 5 For I will also avenge the blood of your body, and will avenge it
on all animals; and I will avenge the life of man on every man that is
his brother.**

The Hebrew text is darker here than in the previous pieces; and here
Lyra sets the mind of the rabbis according to many kinds of murder; for
he divides this saying into two parts, and interprets each in two ways.
The first part of this saying he applies to those who empty themselves.
And if this opinion is true, then immortality is confirmed here in this
text. For how could God take care of him who was dead and nothing more?
Therefore, the punishments of sins after this life are meant here. But
against this opinion, methinks, is the grammar. For although I do not
consider myself a perfect Hebrew, yet it seems to me that the words do
not give such an understanding and opinion.

The second death is when people are thrown to wild animals, as was done
in theaters in the past, but these were cruel and inhumane spectacles.
The third, when someone strangles someone who has been ordered and
prepared by someone else. The fourth, when a close friend is strangled
by another 2c. I would not like this division at all if it could be
proven from the text. But it is a Jewish poem, which came from the fact
that the Jews were hostile to the Roman laws.

\(30\) Therefore this opinion is more simple, if you understand this
text to mean that it generally forbids all kinds of murder and death;
just as the fifth commandment also says, \"Thou shalt not kill. For God
does not want you to strangle an animal, \'except for sacrifice, or for
the benefit and use of men. Much less does he want a man to be put to
death, unless it is by divine commandment or order.

First, it is forbidden to kill wantonly and inhumanely. For discipline
means that one should not, out of carelessness and without cause,
strangle the animals one wants, nor eat their flesh raw and uncleaned.
After this he forbids that one man should not kill another, in whatever
way he pleases. For if God requires the blood from the hand of the beast
that slays a man, he shall not require it.

**[598 \". n. 2M-2N1. Interpretation of I Genesis 9:5. 6. W. I. S0S-90S.
599]{.underline}**

how much more seriously will he demand it from the hand of man?
Intestine\" this text belongs to the fifth commandment that no one
should shed human blood.

**Second part.**

**From the law about the death beaters; from the covenant of God with
Noah and from the rainbow.**

**I.**

**V. 6: Whoever spills the blood of man, his blood shall also be spilled
by man.**

The Latin interpreter has omitted the necessary word baadam, \"by men,\"
out of negligence, which is not to be praised in him. For it indicates
the difference of the time before the Flood and after. For Cain had
slain his brother Abel before, but at that time God had threatened
sevenfold punishment for the honor of human blood to the one who would
slay Cain again. Therefore he did not want that a man who had been slain
should be slain again in a judicial way. And although Adam severely
punished the sin of his death by putting him under ban, he was not
allowed to put him to death again.

But here the Lord ordains a new law, and wills that the slayers of men
shall be slain again, which until now had not been customary in the
world. For God Himself had reserved all judgment for Himself. Because he
saw that the world was getting worse day by day, he finally punished the
ungodly world with the Flood. But here he also shares his power with
man, to whom he gives power over life and death among men, but so that
one would be guilty of shed blood. For whoever does not have the right
to kill a man and kills him nevertheless, God subjects him not only to
his judgment, but also to the sword of man. Therefore, when he is
killed, it is rightly said that he is punished and killed by God, even
though he is killed by the sword of man. For if

If it were without this commandment of God, it would be just as little
right to strangle a murderer as it was not right before the Flood.

34 Therefore, this is the origin from which all worldly rights flow. For
as God gives man power over life and death, so He also gives him power
over that which is less than these: Goods, house and farm, wife,
children and servants, fields 2c. God wants all these things to be under
the control of some people, so that the wrongdoers may be punished.

\(35\) For this is the difference between God\'s power and man\'s power:
God has power and authority to kill us, even though the world cannot
accuse us of anything, but we are innocent before it. For the sin that
is born with us makes us all guilty before God. But men have no power to
kill until we are guilty before the world and the sin is certain. For
this reason, courts of law have been established and proper judicial
processes have been determined, so that the crime must be investigated
and proven before the verdict is passed on the life.

\(36\) Therefore, this text should be diligently noted, in which God
established and ordained the authorities not only to judge life, but
also lesser things than life, such as that the authorities should punish
the disobedience of children, theft, adultery, false swearing, and, in
sum, all the sins forbidden in the other tablet. For he who allows the
judgment of life also allows the judgment of other things, which are
less than and beneath life.

37 Therefore, this is a glorious text, and worthy of note, that God has
ordered the authorities and given them the sword in their hands, so that
they should resist the will to anger, lest cruelty and other sins take
over too much. And if God had not given and commanded this divine power
to man, dear, what kind of life would we lead? Because God saw that
there would be much unhappiness and unpleasantness in the world at all
times, He has given this external means.

**[600 2. II, 2SI-SW. Interpretation of Genesis 9:6, 7. W. I, 906-908.
601]{.underline}**

The world had not yet had such an order, so that wickedness would not
multiply beyond all measure. And has thus, as it were, circumscribed our
life and property and kept them with walls.

38 And this is no less a proof of God\'s supreme love for man that he
promises him that he will stop with the flood and no longer destroy
everything with it, and allows him to eat flesh to preserve this life.

**Dem GOtt hat den Menschen zu seinem Bild gemacht.**

39 This is a great reason why he does not want a man to be strangled
wantonly, namely, that he is the most noble creature, not made like
other animals, but in the image of God. Although man has lost this image
through sin, as indicated above, it can be regained through the Word and
the Holy Spirit. God wants this image to be honored by one person to
another, and does not want us to be tyrannical among ourselves and shed
blood. But whoever does not want to honor this image in man, nor shun
it, but wants to follow his wrath and pain or irritation, as the most
shameful counselors, as someone calls them, God hands his life over to
the authorities, and says that his blood should be shed again.

40 And so this text establishes and orders a police force in the world
that did not exist before the Flood, as Cain\'s and Lamech\'s examples
show, who were not killed again, since the holy fathers were judges over
such public acts. But here God commands that those who have the sword
should use it against those who have shed blood.

41 And so here also the argument is dissolved, with which Plato and all
wise men were concerned. For they conclude that a regiment cannot be run
without injustice: the reason is that men are of equal status and
dignity among themselves. For why is the emperor a ruler of the world?
Why are others obedient to him, since he is both a ruler and a ruler?

He is a man who is better and stronger than other men, and who can die
as soon as another man? for he is everywhere like other men. Therefore
it seems to be a tyranny that he, while he is equal to other men, is
subject to the rule over other men; for if he is equal to other men, he
exercises the highest power and injustice, that he does not want to be
like other men, but prefers himself to others with tyranny.

Reason therefore concludes and finds nothing else that is contrary to
it. But we, who have the word, see that God\'s commandment is contrary
to it, who thus orders and establishes it. Therefore, it behooves us to
submit to the divine order and tolerate it, so that this sin is not
added to other sins, so that we disobey God\'s will in this matter,
which, as we can see and understand for ourselves, serves and benefits
our lives in so many ways.

43 Thus this text permits the slaughter of animals in a spiritual and
secular way, that is, for sacrifices and daily needs. But it forbids the
strangling of man altogether, for man was created in God\'s image.
Whoever does not obey this will of God, God hands him over to the
authorities to be killed again.

**V. 7 Be fruitful and multiply, and be active on the earth, so that you
may become many.**

44 Because God has permitted the slaughter of cattle and animals, not
only for sacrifice, but also for human consumption, but has forbidden
the killing of humans, here is the reason why God so seriously forbids
the killing of humans and is hostile to it, namely, because He wants
humans to multiply on earth. Death strikes, however, make the earth
desolate and lonely, as we see happening in wars. So because God did not
create the earth in vain, but that it might be inhabited, as Isaiah Cap.
45, 18, and therefore makes it fertile with rain and sun, He is
therefore hostile to those who take away those who are to dwell on it;
for His

**[602 L. II, 293-295. interpretation of Genesis 9:7-16. W. 1, 908-911.
603]{.underline}**

Will and desire is life and not death, Ps. 30, 6.

\(45\) Such and such sayings are taken from such promises as this, that
God commands man to multiply. For by this he clearly indicates that he
is more inclined to make alive and to do good than to anger and to kill.
For why else would he so earnestly forbid the striking of death? And why
else should pestilences be so rare? For a common pestilence or death of
the land hardly occurs once in ten years. But people are born every day,
so animals multiply daily and countless fruits grow.

46 All this testifies that God does not love death, but life, just as He
created man for this purpose in the beginning. But death came into the
world through the devil\'s envy, Wis. 2, 24. 2, 24. And yet, even after
sin, the rest of the blessing is preserved in such a way that we can
clearly conclude from God\'s will toward us that He loves life more than
death. And it is good that such thoughts should be much used, for with
them we will surely, as Solomon says, Proverbs 18:22, draw pleasure from
the Lord.

**II.**

**V. 8-11. And God said to Noah and to his sons with him, \"Behold, I
establish a covenant with you, and with your seed after you, and with
every living creature that is with you, of birds, and of cattle, and of
all the beasts of the earth with you, of all that are gone out of the
casket, of whatsoever beasts they be upon the earth. And establish my
covenant with you, that henceforth all flesh shall no more be destroyed
with the waters of the flood, neither shall there any more come a flood
to destroy the earth.**

\(47\) What is the reason why Moses is so rich and of many words in this
description, I have said above several times. For the Holy Spirit does
not make many words in vain. He who therefore considers in what great
trembling, fear, sorrow and danger Noah stood with his own.

He will easily be able to recognize that the highest necessity required
that God so often repeats and imagines the same speech.

\(48\) Since the covenant of which he speaks here does not concern man
alone, but includes all living creatures, it must be understood not of
the promise of the seed, but of this bodily or natural life, which the
unreasoning animals have in addition to us, that God will no longer
destroy it with the flood.

**V. 12-16. And God said, This is the sign of the covenant which I have
made between me and you, and every living creature among you for ever: I
have set my bow in the clouds, and it shall be the sign of the covenant
between me and the earth. And when it comes that I will lead will over
the earth, then my bow shall be seen in the clouds. Then I will remember
my covenant between me and you and all living creatures in all flesh, so
that there will no longer be a flood to destroy all flesh. Therefore my
bow shall be in the clouds, that I may behold it, and remember the
everlasting covenant between God and every living creature in all flesh
that is upon the earth.**

\(49\) This word, \"forevermore,\" should be diligently remembered; for
it comprehends not only men and animals that have been, but all the
descendants who will be until the end of the world. And this text also
teaches us how God always uses a sign for his promises; as I also
indicated above in the 3rd chapter of the skirts made of skins, which he
had put on the bare human beings, Adam and Eve, as a sign that he wanted
to handle, protect and preserve them.

50 And is not the allegory or secret interpretation that some make here
uncomfortable: that as the skin of a dead sheep warms the body, so
Christ, after he has died, warms us also with his spirit and will raise
us up on the last day and make us alive. Some say that he put the skins
on them as a sign that they were mortal. But this is to them

**[604 \> L. n, M5-297. interpretation of I Genesis 9, 12-16. W. 1,
911-414. 605]{.underline}**

not so necessary, because without it our whole life admonishes and warns
us that we are mortal; but this was more necessary to them, that they
might have a sign of life, by which they might learn God\'s favor and
blessing. For this is actually the sign\'s nature, that it comforts, not
that it frightens. And on this opinion, God also created the sign of the
rainbow and attached it to His promise.

\(51\) For this reason God speaks to Himself above (Cap. 8, 21, 22.)
that such a terrible punishment grieves Him, and promises that He will
no longer allow such punishment to take place, because the thinking of
the human heart is evil from youth, and if He wanted to punish the evil
always, He would have to have a new Flood every day: so He promises here
by a word, which is either spoken by an angel, or (as is possible) by
the mouth of Noah to man: \"There shall no more Flood come upon the
earth. The fact that the same thing is repeated so often is a sign of a
special love for man, to whom he wanted to persuade that he should no
longer worry about such punishment, but should be provided with
blessings and all kinds of kindness to him.

Noah and his people were in great need of such comfort. For a man
humbled by God cannot forget his suffering and pain. For the punishment
clings much more firmly than the good deed; as we also see in children
when they are punished with the rod: although the mother then gives good
words and applies all kinds of reconciliation, the suffering is still so
deep in their hearts that they often have to sigh and sob long
afterwards. How much more difficult is consolation for a conscience that
has experienced God\'s wrath and the terror of death, which then sticks
so firmly and deeply in the heart that it still trembles and fears even
in the face of consolation and good deeds!

Therefore, God shows His goodwill here in many ways, pours out His mercy
with special joy, like a mother who gives the angry child so many good
words and jokes sweetly with it, until it finally forgets to cry and
must laugh at her again.

This is a real rhetorical and rich consolation, so variously expressed
according to the need of the poor people who had seen the terrible and
unspeakable wrath of God for a whole year. Therefore, the great fear and
terror could not have been put out of their minds with one or two words,
but many words had to be spoken before they could forget the weeping and
sorrow. For though they were holy, yet they were also flesh, as we are.

55 And we need such comfort now, so that in many a storm and trial we do
not doubt that the windows of heaven and the fountains of the deep are
closed by God\'s word. For this is why the rainbow is still seen, so
that it may be a sure sign that there will no longer be a common flood.
Therefore, this promise demands such faith from us that we believe that
God has had mercy on the human race and will no longer allow a general
flood to pass over us.

**III.**

\(56\) Further, it is disputed here whether there are natural causes in
the rainbow that signify this? and what the philosophers dispute about
this is known, especially Aristotle On the Meteors, about the color of
the rainbow, and the nature of the cloud by which it is produced, and
about its curvature. And they do not make a clumsy likeness of the
mirror in which the face or image is refracted, as the rays of the sun
paint themselves and make an arc when they fall into a watery and hollow
cloud. For in such things reason sees what is most like truth, although
it cannot see truth everywhere, nor recognize it, for this does not
belong to the creature but to the Creator. All my life I have believed
no book less than this \"On the Meteors,\" because it is based on this
reason, as if everything in nature happens from natural causes.

57\. from the rainbow it is certain (as-

**[606 L. II, 227-M. Interpretation of Genesis 9:12-16, W. 1:914-SI7.
607]{.underline}**

They say that it means three days of rain, which I also admit), that it
means that there will be no more flood. And yet it does not mean this
from a natural cause, but only from God\'s word, that God has decreed it
so and determined it by his word. For just as circumcision was a sign
that the same people were God\'s people, who did not show circumcision
for themselves, but only by God\'s word, which was done for them; and
just as the skirts of skins signified life and preservation, not that
they could do the same by nature, but because God had promised it so: so
the rainbow in the clouds signifies that there shall be no more flood,
not from a natural cause, but because of God\'s word.

\(58\) What are natural thoughts and speculations about this, I do not
despise either, but because they are not certain and consistent proofs,
I do not trust them much. And the causes that Aristotle indicates of a
watery and hollow cloud are not certain. For such clouds may well be, if
no rainbow is formed; just as the rainbow may become larger or smaller
from the medium, depending on whether it is thick or thin. Thus I have
seen a rainbow here in Wittenberg, which was quite round and closed into
each other, not cut off on the plane of the earth, as it usually
appears. How is it then that rainbows are seen differently and
differently? Here a philosopher, who considers it a disgrace that he
should not know how to indicate the causes of all things, may well
devise something: but he will not pretend it to me, nor persuade me to
believe that he is speaking the truth.

\(59\) The only, constant and most certain proof is that the same fire
signs in the air, or impressions, as they are called, are all the works
of God, or of the devil. As I have no doubt that the leaping lights,
flying dragons, spears and the like are works of the evil spirits, who
play together in the air in such a way that they either frighten or
deceive people. The

Pagans have taken the flames of fire that one sees above the ships for
Castor and Pollux. So one sees at times a lunar image on horses above
the ears, which is certainly nothing else than the devil\'s mockery in
the air. Although Aristotle considers it to be inflamed air, he also
disputes that the comet is a vapor that ignites in the air.

But it seems much safer and more certain to me that we speak of such
things a priori, that is, according to the first order of God, namely,
that when God wills, a comet burns for a sign of terror; just as the
rainbow shines in the sky when it wills, for a sign of grace. For who
can grasp all the causes or understand how it happens that the rainbow
appears with such beautifully mixed colors and as a complete semicircle?
which really does not come from the position of the clouds. That is why
the arch stands there out of God\'s will and promise, for the assurance
of men and animals at the same time, that there shall be no Flood at any
time.

61 And such signs should remind us that we should be grateful to God.
For as often as the rainbow is seen, it preaches to the whole world
about the wrath in which God destroyed the whole world through the
Flood, and comforts us that we should henceforth believe that God is
good and merciful to us and will henceforth no longer use such terrible
punishment. Thus he teaches at the same time the fear of God and faith,
which are the highest virtues, of which philosophy knows nothing and
only disputes de materiali et formali causa, that is, from what he
becomes and what he is in himself. But causam finalem, that is, why and
for what purpose God let see such a beautiful creature in the sky, it
does not know, but theology shows it.

\(62\) So here they also dispute whether the rainbow was also before the
Flood. And they are very serious here. For since it is written above
(Cap. 2, 2. 3.) that God created heaven and earth in six days and then
rested from all his works on the seventh day, they conclude that the
rainbow was there from the beginning.

**[608- II. 299-\^01. interpretation of I Genesis 9:12-16. w. 1.
917-920. 609]{.underline}**

otherwise it would follow that God had created something new outside
these six days. But this had happened in Noah\'s time, that God had
taken the rainbow, which had been created from the beginning, and had
made it a special sign by a new word, after it had been before but had
meant nothing. In support of this opinion they used the saying of
Solomon, Ecclesiastes 1:9: \"There is nothing new under the sun\";
therefore they say that after the six days no creature was created anew.

But it seems to me that the contradiction is true, namely, that the
rainbow never existed before and was created here for the very first
time; just as the skirts of skins, with which God clothed Adam and Eve,
were not created in the six days, but were made after the fall of Adam
and Eve. That is why they were new creatures. For the fact that the
Scripture says that God rested is not to be understood as meaning that
He created nothing more after that; for Christ John 5:17 says: \"My
Father works until now, and I also work.\"

64\. Although theologians have struggled a lot over Solomon\'s saying:
\"There is nothing new under the sun\", it is easy for everyone to see
that he is not talking about God\'s works, but about original sin, that
the reason which was in Adam after the fall, the teaching and
disputations of morals, of vices, of virtue, of food, of government are
still all in man; as a poet also says in a saying: Nothing is ever said
that was not said before. For, in truth, there is nothing new in the
works and all the doings of men; but the very words, thoughts, doings,
affections, sorrows, loves, and all manner of cases, which were ever
before, are still. Therefore it is a foolish thing that one wants to
interpret this saying to God\'s work and creatures.

\(65\) Accordingly, I hold that the rainbow was a new creature, never
before seen in the world, so that the world would first be reminded of
the past wrath, which sign and footprint the rainbow indicates;
secondly, that it would also have comfort and reassurance from

of God\'s grace: for the rainbow is like a book or painted tablet,
wherein is displayed at once the past wrath and present grace.

66 There is also a dispute about the colors, which some make four: one
fiery, the other yellow, the third green, the fourth water blue. But I
believe that there are only two of them, namely, one is the color of
fire, the other the color of water; and the color of fire is uppermost
before the bow breaks back and makes a reflection under itself; for thus
the uppermost is reversed with the lowermost, as we see in the mirror.
But where the fire and water colors come together and are mixed into one
another, a yellow or pale color also breaks out.

But this kind of colors is ordered by God out of special counsel, so
that not only the water color should be a reminder of the past wrath,
but that also the fire color should hold up and foreshadow the future
judgment. The line that is blue or watercolor on the inside has its
place and measure, so that one can see how far it goes: but the line
that is blue or watercolor on the outside floats around and has no
measured or finished place. For the first world perished by the flood;
but the wrath had a measure, because something remained and was
preserved, out of which afterwards another world was made, which also
has an end. But when God destroys the world with fire, this bodily life
will not be restored, but the wicked will have to face an eternal
judgment of death in the fire, but the pious will be raised to a new and
eternal life, which will not be bodily, but spiritual, whether it will
be in a bodily form.

Therefore, let us remember this sign and learn to fear God and trust in
Him, so that just as we escaped the punishment of the flood, we may also
escape the punishment of the fire. Such thoughts about the rainbow are
far more useful and better than the philosophical disputations about how
or by what it is caused and made.

**[610 L.H.AN-SW. Interpretation of Genesis 9:12-16. W.i,s2o-W\".
611]{.underline}**

**Third part.**

**From the allegories.**

**I.**

69 Thus we have now completed the story of the Flood, which Moses
described sufficiently, as being a horrible example of an exuberant and
almost infinite wrath of God, which cannot be sufficiently exhausted by
any words. Now I must also say something about the secret
interpretation; although I have often testified that I do not have much
desire for allegories, which I loved so much when I was young that I
thought everything had to be interpreted in allegories: Origen and
Jerome, whom I admired as the highest theologians, gave me cause for
this; although Augustine also often uses allegories.

\(70\) But though I followed their example, I found at last, to my great
detriment, that I had followed a vain shadow and despised the sap and
right core of Scripture. That is why I have subsequently become hostile
to allegories. There is something pleasant and amusing about them,
especially when they are based on something lovely; that is why I tend
to compare them to fine paintings. But how much better the natural color
of a living body is than a painting, even if, as the poet says, it is
adorned with appellic colors and comes closest and most similar to
natural colors: so much better and more powerful is history in itself
than allegory.

In our time, the unlearned crowd of the Anabaptists hold fast to
allegories beyond all measure, no less than the monks: that is why they
are so fond of the dark books, as St. John\'s Revelation, and the
useless gibberish and poetry in the last two books of Ezra. For there
each one may invent what he wants. Thus we know that Muenzer, the
rebellious spirit, has also turned everything into allegories. But in
truth, he who without thought either writes allegories himself or
follows those invented by others, is not only deceived, but also damaged
to the highest degree, as the examples show.

Therefore, they should either be bypassed altogether, or they should be
handled with the utmost understanding and concern, and they should be
drawn from and guided by the rules used by the apostles, of which I will
speak hereafter, lest we, like the theologians and canonists, or rather
asimfles, fall into ugly and harmful absurdities, as the decrees of the
most detestable Pope Benedict testify.

\(73\) But this is to be understood in such a way that we nevertheless
do not reject all allegories in general. For we see that Christ himself
and the apostles also used allegories at times. But they are such that
they are according to faith; according to the rule of St. Paul, Rom.
12:7, where he exhorts and says that prophecy or doctrine should be
according to faith.

Furthermore, when I condemn allegories, I am speaking of those that
someone invents out of his own spirit and mind, without the foundation
of sacred Scripture. For the others, which are drawn from the analogy
and guide of faith, not only adorn and decorate the doctrine, but also
comfort the conscience.

75 Peter uses this history of the Flood in the most beautiful allegory
and interpretation when he says in 1 Epist. 3, 21. 22. that through the
flood is meant the baptism that makes us blessed. For thereby is not
washed away the filth of the flesh, but the conscience has a good
covenant with God through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is at
the right hand of God, swallowing up death that we might be heirs of
eternal life, and has ascended into heaven, and has subdued for himself
the angels and the mighty men and the powers 2c. This is actually a true
theological allegory, that is, one that is consistent with faith and
full of comfort.

76\. such is also this one, so Christ leads Joh. 3, 14. of the lifted up
serpent in the wilderness, of which were healed those who looked at it
and were bitten by the serpents. Item, this St. Paul 1 Cor. 10, 4.:
\"Our fathers all drank of the spiritual rock\" 2c. These are such
allegories, which not only come finely with the work, but also teach the
hearts of faith and are useful to the consciences.

**[612 L. ii, sos-s\". Interpretation of I Genesis 9:12-16. W.\'i,
ss\^-sn. 613]{.underline}**

77 But consider Jerome\'s, Origen\'s, and Augustine\'s allegories, the
more part: for these have no thoughts of faith when they make
allegories, but seek philosophical sayings for them, which serve neither
for good morals nor for faith; not to mention that they are foolish and
clumsy enough.

We have heard above of Augustine\'s allegory of the creation of man and
woman, which he directs to the upper and lower parts of man, that is, to
reason and inner stimuli or affects. But, dear, tell me, what is the
purpose of such a poem?

But the pope is praised as a godly and learned allegorical master, who
thus goes up in all heights: God made two great lights, the sun and the
moon. The sun is the papal majesty, from which the imperial majesty has
its light, as the moon from the sun. O impudence above all impudence! O
cursed ambition!

80 In this history, they also compare the ark of their church, in which
the pope is with his cardinals, bishops and prelates; but the laity swim
in the sea, that is, they are stuck in worldly business, and would not
be blessed if these regents of the ark or church did not reach out to
them or throw them boards and ropes so that they draw them into the
church. The laymen, however, are swimming in the sea, that is, stuck in
worldly business, and would not be blessed if these rulers of the ark or
church did not hold out their hands to them or throw them boards and
ropes to draw them into the church. For with such a painting the monks
have painted the church everywhere.

Origen is even purer than the popes, who generally draws his allegories
from external customs. But be that as it may, one should keep St.
Paul\'s rule, which commands that one should make the interpretation
according to faith; for this edifies and actually belongs to the church.
The pagan philosophers can also teach us about morals, even though they
know nothing about faith.

**II.**

Thus St. Paul says in the 1st Epistle to the Corinthians Cap. 10, 2.
that the Israelites under Moses were baptized with the cloud and with
the sea. If you were to look at the manner and words alone, then also
Pha

rao was baptized, but in such a way that he and all his people were
drowned and corrupted in the sea, but Israel passed through without harm
or injury; just as Noah and his sons were also preserved in this baptism
of the flood, but the rest of the world, which had been outside the box,
perished in this baptism of the flood. This is conveniently and
skillfully said. For in the Scriptures baptism and death are compared
and reversed with each other. Therefore Paul says Rom. 6, 3: \"All who
were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death.\" Item,
Christ Luc. 12, 50.: \"I must first be baptized with one baptism, and
how anxious I am until it is completed!\" And to His disciples He says
Matth. 20, 23.: \"With baptism, as I am baptized with, shall ye be
baptized.\"

According to this meaning, the Red Sea is actually baptism, that is, the
death and wrath of God, as can be seen in Pharaoh: and yet Israel, which
is baptized with such baptism, passes through without harm. Thus the
Flood is certainly the death and wrath of God, and yet in the midst of
it the faithful are preserved. Thus death devours the whole human race,
for God\'s wrath proceeds without distinction against the evil and the
good, the pious and the wicked. As the flood that Noah suffered was not
another thing, but the world suffered: so the Red Sea, in which Pharaoh
and the children of Israel went, was not two things, but One Sea. Then
the difference is found in that those who believe are preserved in this
very death, in which they stand beside the wicked, but the wicked
perish; as Noah is preserved because he has the box, that is, the
promise and word of God, in which he lives; but the wicked, who do not
believe the word, are left without help.

\(84\) This difference the Holy Spirit intended to show, so that the
pious may believe from this example and hope for salvation and
blessedness through God\'s mercy, even in the midst of death. For they
have baptism, which is connected with the promise of life, just as Noah
had the box. Now whether the death of a wise man and the death of a

**[614 ii, SM-3V8. Interpretation of I Genesis 9:12-16. W. i, 927-Wv.
615]{.underline}**

\"Fools; for Peter dies, Paul dies, not unlike the death of Nero and all
the ungodly: yet they believe that in death they shall be preserved unto
life eternal. And this hope is not in vain: for they have the Lord
Christ, who receiveth their spirit, and at the last day shall raise up
the bodies of them that believe unto everlasting life.

This allegory is of great use and comforts the heart, for it shows the
difference of the end. If you want to follow the eyes of the flesh,
Solomon\'s saying Ecclesiastes 2:16 is true, that as the wise die, so
dieth the fool, and that the righteous dieth as though God loved him
not. But here you must turn your mind\'s eye and notice the difference,
that Israel enters the Red Sea and is preserved; but over Pharaoh, when
he wants to go after Israel, the waters break and he perishes. Therefore
it is the same death that the pious and the wicked die. And the death of
the pious is indeed generally shameful, but the death of the wicked is
glorious and splendid; but in the sight of God the death of sinners is
the worst, but the death of the saints is precious and delicious; for it
is sanctified by Christ, through whom is the entrance into eternal life.

86 For as the flood and the Red Sea are as it were ministers that Noah
and Israel should be saved out of death, and be preserved in life: so
also our death is nothing else, but a cause of life, if we will continue
in the faith. For when the children of Israel are in their greatest
distress, the sea suddenly divides itself from one another and stands
there on the right and left side as a wall of brass, so that Israel can
pass through without danger or harm. But why does this happen? Precisely
because death had to serve life. For this is God\'s power and might, by
which Satan\'s attacks fail, as they did in paradise. Because there the
devil also dealt with it, that he would like to strangle the whole human
race with his poison. But what happens? Through this blessed guilt, as
the Church sings, it is arranged that God\'s Son comes down into our
flesh and redeems us from such great misery.

Thus this allegory finely teaches, comforts and strengthens that we fear
neither death nor sin, but despise all danger and give thanks to God,
that we are thus called and God thus acts with us, that even death,
which devours the whole world, must serve for our life; as the Flood, by
which the previous world was corrupted, was a cause that Noah was
preserved, and the Red Sea, which took away Pharaoh, must serve for the
preservation of the children of Israel.

This comfort should also be applied to other trials, so that we may
despise the danger and have hope, even if it seems as if there is no
hope left. So when death or other adversity befalls us, we should
encourage ourselves and say, \"Behold, there is your red sea, your
flood, your baptism, and your death; here is your life (as a philosopher
said of shipmen) scarcely a span away from death: but fear not, for this
peril is as a handful of water, whereas through the word you have a
flood of grace; therefore death will not choke you, but will be a help
and encouragement to life. 2c. For how can death harm a Christian, since
one cannot escape death by any other means than death? For the death of
the body is next to the redemption of the spirit and the resurrection of
the flesh; just as Noah in the flood was not carried by the earth, nor
by trees, nor by mountains, but by the flood, which killed all the other
men.

That is why the prophets praise these miraculous works of God so often,
such as the passage through the Red Sea, the exit from Egypt and the
like. For the sea, which by nature cannot do anything else but dampen
and destroy man, must stand still and protect man so that the waves of
water do not sweep over him. What therefore is by nature nothing else
but wrath becomes grace to the faithful, and what is nothing else but
death becomes life. What then is misery, of which this life is
innumerable, and thereby is inimical to our body and good, all this, if
you are in the box, must be given to you.

**[616 L. II, 308-310. interpretation of I Moses 9, 12-16. W. I,
S30-S33. 617]{.underline}**

If you believe and take hold of the promise of God made in Christ, you
will prosper to blessedness and joy,\' so that death, which takes you
away, must become your life, and hell, which devours you, must become
the way to heaven.

90 Therefore Peter says 1 Epist. 3, 21, that the water in baptism, which
is signified by the flood, also makes us blessed. For the water that we
are sprinkled with, or baptism, is death. And yet from this death or
baptism comes life for the sake of the box in which we will be saved,
that is, for the sake of the word of promise to which we are attached.
This allegory is shown to us by the canonical Scriptures, and is not
only safe and without danger, but also in every way useful that we
diligently consider it: for it shows us a glorious consolation even in
the last distresses.

\(91\) The fathers also devised another allegory for this one, based on
the shape and proportion of the chest. For a man\'s body is six times
longer from the crown to the soles than it is wide. The width of the box
was fifty cubits, but the height was six times greater, namely, three
hundred cubits. Therefore they say that the box means the Lord Christ,
on whom all promises hang. Whoever therefore believes in him will be
saved, John 3:16, and will remain alive even in the flood, that is, in
death.

These are not clumsy or unpleasant thoughts, and what I like best in
them is that they are in accordance with faith. Therefore, even though
something may be wrong in the application, the reason is certain and
firm. And there is no doubt that the Holy Spirit has painted the
promises, which are to be fulfilled through Christ, in various ways, and
has presented a wonderful way to make the whole human race blessed
through faith in Christ. Therefore, such allegories, even if they are
not so accurate and true, are neither ungodly nor annoying.

\(93\) Therefore, if one who said that the sun is Christ, and the moon
is the church, which is enlightened by the grace of Christ, should err,
it would be such a one.

Error, which would stand on no erroneous, but certain and solid ground.
But if the pope says that the sun signifies his papal highness, but the
moon signifies the emperor, then not only is the application foolish and
ludicrous, but the reason is also harmful and ungodly. Therefore, such
allegories are not thought up and invented by the Holy Spirit, but by
the lying spirit, the devil.

For this reason, allegories should be drawn to the promises of God and
the doctrine of faith, so that they comfort and strengthen the heart, as
St. Peter\'s example teaches us. Because he sees that Noah is saved in
the midst of death, and that the ark is a testimony and help to life, it
is rightly pointed to Christ. For it must be a divine power that
sustains in the midst of death and leads to life; just as the Scriptures
call God a Lord \"who saves from death,\" Psalm 68:21, and creates that
death is a cause or help and encouragement to life.

95 From such a change has come this way of speaking in Scripture, in
which suffering, distress and danger are compared to a cup that makes
one drunk; which is actually a subtle, attenuating comparison. Just as
the suffering of the Lord Christ is called a drink from the brook, Psalm
110:7, as if someone wanted to say that it was a medicinal drink and
wormwood, which, even though it was bitter, made one healthy with its
bitterness and alive with its killing. But such mitigating comparisons
serve to comfort us, so that we learn to despise death and other dangers
and enter into them all the more joyfully.

Satan also has his cup, but it is sweet and makes one so drunk that he
must drink it again. For those who are too fond of it and drink it up
lose their life and die an eternal death. Such a cup was that which the
king of Babylon drank; as it is written in the prophet Jeremiah, Cap.
25, 15-27. Therefore, let us also receive our cup of salvation with
thanksgiving, as Paul says in Romans 5:3 that believers also glory in
their tribulation.

97 After we have shown this picture of the box and meaning of the Flood
from the Holy Scripture, we must

**[618 n n, 3IV-8IS. Interpretation of Genesis 9:12-16. W. 1, 933-S3S.
619]{.underline}**

The other pieces of this story are: the raven that did not come back,
and the doves, one of which came back because it had not yet found a
place to perch, the other one came back and brought an olive branch, and
the third one did not come back because the water on the ground had
dried up.

Now we have said above, when we told the story, that all this happened
to Noah and his sons for comfort, so that he would be sure that God\'s
wrath would have an end and that God would now be reconciled. For the
dove did not bring the olive branch by its own skill, but it was divine
power and a miraculous work; just as the serpent in Paradise did not
speak by its own skill, but by the inspiration of the devil, by whom it
was possessed. Therefore, just as there the serpent, moved and prompted
by the devil, spoke and man was led into sin, so here the dove did not
bring the olive branch out of its own skill or nature, but out of God\'s
prompting, so that Noah might draw some comfort from this most beautiful
sight. For the fruit of the olive tree is not the dove\'s food, but she
eats wheat, grain or peas.

Therefore, it is certain that this miraculous story must have a special
meaning, especially because the prophets often refer to the doves in
their prophecies of the kingdom of Christ, as Psalm 68:14 and Isaiah,
Cap. 60:8. Thus, we also see that Solomon takes special delight in the
name of the dove in his song. Therefore, one should not despise this
painting, which the allegory shows us, but act diligently and
righteously.

Now we know what kind of allegory the teachers of the raven wrote,
namely, because the ravens have a desire to eat, they meant that this
means the carnal people who have a desire for carnal pleasures and
indulge in the same, like the Epicureans. This is a valid opinion, but
it is not enough, for it is only a worldly and philosophical
interpretation, as Erasmus, for example, is wont to proceed according to
the example of Origen.

But we shall pursue the theological understanding. First of all, the
same moralists do not pay attention to the fact that the Scriptures give
this praise to the raven, that it did not fly out of the box by itself,
but was sent out by Noah as a messenger to investigate whether the
waters had ceased and God\'s wrath had come to an end. The raven,
however, does not come again, nor does it bring back such a good
message, for it remains outside the box; and even though it flies out
and comes back, it does not let itself be taken by Noah, but remains
outside the box.

102 All these things rhyme well with the office of the law. For even the
blackness of the hub is a sign of sadness, and his voice is unpleasant.
So all preachers of the law who teach righteousness are of works: for
they are ministers of death and sin, as Paul calls the office of the law
an \"office of death,\" 2 Cpr. 3:6, \"the law killeth,\" Rom. 7:10,
\"the law worketh wrath,\" Cap. 4, 15, \"through the law sin becomes
more powerful\", Cap. 5, 20.

103\. And yet Moses is sent by God with this teaching, just as Noah left
out the raven. For God wants people to be taught good morals and holy
living. He also wants the transgressors of the law to be told of God\'s
wrath and certain punishment. And yet, such teachers are nothing more
than ravens flying around the ark, bringing no certain sign that God has
been reconciled.

\(104\) For the law is such a doctrine that it cannot reassure, uplift,
or comfort the fearful conscience, but rather terrifies it, since it
does nothing but teach what God requires of us and what He wants us to
do. Our conscience, however, bears witness against us that we have not
only not kept God\'s will as revealed in the law, but have also done
what is contrary to it.

Therefore it may be said of such teachers of the law, as it is written
in Psalm 5:10: \"In their mouth is nothing certain\" (our translation
has: \"In their mouth is no truth\"). For when they teach in the most
perfect manner, they say, \"If thou

**[620 n\> 212-314. interpretation of I Moses 9, 12-16. W. I, 935-938.
621]{.underline}**

do this and that, and you will be saved. Therefore Christ answers the
scribe, who praised the law highly, also mockingly and says Luc. 10, 28:
\"Do this, and you will live\". For he shows him that it is a holy and
good doctrine. But because we are infirm, the guilt is ours, which we
neither keep nor are able to keep. Therefore we rightly say that we are
not justified by the works of the law, not only by ceremonies, but also
by the highest works, as the love of God and of our neighbor. The reason
is that we cannot do them.

\(106\) And we justly punish the insolence of our adversaries who blame
us, as if we forbid good works and condemn God\'s laws, when we teach
that one is not justified nor saved by works. But we would do this if we
did not know the raven that Noah let out of the box. But now we say that
the raven was let out of the box by Noah. But this we deny, that either
the raven is not, or since it is, it is nothing else but the dove.
Because on this lie our adversaries want to force us with all their
shouting, blaspheming and blaspheming, that we should make a dove out of
the raven.

107\. But now look at their books and diligently consider their
doctrine, and you will find that it is a doctrine of works alone. For
thus they say: This is fine, this is honest, do it; that is ugly and
vile, avoid it. And when they teach these things, they think they are
theologians and righteous teachers. But show where he is who either has
done all these things or will do them, especially if he is diligently
held up not only to the other table, as they do, but also to the first.

\(108\) He who therefore rests on this teaching of the law is really
nothing but an audience, and learns nothing but that he knows what he
should do. Therefore, it would be enough to give such people who do not
want to learn anything else only Cato and Aesop, whom I consider to be
better teachers of good manners and outward conduct, and the young boys
are therefore presented with both of them in a useful way. The adults
may learn the Cicero, and I wonder why in the teaching of good manners
and honorable conduct they are not taught.

Some people prefer to read Aristotle rather than Cicero. That would be a
sensible course of instruction. As far as the teaching and instruction
of outward manners is concerned, the diligence and skill of the pagans
cannot be blamed. But they are all under Moses, who teaches not only of
good manners, but also of worship. And yet it is true that he who is
based on Moses has nothing but the raven that flies about outside the
box, but of the dove and the oil leaf he has nothing.

This is a picture not only of the law given by God, but also of all
human reason and wisdom, all laws and all philosophy. For all of these
say no more than what one should do, but advise nothing about where one
should get it, so that one can do it. Therefore Christ\'s judgment Luc.
17:10 is right: \"When you have done everything you were commanded to
do, say, \'We are useless servants.

110 The raven is omitted, for God wants the law to be taught and reveals
it from heaven; indeed, he writes it into the hearts of all men, as Paul
proves in Romans 2:15. And from this natural knowledge all the books of
the philosophers have their origin, which before others were somewhat
purer and more reasonable than: Aesop, Aristotle, Plato, Xenophon,
Cicero, Cato. Therefore, they should be presented to the unintelligent
and the impudent, so that their erroneous stimuli and fragile nature may
be regulated and improved to some extent by this discipline.

111\. But if you ask of the conscience how it is to be satisfied, and of
the hope of eternal life, they are in truth like the raven that flies
here about the box, and finds not peace without, but seeks it not within
the box; as Paul saith of the Jews Rom. 9:31: \"Israel hath followed the
law of righteousness, and hath not passed the law of righteousness.\"
The cause is: the law is like the raven, is a ministry of death and
sins, and makes hypocrites.

Now, whoever wants to, may emphasize such an allegory more extensively,
and investigate what properties this bird has in itself.

**[622n , 814-317. interpretation of Genesis 9:12-16. W. 1, 938-941.
623]{.underline}**

It is an unclean animal, black and deadly in color, with a hard beak and
an unpleasant and terrible voice. It smells carrion even from a
distance, and that is why people shy away from its voice, as it means
death and corpses; it eats carrion and likes to be in such places, where
people kill evildoers.

And even though all this is not to be interpreted in terms of the law,
everyone can see that it rhymes very well with the papists, priests, and
monks, who not only fed on consciences that they killed through false
teaching, but also drew dead bodies for their nourishment, because they
used vigils, funerals, holy water at the graves, and even purgatory
itself to gain money. And this order and work served and benefited them
more with the dead than with the living. That is why they are real
ravens, which feed on dead aesir and sit above them with horrible
screaming and bawling. This rhymes very well with the papists and the
ravens. The whole papacy, where it is best, does nothing but torture and
kill consciences like an executioner. But it does not lead or bring
anyone to true righteousness, but only makes hypocrites, just as the law
does.

\(114\) In Ezekiel, chapter 13, v. 19, among other sins of false
prophets, this one is listed, that for the sake of a handful of barley
and a piece of bread, they choke the souls that do not die, and make
alive the souls that do not live. Such things actually belong to the
ravens or preachers of the law; for they make righteous those who live
by the law, but such are actually souls that do not live. Again, they
condemn those who do not want to keep the statutes of men; as the
Pharisees condemned the disciples for plucking up ears of corn, not
bathing, not fasting, Matth. 12, 1. 2. This is a terrible and deadly
voice, which the ravens that sit on the dead ases should remind us of.

When the Greeks wanted to curse something bad, they said in their
proverb: For the ravens; as also the Germans say in their proverb: That
the ravens eat you.

If we want to draw this curse on the allegory, it is truly a very evil
curse. For what can be more harmful than that one has such teachers who
kill when they teach in the best way, and bring the consciences into
such distress that they can never come out of it again? And if anyone
should say that this allegory of the raven, which we have thus applied
to the church office, is not really true, it is nevertheless true and
agrees with the reason, and is not only very convenient but also very
useful for teaching.

Now what Moses says about the dove is a very lovely picture of the
gospel, especially if you diligently pursue the qualities of the dove,
of which there are ten. The first is that it has no gall; the second,
that it does not bite; the third, that it does not scratch; the fourth,
that it eats nothing unclean; the fifth, that it feeds other birds\'
young; the sixth, that it does not sing, but sighs and whines; the
seventh, that it sits by waters; the eighth, that it flies in heaps; the
ninth, that it perches in places where it is safe; the tenth, that it
flies quickly. Which ten qualities are put into these rhymes:

> Peaceful and quiet is a dove, Without all anger and deceit.
>
> Her foot does not scratch, her beak does not sore, The purest grain
> her mouth reads.
>
> With her plumage she swings nimbly to fresh water.

Their little song and their best G\'sang

Is sigh\'n and Kirr\'n her life long.

Another boy\'s child,

> Not differently than with heaps fleugt. She makes her nest and hides
> there.

Since it is safe and untainted.

The New Testament Matth. 3, 16. testifies that the Holy Spirit appeared
in the form of a dove: therefore it is right that this allegory points
to the ministry of grace.

\(118\) Now Moses indicates that the dove did not fly around the box
like the raven, but flew out, and after it found no place to land, it
came back to the box and was taken back into the box by Noah.

119\) This dove is an image of the holy prophets, who are sent to guide
the people.

**[624 D n. 317-81S. Interpretation of I Genesis 9:13-16. W. 1, 941-944.
625]{.underline}**

But the Flood, that is, the time of the Law, had not yet passed. So
David, Elijah, Isaiah were sent out to bring the message of the end of
the Flood, even though they had not reached the time of grace or the New
Testament, and the Flood had not yet ended. Therefore, after the message
was delivered, they returned to the box, that is, they became righteous
and saved without the law, through faith in the given seed, in whom they
believed and for whom they waited.

120\) After this dove another one is let out, which finds that the earth
is dried up, and the waters are gone not only from the mountains, but
also from the trees. But this one sits alone on an olive tree, breaks a
branch of it and brings it to Noah.

This allegory also appears in the Scriptures and compares the oil in
many places with the grace or mercy or forgiveness of sins. The same
leads the dove in the mouth and is thereby signified the outward
preaching office or oral word. For the Holy Spirit does not teach by
means of new revelations and inpourings outside of the preaching
ministry, as the enthusiasts and Anabaptists, the senseless and foolish
teachers, would have us believe; but for this reason God makes it so
that the dove leads a green olive branch in its mouth to Noah, so that
we may understand from this that God in the New Testament, after the
time of the Flood or the wrath has ceased, wanted to show His grace and
mercy to the world through the oral word.

The servants of this word are doves, that is, simple, sincere people who
are without gall and full of the Holy Spirit. So Isaiah Cap. 60, 8. also
compares the ministers of the gospel or grace to doves flying to known
windows. And although Christ commands his disciples to be simple-minded
like doves, that is, to be sincere and without bitterness, he also
admonishes them to be prudent like serpents, that is, to be careful of
false and deceitful people, to be cautious; as

It is said that the snakes with special cunning and art perceive in the
fight of their head and hide the same.

123\) That the olive tree grows green rhymes with the word of the
gospel, which endures forever and is never without fruit; just as Psalm
1:3 compares the people who diligently follow and handle the word to a
tree whose leaves do not wither. We have not heard anything like this
from the raven flying around the box. Therefore, this dove, which is
omitted for another time, is a figure and image of the New Testament, in
which forgiveness of sin and grace are clearly promised through the
sacrifice of the Lord Christ. That is why the Holy Spirit wanted to
appear in the New Testament in the form of a dove.

124\. The third dove has not come again. For after the promise of the
gospel, which is proclaimed to the world through the mouth of the dove,
is fulfilled, there is nothing left to wait for, and no other new
teaching is awaited, but only the revelation of the things which we have
believed. Therefore, this also belongs to the fact that we have a
certain testimony that this teaching will last until the end of the
world.

125 Thus it is also clearly stated in the text about the time, that
Noah, after he had let out the first dove, still waited seven days;
which seven days are the time of the law, which had to go before the
time of the New Testament.

The text also reports about the other dove that it came back to the box
at vespers time and brought an olive branch in its mouth. For the last
time of the world is appointed for the gospel. Therefore, one should not
wait for any other teaching; as Christ compares the gospel to the
Lord\'s Supper, Matth. 22, 2. and Luc. 14, 16.

The doctrine of the Gospel was soon from the fall of the first parents
in the world, and God confirmed this promise to the fathers by many
signs. Before that nothing was known about the rainbow, nothing about
the circumcision, nor

**[626 L. n, s,!\>-ni. Interpretation of Genesis 9:12-16. 20-22. W.i,
stt-sis. 627]{.underline}**

of other things, which God has subsequently ordered. But of the Blessed
Seed it has been known at all times. Now that it has been revealed, we
have nothing else to look forward to, except that the things we believe
will be shown and revealed, and we will fly away with the third dove
into another life and never return to this wretched and miserable life.

These are my thoughts about this allegory, which I recently wanted to
indicate. For one should not deal with such things according to length
and as expansively as the histories and articles of faith.

Origen, Jerome, Augustine, and Bernard speak too much of allegories and
have this error, that because they deal with them too long, they reject
the hearts and chase them away from history and faith. Since allegories
are to be acted upon and carried out in such a way that the faith to
which the histories everywhere point is awakened, increased, explained
and strengthened. But those who do not want to seek faith in the
histories, it is not surprising that they have a desire for useless
allegories and like to deal with them a lot.

And as we see that in the papacy the hymns are very sweet, but the words
are commonly not only uncomfortable, but also ungodly and contrary to
Scripture: so the teachers have often falsified a good understanding of
Scripture, which serves faith, with clumsy allegories.

I have often said what theology was like when I first began to study
theology. \"The letter\", they said, \"kills\", 2 Cor. 3, 6. That is why
I was especially hostile to Lyra before all teachers, because he follows
the text so diligently and likes to stick to it. But now, for this
reason, I prefer him to all other interpreters of Scripture.

132 And I admonish everyone, in the most diligent way I can, that one
should diligently observe history and think about it well. But since at
times we also want to use allegories, we should do so in such a way that
they remain in accordance with the faith, that is, that we draw and
direct them to Christ, to the church, faith, and preaching ministry.

For so it shall come to pass, that though the allegories be not proper
enough, yet they shall not fail nor err from the faith. For this
foundation shall stand firm; but the stubble shall become void and
perish. Now we come again to the history.

**Fourth Part.**

**FromNoah and from his case.**

**I.**

V. 20, 21, 22: **And Noah began, and became a husbandman, and planted
vineyards. And when he had drunk the wine, he was drunken, and lay
uncovered in the tabernacle. When Ham Canaan\'s father saw his father\'s
shame, he told his two brothers outside.**

What kind of man Noah was in the flood is sufficiently shown by the same
history. But what kind of man he was before the flood, Moses indicated
with few words, since he said that he was justified and of divine
perfect conduct. Nothing else is said about such a great man, without
his wonderful and almost unbelievable chastity being indicated and
praised with dark words, with Moses writing that he had only begotten
children in the five hundredth year. And this indicates that at that
time the nature of man was much stronger and better, the Holy Spirit
also much stronger and richer in the holy men of the first world, than
it is now in us, who are the end of the world. And this is truly a great
glory of Noah, that Moses says he was righteous and of a perfect life
before God, that is, he was full of faith and the Holy Spirit, graced
and adorned with chastity and all good works, pure worship and religion,
who also suffered many temptations from the devil, from the world and
from himself, all of which he overcame. Such a man was Noah before the
flood.

134 Although Moses gives little indication of what he was after the
Flood, it is easy to think that he lived three hundred and fifty years
after the Flood.

**[628 L. II, 321-32L. Interpretation of Genesis 9:20-22. W. I. 948-sso.
629]{.underline}**

that such a man could not be idle, but will have had to do with the
regiment of the church, which he alone ordered and ruled.

135 Thus he first had the office of a bishop, and because he had tried
many temptations, he was especially concerned that he should set himself
against the devil, comfort the afflicted, restore the erring, reassure
the doubtful, restore the despondent, expel the impenitent from his
church, but receive the penitent again with a fatherly heart and joy.
For this is almost the office which a bishop is to perform through the
ministry of preaching.

After that, he also had his worldly business of appointing regiments and
ordering laws, without which the will of the people cannot be
controlled. In addition, there was also his household regiment and the
Hanseatic League.

**II.**

Now reason can recognize that Noah was burdened with so many and various
businesses after the Flood: and yet nothing is thought of Moses, but
Moses alone considered it necessary to show how he had begun to plant a
vineyard and had lain naked in his hut in drunkenness. And this is a
foolish and quite useless history, if you want to hold it against other
works that he has done through so many years. For other things could
have been more edifying and could have served to show how one should
conduct and arrange one\'s life properly, if they were told. This
history, however, has this appearance, as if it were a cause of trouble
and an applause to drunkards and those who fall into sin through
drunkenness.

We know from our teaching what the Holy Spirit\'s counsel and concern
are. For with this account of the astonishment and fall of the most holy
and perfect patriarchs, he wanted to comfort the pious who feel their
weakness and therefore become fainthearted.

The Holy Spirit had the right and theological reason why other great and
high works of Noah had to be left aside. This is the right and
theological reason why the Holy Spirit left other great and lofty works
of Noah undone and wanted to tell of this great fall of such a great
man.

But Lyra excuses Noah as if he had not known the strength and power of
the wine and had therefore been deceived after he had taken a little too
much of it. But I believe that it was the wine before, or was first
planted by Noah\'s skill through the infusion of the Holy Spirit, so
Noah knew well the nature and properties of this juice and often used
the wine before time with his own, both for his body and in sacrifices.
But since he once wanted to use wine for his refreshment, I believe that
he drank too much of it.

140 And this cannot excuse him at all. For he who wanted to do this
could put forward much greater and more respectable causes than Lyra
presents: namely, that Noah, as an old and well-aged man, and who had
now worn out his body and strength through many and daily business and
worries, would have let the wine, to which he was already accustomed,
creep up on him and overcome him. For worn-out and old people are more
easily overcome by wine than those who are still strong in body, young,
without worries and of free spirit; for they can take more of it without
any particular harm or weakening of their reason.

141 Those who therefore excuse the patriarch in this, willingly throw
away this consolation, which the Holy Spirit has considered necessary
for the church, namely, that even the highest saints stumble and fall at
times.

For although this case may be considered minor, it has caused a great
deal of trouble, which has angered not only Ham, but also his brothers
and perhaps even their wives. But now we should not take Ham for a boy,

**[630 L. II, \"23-32\". Interpretation of Genesis 9, 20-22. W. 1,
950-953. 631]{.underline}**

who was about seven years old; for he was born in the five hundredth
year of Noah, so he was at least a hundred years old, and has now had
several children of his own.

143 Therefore he did not laugh out of his father\'s childish frivolity,
as children do when they gather around a drunken man from the street,
stand around him, and make their play and amusement out of him. For he
was utterly and horribly offended by his father\'s fall and infirmity
and considered himself much holier, more righteous, more pious and more
godly than his father. So that it does not only seem as if it were an
annoyance, but it is here the right seriousness and righteous annoyance,
because Hain is so annoyed at his father\'s drunkenness that he also
judges him in it and has his pleasure and joy in such his sin.

For if we want to speak of this sin of Ham\'s rightly and actually, we
must look at the original sin, that is, we must look at the naughtiness
and wickedness of his heart. For he, as a son, would never have laughed
at his drunken father, if he had not first left out of his heart the
reverence, so that the children should behave towards their parents
according to God\'s commandment.

Just as Noah before the Flood was considered a fool by most of the
world, condemned as a heretic and despised as a foolish man, so here his
son ridicules him as a fool and condemns him as a sinner. And because at
the same time the church, worldly and household regiment had Noah alone
on its neck and had to order with many worries, trouble and work, it is
win doubt, he will have done much, at which his proud, splendid and
presumptuous son will have been annoyed. The son, however, did not let
himself notice such naughtiness of his heart, which now shows itself and
breaks out over the father\'s public sin.

146\) If one looks at this origin of all sins, namely the original sin,
and judges Ham\'s misdeed from it, then it becomes clear what an
abominable deed Ham did against his father.

has committed. For no one becomes an adulterer or a murderer unless he
has first put the fear of God out of his heart; just as a student does
not rebel against his teacher unless he has first put aside and thrown
away all the reverence that a student owes his teacher. Thus the 14th
Psalm, v.:2, says that God first looked down from heaven upon the
children of men to see if any were wise and asked after God. But since
he saw no one, he goes on to say that there was no one who did good, but
that they were inept and sinned with their mouths and with their fists,
and there they were afraid, since there was no reason to fear 2c.

\(147\) In the same way, Ham also considered himself wise and holy, and
regarded many things that his father did as evil or foolish in his mind.
This not only shows that Ham despised his father in his heart, but also
that he forgot and despised God\'s commandment. That the wicked and
ill-advised son lacks nothing more than that he should seek an
opportunity to bear witness and thereby reveal his father\'s sin and
foolishness. Therefore he does not laugh at his father as a child of a
drunkard usually laughs, nor does he call his brothers to a ridiculous
and entertaining spectacle, but rather deals with it so that everyone
should take this case as a clear testimony that God has abandoned his
father and accepted him instead. Therefore he carries out this sin of
his father and brings it with pleasure among others. For as I said
before, he was not a boy of seven years, but at least a hundred years
old.

This naughtiness actually comes from original sin, which makes people
presumptuous, proud and wise beyond measure; yet, as Paul admonishes in
Romans 12:3, one should think of himself moderately, according to the
measure that God has distributed to every believer. But original sin
does not allow Ham to remain within this measure; therefore he misses
and submits himself beyond his measure of judging his father. Just as we
see this also in Absalom. For before he started a rebellion against his
father.

[**632 6 ll. WS-W7. Interpretation of** Genesis 9:2V-22. **W.** 1,
9SS-9SS**. 633**]{.underline}

If he is displeased with his father, he judges his father\'s government
unreasonably. And this displeasure, that I call it, which he draws from
his father\'s government, is followed by public contempt, public outrage
and violence against his father, so that he intends to suppress him, 2
Sam. 15, 3. ff. Because Ham\'s heart is full of such poison, which he
sucked, as it were, like a spider from his father, as from a beautiful
rose, such fruit also follows from it.

These examples remind us of the battle that has been going on since the
beginning of the world between the church and Satan and his members,
namely the hypocrites and false brothers. Therefore, this action of Ham
should not be interpreted as a child\'s play, but as the most bitter
hatred and resentment of Satan, so that he may arm and provoke his
members against the true church, and especially against those who are in
the ministry of preaching, so that they pay close attention to every
opportunity to see if there is anything to blaspheme about them and
their ministry.

Thus we see that at the present time the papists have nothing else in
mind than that they, out of diligence and intention to blaspheme us,
take notice of our whole life and walk. Therefore, when at times we
provide something out of human frailty (as we are truly weak and feel
and suffer our distress and misery), they fall in with heaps like hungry
swine and roll in our filth, taking pleasure and amusement from it,
revealing our weakness according to the example of the accursed hammer.
For they actually have a righteous serious hunger and thirst for our
aggravations. And since they cannot accuse us of any adultery, nor
death, nor error, because of God, without what they do with lies (as
they, as an insolent bunch, do not shy away from any lie): so they pick
up other things, which they blow into the ears of the common rabble and
make a big fuss about.

151\) It is known of David that he was surrounded on all sides with
enemies and adversaries, who made a fuss against him on every occasion,
because they

They did not begrudge him the rule to which he had been appointed by
God. Therefore, when the terrible case of adultery happened to him, they
rejoiced and rejoiced.

This, however, is part of the teaching. For since God at times causes
even the pious and holy to err and to fall into such sins, which are
either real offences in themselves or have the appearance of such, we
should be careful not to follow the example of Ham and therefore judge
them soon. For Ham had long ago despised his father, but here he raises
his hand and does it publicly, taking it for granted that his father,
the old fool, had been completely abandoned by the Holy Spirit, since he
had not guarded himself against drunkenness: although he alone had the
church\'s regiment, police and housekeeping on his neck. But, O poor
Ham, how great a glory you have won here, who have now found what you
were looking for, namely a poison in the most beautiful and lovely rose.

For this reason God is praised and blessed forever, who guides his
saints wonderfully, Ps. 4, 4. For while he lets them be weak and fall,
and lets them be full of displeasure and anger, so that the world judges
them and condemns them, he forgives them such weakness and has mercy on
them, but again he leaves those who think they are angels to the devil
and rejects them completely. This, then, is the first benefit of this
history that the pious should take from it, namely, a necessary comfort
in their weakness and frailty, because they are afraid that even the
most holy people at times have fallen grossly and horribly out of the
same weakness and frailty.

Secondly, this history is also an example of divine terror and judgment,
so that we let Ham\'s danger be a warning to us, and do not refrain from
judging soon, if we see that a secular or spiritual authority, or even
the parents err and fall. For who knows why God does such things? And
although such cases are not to be defended or excused, we see that they
serve greatly to comfort the pious, because they testify and teach that
God has not abandoned His

**[634 \". u, SS7-SM. Interpretation of Genesis 9:20-22. W. i, sss-sss.
635]{.underline}**

Saints can credit their stumbling and falling, so that even if we are
hurried with sins, we may hope in God\'s mercy and not despair.

But such comfort and medicine of the pious is pure poison to the wicked.
For they do not seek and ask how God teaches and comforts; therefore
they are not worthy to see God\'s glory in His saints. For they look at
nothing else but this, by which they are vexed and entrapped, so that
they fall away and finally perish by themselves.

Therefore, let us cherish our ancestors and forefathers, and if they
should err and fall, let us not be offended by them, but let us remember
that they are human beings, and let us consider it that God deals with
His saints in a strange way, and wants the wicked to be offended by them
and to be embittered against them; as Moses threatens the Jews, Deut.
32:21, that God will anger them against a foolish people. For because
they would not listen to the prophets throughout the whole time of their
kingdom, God caused them such trouble that He rejected them, who wanted
to be a wise and holy people, who had the promises and were descendants
of the fathers and patriarchs, and chose in their place the filth and
the soup of the world, a foolish people and who were not God\'s people,
that is, without God\'s knowledge, fear of God and religion, without
worship, divine wisdom and word. This trouble made the Jews mad and
senseless.

157 The papists will suffer the same fate: they will be afflicted with
an affliction that can neither be advised nor helped, like Ham, who,
having abandoned honor and obedience to God and his father, and thinking
that he wants to be able to govern the church better, thereby also
secretly either ridiculing or condemning his father, now reveals that he
also shows and proves before others what disobedience, dishonor and
contempt he carries in his heart toward his father.

158\. this ungodly presumption and disobedience is followed by the other
two brothers, Shem.

and Japheth, but remain in the honor and fear of God and their father.
They do see the annoyance that the father is drunk and lies there on the
ground without any shame, like a child; they also understand how such a
vice is not at all appropriate and very bad for one who is commanded by
the church and worldly rule; But they do not allow themselves to be
deprived of the reverence that children owe a father, but overcome this
annoyance, also cover up and, as it were, gloss over this weakness of
their father by going backwards and covering the father\'s shame with a
garment. They would not have shown such outward and truly lovely honor
to their father if they had been inwardly rightly minded in their hearts
toward God and had considered their father to have been set up as a high
priest and king by divine power.

This is why Ham is held up to us as a terrible example, who was
preserved with so few in the Flood and now so completely forgets all
fear of God. And it is very good that one diligently thinks and
considers how he got into such a case. For outward sins, which are
committed with the body, must first take place in the heart; so that
before the sin comes into the work, the heart falls away from the word
and fear of God, does not know him or ask for him, as the 14th Psalm v.
2 says. If now the heart stands so that it does not respect the word,
and despises the servants and prophets of God, then ambition,
hopefulness, slander, hatred and resentment follow against those who
hinder and endure such a heart\'s lust and desire, until finally, after
scorn and shame, death and bloodshed follow.

160 Therefore, those who want to either govern the church or hold
secular offices should pay attention to this with all diligence and
therefore call upon God daily, so that they may remain in humility. For
in order that we may diligently take care of this, such histories should
cause and awaken us, 1 Cor. 10:6, 11, because we see by what cause and
occasion Ham has fallen into such a terrible case.

**[636 V. II, 329-331. interpretation of Genesis 9:20\--22. W. 1,
95S-SS2. 637]{.underline}**

And so, when we see the saints fall, we should not let anything bother
us, much less strut and rejoice over the weakness of others, as if we
were stronger, wiser, and holier; but rather help bear, cover, even
adorn, palliate, and excuse such cases and sins as much as we can, and
consider that if another suffers today, this may also befall us
tomorrow. For we are one mass and all born of one flesh. Therefore we
should rather learn the rule of St. Paul 1 Cor. 10, 12, that he who
stands there should see that he does not fall. For thus the other two
brethren looked upon their drunken father, and thought: Behold, our
father has been overtaken by a fall and infirmity; but God is marvelous
in His saints, whom He causes to fall at times for our consolation, that
when we are compassed about and overtaken by such infirmity and
weakness, we may not despair.

We should also follow this wisdom. For though others err and sin, we
have no power to judge them; they stand or fall, and so they stand and
fall before their Lord, Romans 14:4. But if someone\'s fall and error
displeases us (as indeed many cases and sins often do, which should not
and cannot be excused and defended), we should take all the more care
that such things do not happen to us; but out of hopefulness, contempt
and presumption we should not judge anyone. For this is actually a bad
habit and an affliction of original sin, that one should be prudent
beyond his measure and seek and obtain praise for righteousness out of
other people\'s sin and error.

So we are poor and weak sinners, and we gladly confess, as we are human
beings, that our life and walk is not always without trouble. But
because we have such frailty in common with our adversaries, we do what
our ministry demands of us. We plant and spread God\'s word, teach and
instruct the church, punish and correct what is sinful, exhort to
correction, comfort the weak, rebuke and punish the reprobate and the
impenitent, and what is of the

and others are more, so our office, laid upon us and commanded by God,
requires of us.

164\) On the other hand, our adversaries do this: First, they seek
nothing but hypocrisy, that they may be considered holy and respected;
then they strengthen and weigh down their common weakness with the
greatest sins in themselves, that they do not wait for their calling,
but care for and seek nothing but honor and riches; but they do not care
for the church, but let it fall apart miserably; they condemn the pure
righteous doctrine and teach idolatry. In sum, apart from their office,
they are wise; but as for their profession, they are the most
incomprehensible, which vice does the greatest harm to the church.

This is the first part of this history, which Moses alone wanted to
describe, although it is certain that Noah, as a just and pious man, was
graced and adorned with many high and excellent virtues and did great
things in the church and secular government at the same time. For a
police or secular regiment and church cannot be ordered without the very
highest skill, and in these two states (that I say nothing of the house
regiment) they often bear themselves to causes of much and great danger.
For the devil, who is a liar and a murderer, is a bitter enemy of these
two regiments, the church and the police.

Moses passes by all such glorious works and does not even touch them
with a word. This alone, how Noah became drunk and was mocked by his
youngest son, he tells as a special example, from which the pious should
learn to trust in the grace and mercy of God; but the hopeful, and those
who pretend great and special devotion, holiness and wisdom, should
learn from it to fear God and refrain from judging others. For God is
wonderful in His saints and terrible, as Manasseh the king says (Prayer
of Manasseh v. 5), \"over the wicked and sinners. As this example of Ham
indicates, who does not begin to despise the father only here over this
deed, but has such

**[638 L. II, 331-SA. Interpretation of Genesis 9:20-25. W. I. SW-964.
639]{.underline}**

He carried enmity and resentment against his father in his heart for a
long time, after which he also made the world full of idolatry.

(v.23-25) **Then Shem and Japheth took a garment, and put it on both
their shoulders, and went backward, and covered their father\'s shame;
and their faces were turned away, that they might not see their
father\'s shame. And when Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his
young son had done unto him, he said, Cursed be Canaan, and be a servant
of all the servants of his brethren.**

Here Moses tells in truth an excellent and noticeable example of
reverence for a father. For these two sons would not have sinned if they
had not gone backward and covered their father. For what great sin would
it be if one were to see a man lying naked and see what he did not want
to see? But these two sons do not do this; but when they hear from the
trustworthy brother, who laughs at his father, what has happened to his
father, they both take a garment over their shoulders and go backward
into the hut, letting the garment fall backward from them, and so cover
their father.

Who would not see here that in both of them there is such a heart that
looks to the will and word of God, and honors with all fear the fatherly
majesty and majesty, which God does not want the children to despise or
ridicule, but to honor? Therefore, God hereby indicates that He
considers such honor to be the most pleasing sacrifice, as well as the
highest service and obedience, but is furiously enraged against Ham and
becomes hostile to him, who, without sin, could have seen what he saw,
since he had come close to it, if only he had covered it up and
concealed it, and would not have let it be known that he had pleasure
and joy in it. But because he is a despiser of God, of His word, and of
the order instituted by God, he not only does not cover his father\'s
shame with his garment, but also makes a spectacle of him and leaves him
exposed.

So Moses shows in this description,

The two brothers\' actions toward their father indicate that there was
great malice in Ham and that he bore a devilish and very bitter hatred
and resentment toward his father. For who is there among us who would
not at least cover with his garment an unknown and strange man who was
drunk and lying naked, that disgrace might be prevented? But how much
more and cheaper should this be done to a father? But now we see that
Ham not only does not do such things, which human nature and reason
would have us do to a stranger, to his father, who at that time was a
lord and prince of the whole world, but also reveals such things with
joy, mocks and mocks his drunken father, and brings his infirmity before
his brothers as a happy newspaper.

For this reason, Moses presents this Ham as a terrible example to be
diligently held up in the church to the youth and to be imagined, so
that they may learn to honor the ancients, the authorities and parents.
For this history to be written and Ham, the despiser of God and his
father, to be painted in such hideous colors, was not done for the sake
of Noah or Ham, but for the sake of all of us and our descendants.

And it is especially diligently indicated what the reward of such
godless contempt was. For good old Noah, who was considered foolish and
unfunny by his son and thought to be an old man worthy of ridicule,
comes forth here in a true prophetic majesty and preaches to his sons
about a divine revelation of how things will be in the future. So that
what Paul says in 2 Cor. 12, 9 is true, that God\'s power is mighty in
the weak. For the fact that Noah speaks so confidently of things to come
is a strong indication that he was full of the Holy Spirit, when his son
had laughed him to scorn and despised him, as if he had been completely
abandoned by the Holy Spirit.

172 But I have recently shown how Noah\'s sons followed one another and
which was the firstborn and the youngest, so I will leave it at that.
For this is more useful and much more to note.

**[640n . WS- \^4. interpretation of I Genesis 9:23-26. W. i. s\"-sw.
641]{.underline}**

The Holy Spirit is so enraged against the disobedient son and despiser
that He will not call him by his right name, but calls him by the name
of his son Canaan. Some say that this is why it happened, because God
wanted to keep Ham as a blessed one in the company of the others, so
Noah did not want to curse him, but his son Canaan; but the curse of the
son hits the father, who deserved it with his contempt. Therefore the
name Ham perishes here, because the Holy Spirit becomes fiercely hostile
to him, which is truly a severe enmity; as also in the 139th Psalm v.
22. it is said: \"I hate them in right earnest.\" For when the Holy
Spirit begins to be angry and hostile, eternal death follows.

Although the Son of Ham sinned much more against his father, this sin
was evident and apparent before others, showing the fruit of original
sin and devilish naughtiness and wickedness, in that the drunken father
lay bare. And because with this sin the others, which he had done
against his father before, are now as it were decided and fulfilled, the
Holy Spirit curses and condemns him, and threatens him to the horror of
the others, that he shall be a servant forever.

**Fifth part.**

**Of the curse, pronounced on Ham, and of the blessing, pronounced on
Shem and Japheth.**

**I.**

V. 26. **And he said, Blessed be God, the Lord of Shem, and Canaan his
servant.**

These are two great and excellent prophecies, which should be considered
well, because they also belong to our time, although they are
masterfully falsified by the Jews. Because they see that Ham will be
cursed three times, they draw and interpret this to their people\'s
glory and make a promise of a bodily rule and worldly kingdom out of it;
although much is another cause, that

the curse is so often repeated, namely that God cannot forget such
disobedience and contempt of parents, nor let them go unpunished; for He
wants one to honor parents and authorities; He also wants one to show
due honor to the elderly; as He commands 3 Mos. 19, 32. that one should
stand up before a gray head, and of the servants of the church He says:
\"Whoever despises you despises Me\", Matth. 10, 40. Luc. 10, 16.

\(175\) Therefore, when children disobey their parents, it is a sure
sign that the curse and calamity are not far off; just as the contempt
of the ministry and the authorities is a sign and harbinger. For when in
the first world the patriarchs began to be laughed at and their
reputation despised, the flood followed; and when in the nation of Judah
the younger began to set himself against the old and to be proud, as
Isaiah 3:5 says, Jerusalem fell, and Judah lay in heaps. Wherever such
corrupt customs are rampant, you may certainly conclude and boldly say
that misfortune and disaster are not far away. That is why I am very
worried and afraid that Germany will be in a very bad way, because all
discipline and respectability is so corrupt and evil in it.

Here we should also note the rule that experience itself and the Holy
Scriptures indicate, namely, that because God pauses in punishment and
forgives it, he is ridiculed by the world and punished with lies. This
is the rule we are to put to all prophecies and attach to them as a
seal. So Ham hears that he will be cursed, but because he does not feel
the curse so soon, he despises it and is sure to be ridiculed.

Thus the first world laughed at Noah when he preached of the flood. For
if they could have believed that such a punishment existed and was near,
do you not think that they would certainly not have continued, but
rather would have reformed their lives and repented? And if Ham had
believed this to be true when he heard it from his father, he would have
taken recourse to mercy and asked for mercy and forgiveness for the sin
he had committed. But he does none of these, but rather divorces many
things.

**[642 n, 334-336. interpretation of Genesis 9, 26. W. I, 969-972.
643]{.underline}**

He preferred to leave his father out of great pride and pride of place,
and went to Babylon and built a city and a tower there with his family,
and rose to be lord over all Greater Asia.

But what is the cause of such certainty? None other than that the divine
prophecies alone can be believed and not so soon felt and experienced.
And this happens in both parts, namely in the promises that the
prophecies have in themselves, as well as in the threats. That is why
the flesh and reason always look at the contradiction; they consider it
to be true.

Thus Ham is cursed by his father, but nevertheless has under himself the
greatest part of the world and sets up great kingdoms Again Shem and
Japheth are blessed; but if you compare them with Ham, then they are
actually beggars compared to him with their lineage. How then can this
prophecy be true? Answer: These and other prophecies, all of them
promising or threatening, cannot be understood by reason, nor can they
be felt so soon, but are understood by faith alone. For God postpones
both the punishments and the rewards, therefore it is a matter of
waiting; for \"he who perseveres to the end will be saved\", as Christ
says Matth. 24, 13.

Without this, the whole life of the pious rests on faith and hope alone.
For if you want to conclude according to your own understanding, or
according to the works themselves and the examples of the world, you
will find the contradiction in all of them. For Ham is cursed and yet
remains lord alone; but Shem and Japheth are blessed and yet must bear
the curse alone and be afflicted in many ways. Because therefore God
promises and threatens at the same time according to the length, one
must wait in faith. For \"although the prophecy\", as Habakkuk Cap. 2,
3, \"will be forgiven, yet it will surely come and not be forgiven.\"

181 Therefore, a great wrath of the Holy Spirit is held against us here,
since he says of Ham, \"He is a servant of all.

Servants\", that is, among all, the most despised and least servant. But
if you look at history, you will find that he is a lord in the land of
Canaan; but Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and the other descendants who have the
blessing dwell among the Canaanites like servants; and because Ham\'s
descendants are the Egyptians, see how a miserable servitude Israel must
bear among them.

How is it true that Ham is cursed and Shem is blessed? So it is true
that one had to wait for the divine promise and threat. But this delay
is so that first the wicked may fulfill their measure, and God cannot be
punished or blamed for not allowing time and space for repentance and
conversion. But because the pious suffer among the ungodly, and must
serve as servants to those who are the true servants themselves, they
are thereby tempted and exercised to strengthen and increase their faith
and love toward God; so that they may be instructed through much
suffering and persecution, and when they are thus prepared and
instructed, they may finally obtain the promise. For when the time was
fulfilled, Ham\'s family could not have been so strong and mighty that
they would not have had to give way to Shem\'s descendants. Since this
curse, which Ham himself and his whole family had so bravely despised
and disbelieved for such a long time, has been fulfilled.

183 We are in a similar situation at the present time. We have the right
doctrine and the right worship, therefore we can also boast that we are
the right church and have the promise of spiritual blessing in Christ.
But because the pope\'s church condemns our doctrine, we know that the
same church is not Christ\'s, but the devil\'s, and he is truly a
servant of all servants, like Ham. And yet the work proves in itself
that the pope is mighty and a lord, but we are servants and swept
offerings, as Paul calls it 1 Cor. 4:13.

What shall we poor and afflicted people do? In our hearts we should take
comfort in the spiritual rule, that is, in knowing that we have
forgiveness.

**[644 L-11, 3S6-MS. Interpretation of Genesis s, 26. w. i. 972-974.
645]{.underline}**

of sins and have a gracious and reconciled God through Christ, until the
bodily blessing also comes on the last day. Even though we feel a little
bit of bodily redemption in this life, because the tyrants are
stubbornly opposed to the gospel, they will be completely eradicated
from the earth.

Thus, after all the kingdoms of the world, the Roman Empire has finally
fallen and perished, but the word of the Lord and the church remain
forever. Thus Christ\'s power breaks off a little and weakens it always
a little; but that he may be lifted up altogether and become a servant
of all servants, like the godless Ham, requires faith and perseverance.
However, Ham is excluded from the kingdom of God and has the kingdom of
the world under him for a time: just as the pope is excluded from the
church of God and leads a worldly rule for a time, but in such a way
that he cannot remain a lord for long.

The divine law leads to such a trial, namely, that the pious and godly
have a kingdom, but not otherwise than in faith, in which they are
satisfied with the spiritual blessing, that they have a gracious God and
certain hope of the kingdom of heaven. In the meantime, they must let
the ungodly possess the kingdoms of the world until God also disperses
them in the flesh, but makes us heirs over all goods through Christ.

187 This prophecy also shows that Noah was abundantly and wonderfully
enlightened with the Holy Spirit, because he saw that his generation
would remain forever; and that Ham and his generation would finally
perish and be especially deprived of spiritual blessings, although he
would have power and dominion over his generation for a time.

Now this is to be understood as I said above about Cain\'s descendants.
For I do not hold that Ham\'s whole lineage is absolutely damned, but
that those who have converted to the faith have been saved, not because
of a certain promise made to them,

but by accidental grace (that I speak thus); as the Gibeonites and
others were preserved when the people of Israel took the land of Canaan.
Thus by such accidental grace, and not by special promises, Job, Naaman,
the Ninevites, the widow of Sarepta, and others of the Gentiles were
saved.

**II.**

\(189\) Why does he not say, \"Praise be to Shem,\" but says, \"Praise
be to God, the Lord of Shem\"? Answer: This is done for the sake of the
great and mighty blessing. For he does not speak here of a bodily or
temporal blessing, but of the blessing through the future promised seed,
which he sees and understands to be so great and rich that it cannot be
reached with words, nor can it be spoken of. Therefore he goes to and
gives thanks to God. And it can be seen that Zacharias had just looked
at this example and followed it, since he says about such a trade Luc.
1, 68: \"Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel.

190\. Therefore Noah directs the blessing to a thanksgiving to GOD
Himself. \"Praise be to God,\" he says, \"who is the God of Shem. As if
he wanted to say: It is not necessary that I extend my blessing over
Shem, because he is already blessed with the spiritual blessing, he is
already God\'s son, and from him the church will come and be planted,
just as it was begotten and planted from Seth before the flood. And this
is especially noticeable and clear, that he binds God and his Son Shem
so closely together, trusting one to the other, as it were.

Therefore there must have been an excellent light and high knowledge in
Noah\'s heart, that he makes such a distinction among his sons. He
discards Ham with his lineage, but places Shem in the line and order of
the saints and the church, as the one on whom the spiritual blessing
promised in Paradise through the seed should rest. For this reason the
holy man praises God and gives thanks to Him.

**[646 II, N9-341. Interpretation of Genesis 9:27. W. I, 974-S77.
647]{.underline}**

**III.**

**V. 27. God will speak kindly to Japheth, and he will dwell in the
tents of Shem, but Canaan will be her servant.**

This is a wonderful prophecy, because it has such peculiar and proper
words. Noah does not bless Shem, but the God of Shem, and thanks Him for
having so kindly received Shem and graced and adorned him with the
spiritual blessing or promise of the woman\'s seed. But when he comes to
Japheth, he does not use the words he said about Shem. So that he
actually shows the mystery, of which Paul deals with Rom. 11, 11. ff.
and Christ Joh. 4, 22. that salvation comes from the Jews, and yet the
Gentiles are also made partakers of it. For although She alone is the
right root and trunk, the Gentiles are also grafted onto this trunk as a
foreign branch, and enjoy the fat and the sap that is in the chosen
tree.

Noah sees this light through the Holy Spirit, and though he speaks dark
words, he prophesies very truly that the kingdom of the Lord Christ is
to be built and planted in the world from the tribe of Shem, not
Japheth.

194 The Jews here make idle talk and say that Japheth means the peoples
who first dwelt around Jerusalem, who were admitted to the temple and
worship. Noah, however, did not ask much about the temple at Jerusalem
or Moses\' tabernacle, but rather about greater things, namely, about
the three patriarchs who were to fill the whole world; and he says
especially about Japheth that although he is not from the root of God\'s
people, nor does he have the promise of Christ, he will nevertheless be
called through the gospel to this community and society of the same
people who have God and the promises.

So that in this prophecy of the Gentiles and Jews church is pictured.
For Ham is reprobate and is not admitted to the spiritual blessing of
the seed, without something by chance grace.

could have happened. Japheth, however, although he does not have the
promise of the seed, like Shem, nevertheless receives comfort and hope
that he will be incorporated into the fellowship of the church. Just as
we Gentiles, who are the children of Japheth, do not have a promise that
has been made to us, but are nevertheless included in the promise made
to the Jews. For we are included in the company of the saints, the
people of God. And this is not written for Shem and Japheth, but for
their descendants.

Here we see what is the cause of the Jews\' pride and glory. For they
see that their father Shem has the promise of eternal blessing through
Christ alone. But after this they are lacking in that they think that
the promise is inherited and obtained according to the flesh, because
they are the children of the fathers, and not rather through faith; as
Paul treats this text masterfully in the epistle to the Romans Cap. 9,
6, namely, that those are not Abraham\'s children who come from Abraham
according to the flesh, but those who believe as Abraham believed, Gal.
3, 7.

197 This is also what Moses indicates secretly, because he clearly says:
\"Praise be to God, the Lord of Shem. For in this way he shows that the
promise is nowhere else, except the LORD of Shem. Therefore a Jew will
not partake of this promise, unless he has the LORD of Shem, that is,
unless he believes. So also Japheth is not made partaker of the promise,
except he dwell in the tabernacles of Shem, that is, except he be in the
fellowship and company of the very same faith which Shem hath.

198 Therefore this is a high and excellent promise, which belongs to and
endures to the end of the world. But as we have said that it belongs
only to those who have the God of Shem, or who believe, so also the
curse belongs only to those who remain and persevere in the ungodly
nature of Ham. For since this Noah was not as a man of his own
understanding and

**[648 A. II, 341-343. Interpretation of Genesis 9, 27. W. 1. 977-sso.
649]{.underline}**

When he speaks from the mind of God, he does not speak only of the
temporal curse, but of the spiritual and eternal curse, so that the
curse is not understood to be a curse before the world alone, but rather
before God.

As I also said above about Cain\'s curse. For if you will look at the
work and the experience, you will find that Cain had the bodily blessing
greater than Seth. For God wants His church to have such a form in the
world that everyone will regard it as if the curse of the wicked had
fallen on it alone; but the wicked will be regarded as those on whom the
blessing has fallen. That is why Cain first builds the city of Hanoch,
while Seth has to live in the tents and make do.

Thus Ham built the city of Babylon and the tower, and had dominion far
and wide, while Shem and Japheth were poor and had to make do miserably
in the tents. So that the work and the experience itself show that the
divine promises and curses must not be understood in a physical way from
this temporal life, but spiritually. For although the pious are
oppressed and must suffer in the world, they are nevertheless the most
certain heirs and children of God. And although the wicked, on the other
hand, have happiness and prosperity, power and honor for a time, they
will finally be cut down and wither away like grass, as the Psalms teach
in many places.

But Ham\'s and Cain\'s work and status are almost the same. Cain
strangles his brother, which work and deed sufficiently shows that in
his heart there was neither discipline nor reverence for his father.
That is why he is also expelled from his father, leaves the church that
had the right God and the right worship, builds the city of Hanoch and
allows himself to be completely taken in by western worries and trades.
In the same way Ham sinned against his father, because he showed him
neither honor nor respect, but despised and laughed at him. But when he
then hears the sentence of cursing upon him, by which he is cursed by
the curse of his father, he sins.

If he is excluded from the seed and the church because he is not cursed
in his own person but in his son, he will surely leave God and the
church and go to Babylon and build a royal city there.

These are very apparent examples and necessary to the church. Now, in
our time, the Turk and the Pope make us boast of the heavenly and
eternal blessing that we have the teaching of the gospel and are the
church. For this they also know what we hold them for, namely, that we
hold both the pope and the Turk to be the right antichrist and condemn
them. But see how they rely on their wealth and power, and certainly
despise what we think of them! After that they are also strengthened,
because they see that ours are so little, and in addition weak and
small. We see the same thing in Cain and Ham, who were cursed and cast
out or banished.

\(203\) And such examples instruct us that we should learn that we do
not have to look for a certain nor lasting place in this temporal life,
but that in so many cases, to which this life is subject, we should look
to the hope of eternal life, which is promised to us through Christ.
This is the only ford, to which we, like careful and diligent mariners,
should always steer earnestly and diligently in such violence of storms
and tempests.

For what does the Turk gain by bringing the whole world under his rule?
he will never do so, for Michael will help and support the holy people
or the church, as Daniel prophesies in Cap. 10:13. And what does it help
the pope if he takes treasures and goods from the whole world, as he has
done diligently for several hundred years? Will they therefore also
escape death, or will they establish and obtain an eternal and permanent
seat for themselves in this life? Why should we care so much about their
bodily blessings, or about our own sorrow and danger, because they are
rejected from the fellowship of the saints? but we will enjoy eternal
goods through the Son of God.

**[650 II, 343-34\". Interpretation of Genesis 9, 27. W. 1. 980-S8S.
651]{.underline}**

If Cain and Grove, as the ancestors and grandparents, and the Pope and
the Turk, as the descendants of the same, can despise the judgment of
the true church for the sake of a short and small welfare of this life,
why can we not also, who already have the eternal goods in certain
possession, again despise their power and judgment? For Ham does not
turn to this curse of his father, but is still angry against him and
despises him as an old fool: but he goes and equips himself with the
power of the world, of which he thinks more, and would rather let it be,
than if he had received the blessing from his father, like Shem.

For this reason, this history belongs to comfort and strengthen us when
we have to experience such things today, as the popes and bishops now
bravely despise us. What should the mendicant heretics do, they say, for
their goods and power give them courage and inflate them. But we should
patiently suffer such insolence from godless people, as Noah suffered
from his son at that time, and comfort ourselves with the hope and faith
of eternal blessing, which we know they do not have.

I have just said that Ham\'s sin moved and angered the Holy Spirit to
such an extent that he could not call him by his name in the curse. And
it is true, as also the punishment proves, that Ham has sinned grossly.
However, as I said above, this cause is not inconvenient, because Noah
saw that Ham had been taken into the box according to God\'s word and
command and had been preserved with the others, he wanted to spare him
after God had spared him in the Flood. Therefore, he places the curse
that Ham deserved with his sin on his son Canaan, whom Ham undoubtedly
wanted to keep with him.

The Jews say of another cause, namely, that his son Canaan
[first]{.underline} saw that his grandfather lay uncovered, and told his
father, who also saw it afterwards; that therefore the son Canaan caused
his father to commit this sin. But how much of this cause to

Anyone who reads it will be able to judge whether it is true or false.

But here one must also say of the grammatical question. Because over it
the grammarians fight, why the Latin interpreters have all: Dilatet Deus
Ja- phet, \"God spreads out Japheth\", when the Hebrew language here
cannot be given in this way. Although not only the Hebrew, but also the
Chaldean interpreters understand the word so that it means to spread
out. Now at times such and such grammatical disputations are of great
use and show the real mind of the opinion.

For this reason, some use the word japheth, which means to be beautiful,
as Psalm 45:3 says: japhjaphitha mi bene adam,

that is: \"You are the most beautiful among the children of men.\" But
these can be easily convicted that they are mistaken. For this word
japheth actually comes from pathah, that is, to persuade, or to catch
and circumvent one with good words; as Ex. 22:16. says: ki jephateh isch
bethulah, that is, \"If any man persuade a virgin, he shall give her her
morning gift.\" And Jer. 20:7: pithi- thani jehovah va epath, \"O LORD,
thou hast persuaded me, and I have been persuaded.\" Item Proverbs 1,
10: in \"My

Child, if the bad boys tempt you.\" But it is not necessary to give more
examples of this. For this word occurs everywhere, and I do not doubt
that it is made from the Greek word xxxxx, I persuade; for so much it
means entirely.

But now to the question: Why did the Latin interpreters all give it
thus: \"The Lord spread Japheth\", since it is not pathach, which means
to spread or open, but pathah, which means to persuade? Answer: I do not
doubt that the interpreters will have been annoyed and offended by this,
that because this is a promise, it seems to be an inconvenient and hard
thing to take for it, as if Noah said: God persuades or deceives
Japheth. For such would be considered as words of a curse and not of a
blessing. Therefore, they have inclined to a more lenient opinion, even
though it is contrary to grammar,

[**652 l L.H. S45-S47. Interpretation** of Genesis **9,** 27. **W. 1,
983-986. 653**]{.underline}

and because there is only a small difference between pathach and pathah,
they have taken one for the other, as it has pleased them, from causes
and necessity of circumstances, because it is a promise.

But it is not necessary to reverse and falsify the text in this way and
to do violence to grammar, especially because the word pathah indicates
a very convenient opinion. For it is a xxxxx (double-meaning), like the
word suadere, to counsel, and can be understood at the same time as good
and evil counsel. Therefore it does not disgrace God to say such a word
about Him, as is clearly exemplified in Hos. 2:14, where God says: \"I
will entice her and lead her into a wilderness, and speak kindly to
her\"; or persuade her with good words and entice her and lead her
around with words, so that she, the church, will believe and submit to
Me 2c. In this way this word is also rightly understood here, as that it
means to entice, to persuade, to move with friendly and good words. God
thus entices, persuades and catches Japheth with his persuasions, so
that he is persuaded according to his name, kindly enticed, moved.

But here someone might say: What kind of opinion is this, and why should
Japheth be moved or persuaded, and that by God? Answer: In this
prophecy, Noah takes cause and occasion from the name and thanks God
that he has placed Shem so that he stands like a strong root from which
Christ shall be born. For the word sum means to lay, to set, to
establish.

But for Japheth he prayed that he might be a true Japheth. Because he
was the eldest son, to whom the right of the firstborn properly
belonged, he asked that the Lord would kindly persuade him: Firstly, so
that he would not grant the honor to his brother or become impatient for
this privilege to be taken away from him and given to his brother;
secondly, because this request concerns Japheth\'s person alone, he at
the same time wraps up and includes his entire family in it, so that
although the promise was made to Shem alone, God would not exclude it.

He does not want to persuade the generation of Japheth, but wants to
speak kindly to it through the gospel, so that it may be persuaded also
and through the word of the gospel. This is a divine persuasion by the
Holy Spirit, not of the flesh, the world, or the devil, but a holy and
life-giving persuasion. And Paul also uses this kind when he says Gal.
1, 10: \"Do I preach to men or to God?\" And in chapter 3, v. 1: \"Who
has bewitched you not to obey the truth,\" or not to be persuaded of
what is true?

215: So that Japheth is called one whom we call foolish or simple-minded
in the proverb, who soon believes, is soon and easily persuaded, is not
quarrelsome, not stubborn, but gives his mind captive to the Lord and
rests on His word, remains a disciple and does not want to be master in
God\'s words or works. Therefore, a very sweet wish and request is held
out to us here, that God would persuade Japheth, that is, speak kindly
to him; or even if He does not speak to him out of promise, as He does
to Shem, yet He would speak to him out of grace and divine kindness.

216 And this desire of Noah\'s is that the gospel may be spread
throughout the whole world. For Shem is like the tribe from which
lineage Christ was born. For he is the church of the Jews, which has had
patriarchs, prophets and kings. And yet here God indicates to your Noah
that the poor Gentiles also shall dwell in the tents of Shem, that is,
shall come to the fellowship of the goods which the Son of God brought
into the world, namely, forgiveness of sins, the Holy Spirit and eternal
life. For he clearly prophesies that Japheth also, according to his
name, should hear the kind words of the gospel, so that though he does
not have the name, like Shem, who is ordained and appointed to be the
tribe from which Christ is to be born, he nevertheless has the kind
persuasion, that is, the gospel.

Therefore it was Paul through whom this prophecy was fulfilled. For it
was he, almost alone, who brought about the

**[654 L. n, 347-34\". Interpretation of Genesis 9, 27-29. W. 1,
986-S8S. 655]{.underline}**

Japheth with the doctrine of the gospel; as he says Rom. 15, 19: \"I
have filled all things with the gospel of Christ from Jerusalem and
around to Illyricum. For to Japheth\'s lineage and descendants belongs
almost all of Asten, except the Orientals, and Europe. Therefore, the
Gentiles have not, like the Jews, received from God a kingdom and
priesthood and neither law nor promise, but only from God\'s mercy have
they received the friendly voice of the gospel or eloquence, which the
name Japheth brings with it.

The interpreters, whom God thus let err, did not see this actual mind
and opinion, and yet they were not so far from the right opinion. For
the word hirchib, which means to spread out, also means, according to
the manner of the Hebrew language, to comfort; as, on the other hand, in
Latin angustiae mean fear, affliction, danger, misery; as Psalm 4, 2:
bazar hirchabtha: In angustia fecisti mihi dilatationem: \"In fear you
comfort me.\" Now the some true dilatation or spreading and consolation
is the word of the gospel.

219 Thus both opinions agree, if they are rightly presented. The first,
however, is the right and proper one, and brings with it this bright
light, that although the promise has not been made to us Gentiles, we
are nevertheless called to the gospel by divine providence. For the
promise belongs to the Shem alone; but Japheth has the persuading word,
and, as Paul says Rom. 11:17, \"like a wild olive tree he is grafted
into the right olive tree, and becomes partaker of the natural sap and
fatness of the olive tree.\" For in the Holy Scriptures the former is
consistent with the latter, and what God promised in Noah\'s day He now
accomplishes and proves by deed.

220 Ham is the name of one who is warm and hot. Which name, I believe,
was given to him by the father because of the great and strong hope he
had drawn from his youngest son, so that the other two would be compared
to him,

They would be cold, as it were; just as Eve is resplendent when Cain is
born, Gen. 4:1, because she considers him to be the man who would make
up for all the misery and set everything right, when he is the first to
cause harm in a new way, because he strangles his brother.

Thus, God, through His incomprehensible counsel, changes the minds and
thoughts even of the holy people. For Ham, who, when he was born, his
father assumed would have a special zeal and fervor to help the church
before the other brothers, is hot and warm after he grows up, but in a
different way and manner than his father had intended. For he is
inflamed against the Father and God Himself, as his deed shows.
Therefore his name bears on it what it should have, even though his
father, when he gave him this name, did not understand it in this way.

This is the prophecy of Noah about his sons who filled the world. That
therefore, out of God\'s mercy, the light of the dear Gospel has also
gone out over Germany, flows too well from this prophecy of Japheth. So
that what Noah prophesied at the same time is now being fulfilled. For
though we are not of Abraham\'s seed, yet we dwell in the tabernacles of
Shem, and enjoy the promises fulfilled by Christ.

**V. 28. 29. Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years,
and all his days were nine hundred and fifty years, and he died.**

From history it is found that Noah died in the eighth and fiftieth year
after Abraham was born. Because Abraham had such a good and excellent
schoolmaster until the fiftieth year, he was able to grow considerably
in teaching and religion. And there is no doubt that Noah, who was full
of the Holy Spirit, would have loved this grandson of his especially, as
the only heir of the promises made to Shem.

**[656 n. m, s. i. Interpretation of I Moses 9, 28. 29. cap. 10, 1. 2.
w. i, sW-gss. 657]{.underline}**

At the same time the family of Ham was powerful and had happiness and
prosperity; from whom idolatry was planted and brought to the Orient.
Abraham saw this lineage, but not without trouble. But it was preserved
by Noah, with whom Abraham held almost alone and worshipped him, when he
was still present from the first world. But the others, so

The people who had forgotten the great wrath in the Flood still laughed
at the pious old man, especially the family of Ham, which puffed up and
exalted their property and power. This has also practiced his courage
and contempt at the father Noah, and after it has been heard by luck and
welfare, it has laughed at and despised his curse of servitude as a
dream and fable of an old fool.

**The tenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**From the family of Zajcheth.**

**I.**

**V. 1. This is the lineage of the children of Noah: Shem, Ham, Japheth.
And they begat children after the flood.**

It seems from the appearance that this 10th chapter does not have much
special about it, nor is it very useful or necessary; especially because
we, who were born after so many changes of regiments, countries, and
people, have nothing that we could say about each person that is told
here: so it is not proper that we remain completely silent about it.

First of all, it is to be noted in this chapter that Moses divides the
world after the Flood and differentiates it into three parts according
to the three sons of Noah. Although our writings and histories also
divide the world into three parts, into Asia, Europe and Africa, Moses
nevertheless leads a different division, which is not the same as ours.
For to the part, which we call Europe, he counts also this part, which
we call Asia after midnight, which extends up to the Mediterranean Sea,
where it joins Palestine. The same whole line after midnight with whole
Europe he counts to the sons of Japheth. For because of their much

They have also taken up a larger share than Sem.

3\. to the other part of the world he makes this, so we call Africa,
among which are also the Moors or Ethiopians, and reaches to the two
mountains Abyla in Africa and Calpe in Spain, called the Pillars of
Hercules.

\(4\) The third part, Judea, he gives to Shem, and not only that, but he
adds Persia and the other countries after the east and south.

**V. 2. The children of Japheth are these: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan,
Thubal, Mesech and Thiras.**

5 Japheth leaves behind him seven sons, whose names the holy scripture
keeps all, without that only the name of Thiras is lost and is nowhere
to be found in the scripture. The first son is Gomer, whom Jerome
considers to be the father of the Galatians. However, it seems to me
that this part is somewhat smaller than that it can be attributed to
this patriarch. Thus one knows that the Galatians are Germans; as one
then says that they should still use today the German language, as it is
current in Saxony.

From Ezekiel, Cap. 38, 6, it is clear that they live after midnight.
Therefore I think that they are the peoples who live in Scythia, at the
Cimmerian Bosporus (Strait of Kaffa). For the consonance of the words
Gomer and Cimmerius is

**[658m .Interpretation of Genesis 10, 2. W. i, sss-sss.
659]{.underline}**

no small proof. Although the peoples who live there today are bordered
and not original inhabitants, there is no doubt about the place. So it
is also common that one puts the letters *g* and *s* or *o* for each
other, as they make almost the same words and are not at all dissimilar
to each other; as the Italian and Belgian pronunciation proves.
Therefore I think that Gomer and his descendants lived at the Cimmerian
Bosporus, at the lake or sea Mäotis and at the countries, which lie
first after midnight.

\(7\) As for Magog, I am sure that Ezekiel, Cap. 38, 2, says about Gog
and Magog. But Gog means a roof. Therefore Gog is considered to be the
Scythians, who do not live in houses like us, but under huts alone or
tents.

\(8\) For this reason the Turks boast that they do not build for
splendor, as we do, who adorn the cities with magnificent buildings and
build castles and fortresses as if we would live here forever. For the
sake of such diligence or ambition, as it may be called, the Turks
ridicule us and consider it a piece of peculiar sanctity if one does not
live in delicious houses. That is why they ravage vineyards and tear
down beautiful buildings. The same kind of life is led by those peoples
after midnight who are called Tartars, for they also live in huts and
are, as the Hebrews call them, Magogs, among whom are also the Scythians
and other peoples.

9 What Madai means is known. For there is no doubt, as the name also
indicates, that they are the Medes. Although the histories of the holy
scriptures indicate something more certain and call Darms Madai, who was
a Mede, as the histories of the pagans also testify.

10 Javan is undoubtedly Janus, from which the city is called Janiculum
(near Rome). And although some think that from Javan are called the
Greeks, who are called Jones, it is certain that before times also in
Italy the Greek language was in use. Hence the countries, first of all
situated at the sea, were called Great

Greece, and the histories report that Pythagoras taught there.
Therefore, we can conclude without any obstacle that Javan and his
family held Asia Minor and the whole coast of the Mediterranean Sea from
Cilicia to the outermost borders of the Spaniards. Therefore Moses says
afterwards of his sons clearly that from them the islands of the sea are
spread out; because the Mediterranean Sea has many islands. Thus one did
not know before the Trojan time, which it had for a shape around Italy,
that I consider it for the fact that in the same places much changes
took place.

According to Jerome, Thubal is the Spaniards. But methinks he belongs to
the Tartars. And he is also remembered by Ezekiel, Cap. 38, 3.

Jerome thinks that Mesech is the Cappadocians. But from the Psalm it can
be seen that it is Great Armenia, where the Georgians and Caspians are.
For in the 120th Psalm v. 5. it says: \"I am a stranger under Mesech,
and must dwell among the tents of Kedar.\" Now it is certain that Kedar
is the stony Arabia, where the Moabites, Edomaeans and Ammonites sat.
They have Meshech on the side after midnight. And I would gladly say,
according to the word, that they are the Muscovites; and it may well be
that they came out of Armenia into the countries where they are now; as
often one people drives out another, and one settles in another\'s
place.

It is not known what peoples are signified by Thiras, because this name
is nowhere found in the Scriptures. Jerome thinks that it means the
Thracians; as the name Thiras indicates to some extent.

14 So this is the lineage of our father Japheth, of whom also the
heathen know and call him Japetus. And from him have their origin all
peoples who live after midnight, as Medes, Scythians, Tartars,
Cimmerians, Poles, Vandals, Danes, Germans, Greeks, Italians, Gauls,
Spaniards. But because the languages have often been changed, it is an
indication that also the inhabitants have often changed.

**[660 L. in, s-8. . Interpretation of I Genesis 10, 3-5. W. i, sss-ss8.
661]{.underline}**

**II.**

V. 3. **But the children of Gomer are these: Askenas, Riphath and
Thogarma.**

15 The Jews say strongly and unanimously that Askenas means the Germans.
Although this cannot be proved from the holy scriptures, we gladly
accept it, because we have nothing more certain about it. This name is
also remembered by Jeremiah Cap. 51, 27, although our translation does
not have a personal name, but a people\'s name. Eusebius says that they
were the Goths; but of them it is known for certain that they were
Germans.

Thus we Germans come through the whole line from the firstborn of
Japheth. Although this is not a glory before God, it indicates that
because this Askenas is the firstborn, he must also have land and
people. After that, this is also indicated, although in obscure words,
that it should come to pass with him that he comes to the knowledge of
the gospel; for all this both entails the right of the firstborn. And it
is not unclearly indicated herewith that God graciously regarded this
nation and wanted to honor it especially; as also the histories testify
that the German nation has always been considered the most praiseworthy.

17 Riphath is nowhere mentioned in the holy scriptures, neither Thiras.
So the pagans have nothing of it in their writings, unless they speak of
the Riphaeans and of mountains, which they also call mountains, and
fable that the griffins read gold in them. But that everything they say
about such mountains is a fable and a fictitious thing, no one doubts.

\(18\) Therefore we hold that these were also nations that dwelt after
midnight, but were destroyed or driven out by the Tartars; for in this
way God punishes the land and the people for their sin; as He says in
the prophet Amos, Cap. 9, v. 8: \"The eyes of the Lord look upon a
sinful kingdom, that I may utterly destroy it from the face of the
earth\"; and Daniel, Cap. 2, v. 21: \"He removes kings, and sets up
kings. 2, v. 21: \"He removeth kings, and setteth up kings.\" Therefore
the names of the countries and kings

The kingdoms are devoured as they are able, but those who dwell in them
are destroyed and perish for their sins. Thus the Turk devoured Greece,
the Goths Spain, and yet the old names remain. And this is the course of
the world, and it is no different in it; which is all written in honor
of the holy scriptures.

19\. no one knows who Thogarmah is\^ Ezekiel remembers his Cap. 27, 14.
and counts him among the nations after midnight. Methinks he belongs to
the Tartars. Some still guess and pretend that it is the Phrygians,
because the word Tigranes is not far from it; but what to build on this,
each reader may judge for himself.

**V. 4. 5. The children of Javan are these: Elisha, Tharfis, Kittim and
Dodanim. From these are spread the islands of the Gentiles in their
lands, each according to their language, gender and people.**

Jerome thinks that Elisha was the Aeolians. But I think it was a larger
landscape. Ezekiel also remembers Cap. 27, 7.

21 Tharsis, they say, is Cilicia, where Tharsus is, St. Paul\'s
fatherland; I am not against that either.

22\. the Kittim are often called in the holy scripture, and is almost
understood by it Italy; but in my opinion it is actually Greece with the
next area after Italy and France. Balaam remembers this name 4 Mos. 24,
24: \"The ships from Chittim will come and destroy the Affur\" 2c. and
Isaiah Cap. 23, 1. where he prophesies about the devastation of Tyre and
Ashdod, which should happen through Alexander.

23 So Macedonia also takes its name from Kittim, for when the Hebrews
add the letter *m* to Kittim, it becomes makittim, which we call
Macedonia. But someone might say: Why should Greece have its name from
Macedonia, which is an unsightly part of Greece? Answer: How unsightly
and despised this part is, yet Alexander, the monarch and regent of the
whole world, came from it. Therefore it is rightly praised as the head
of the whole of Greece.

**[662 8. in, 8-io. interpretation of I Genesis 10:4. 5. w. i, sW-iom.
663]{.underline}**

des, because it is also the head of the whole world.

024 Of Dodanim I hold that it perished. For if the Dodonaeans, who had a
name from the temple of Jupiter, which was with them, are called by this
name, they are truly, compared with the whole kingdom, of which they
remained, like a small branch, compared with a large tree; as still
today Rome is only a small oert and piece of the very large monarchy, to
which it belonged before times.

**III.**

\(25\) Therefore, these sons of Javan were the most powerful kings, and
were undoubtedly properly instructed in doctrine and religion by their
grandfather Japheth, and were the holiest men, especially until the time
when the Jewish people were distinguished from the other peoples by a
certain law, order and rule.

\(26\) That Moses says that the islands of the sea were spread out by
him indicates that they were skilled and experienced mariners, which
they undoubtedly learned from the example of the box in the Flood. But
because God has confirmed their kingdom and made it permanent, I
consider it that they have kept the right worship, which they inherited
and received from the fathers, and have used it in their church. For God
does not confirm the rule of the ungodly and idolatrous, but overthrows
them. But that Pliny says that some islands have not always been, but
have emerged and risen from the sea, I do not know whether the same is
true. But that seems to me to be more credible, that they were
discovered and inhabited by people who were experienced in navigation,
as Moses indicates here.

27 These are the descendants of Japheth, among whom were undoubtedly the
most holy fathers, who governed their family both spiritually and
physically, well and rightly, and set up altars and worship in the
places where they lived. For there was no law that worship should be
held in a certain place,

When the Lord\'s gift was given, each one was free to sacrifice wherever
he wished, just as we are now free to pray wherever we wish.

\(28\) But the same race, as time went on, fell more and more into
idolatry, and began to worship the sun and the stars (2c). Which
idolatry undoubtedly originated from right worship and invocation; as
superstition and false worship commonly arise from right faith and
religion. For the pious fathers taught their children to pray in the
morning when the sun rose, and to pray to God for such a beautiful
light, by which not only everything is illuminated, but also preserved
and nourished. But this the descendants turned into idolatry. Just as
the Chaldeans worshipped fire, just as the Turks used circumcision, and
we, having abandoned the apostles\' teaching, have fallen into
abominable idolatry, which the godless swarm of the popes introduced
into the church for the sake of great profit and gain. For when the
pious and godly have rightly known, rightly believed and rightly served
God, the godless have always wanted to imitate them; from which all the
misery in the church has followed and sprung.

Our ancestors, however, were great and excellent people, among whom our
Askenas was a special hero and of a God-fearing way of life, and also
ready with his fist. How then today, praise God, Germany, above other
glorious gifts she has, is also graced with the bright light of the
Gospel, which is the highest gift of all. And good to those who make
good and holy use of it.

\(30\) With special diligence Moses reports that these descendants have
divided their tongues and families into certain places, so that he wants
to show that the regiments were ordered and appointed. And this was
undoubtedly done and ordered by Noah, their grandfather himself, who
sent one to Asia, the other to Greece, the third to Italy, and
established police forces and churches there; and since his children and
his children\'s children were to be

**[664 \' L. m, 10-12. interpretation of Genesis 10:4-6. W. 1. 1001-IMS.
665]{.underline}**

If they have obeyed, they have experienced God\'s blessing. Therefore,
all this is held up to us as examples of special obedience to the Father
Noah and also special diligence in the appointment of the churches and
regiments. After that, they are also examples of righteous unity, by
which both the church and the secular government stood well until the
accursed Ham brought the whole world into turmoil, as will be heard in
the following chapter.

But it would be useful and good, that because these histories have
perished, one would know the etymology (origin) of these names, from
which or on which each one was conceived. For I cannot believe that the
holy fathers, who were full of the Holy Spirit and had seen beforehand
everything that would happen in the future in the church and in the
worldly regimes, had thought up such names and put them on their
children; as I have shown similar examples several times above, in which
the names indicate either the times or other circumstances. But because
the histories have perished, one would have to guess the reason of such
derivation, if one could find the etymology.

32 Gomer means one who concludes and ends a thing, or a completion. From
this it can be inferred that at the same time a special emergency
occurred, so that everyone thought that it was now over with the church.
But since we certainly cannot know this, such thoughts are in vain.
Therefore, we command such reflection on the name of the cause to the
idle.

**Second part.**

**From the lineage of Ham.**

**V. 6. The children of Ham are these: Chus, Mizraim, Put and Canaan.**

33\) Now it is truly surprising that the lineage of the godless Ham is
told rather than that of Shem, the blessed one; but this is perhaps
because of Christ\'s saying in the gospel Matt. 19:30,

that in the Kingdom of God the last become first. For as we see here
that Ham is set in the midst of Japheth and Shem: so we see that the
wicked sit in heaps in the midst of the church, and have the very best
and most glorious place.

034 And it shall come to pass, that the family of Ham shall not be
content with his portion and estate, but shall lay hold upon the family
of Shem and Japheth. For they have taken not only some parts of the land
that lie after the morning and after the midnight, but also some that
lie after the noon. For Chus are the Ethiopians, as we now call them,
and have possessed not only the lands after the south, which are far
from the sea, but also the places which border upon the sea. There is no
doubt that Mizraim is Egypt.

35 There is nothing certain about Put: therefore I believe that this son
also perished soon because of sin. Some commentators report that it is
the Libyans or Afern, that is Africa, as far as it touches the
Mediterranean Sea, Numidia, Mauritania and Cyrenaica. And in Numidia,
they say, is a water, so there has the name Put.

\(36\) Canaan is the most famous of all these, because he took this
kingdom, which was given to the children of Israel. But see how it is in
this world of the right church. Ham is cursed by his father Noah, but
Shem and Japheth are blessed. But does not the experience show that it
has all been reversed and the contradiction found? For Canaan, the son
of Ham, wins the very best and most glorious part of the earth; as I
believe that in the land of Canaan was paradise, and is the only place
in which God afterwards willed that the church and his people should be.
Because Ham, with his family, owns and possesses the best and most
beautiful part of the whole world, the church must be afflicted and
poor: and yet such happiness and prosperity of the wicked does not last
forever, but Canaan is miserably devastated in the end, and God\'s
people are on top and triumphant.

37\. the name Canaan is significant; for Canaan means a merchant or
trader, and are ever the trading cities in the

**[666 L. Ill, 12-U. Interpretation of Genesis 10:6, 7. W. 1. 100S-1O08.
667]{.underline}**

Therefore also Tyre and Sidon, then dwelt merchants, have given the name
to this whole kingdom. Nor are there any other trading cities that are
praised so much in the Scriptures, although the histories of the pagans
also indicate that they were the most famous cities in the whole world.
For Carthage was a colony of them. And Ezekiel calls Cap. 26, 17. calls
the city of Tyre a famous and mighty city at the sea, before which the
whole country had to fear.

That is why Ham had the very best part of the world, namely the whole
side to the south, except Arabia, Persia and India. Where then has the
curse remained? Answer: It has passed away, but it has not been taken
away or lifted, so that the wicked might fulfill their measure and
become the more secure. On the other hand, the church must be under the
cross and persecution, so that it may keep the eternal goods and the
right blessing all the more surely.

V. 7. **But the children of Chus are these: Seba, Hevila, Sabtha, Raema
and Sabtecha.**

\(39\) These five sons of Chu, who, as we have said, was a Moor, have
taken fortunate Arabia and all the line to Persia and India, where
Hevila is; as Genesis 2:11 says. Seba, they say, is still a famous city
in the land of the Moors.

**But the children of Raema are these: Sheba and Dedan.**

40 Rama or Raema is the father of the blessed Arabia, whose son, Sheba,
had the richest country in the noon, which is especially praised before
the other parts of the world in the histories. And what may it say? Shem
and Japheth get sandy, barren, swampy and uninhabitable places for their
dwelling; Ham, however, gets what was left of paradise, in which nothing
but spices, gold and precious stones grow.

41\. but this is by the special counsel of God, who gives the wicked
abundance and fullness of all things; even as they are covetous and
covetous of them, and set their hearts on them.

hang on it. Therefore, God does not fail them with their diligence and
work. In the meantime, the children of God suffer hunger, thirst and
frost, and are hanged and burned. But why does this happen? Because we
should understand that other treasures and goods are promised to us in
the Word and are acquired through the Son of God. And because the wicked
do not pay attention to them, they let themselves take the temporal
things that flow to them after they have sought them so diligently.

Thus God has showered the Roman Empire with unspeakable violence. The
Turks are now miraculously fortunate and are spreading their borders far
and wide. But because by this marvelous counsel of God the weak children
of God are vexed, they become impatient and grieve when they see that
the wicked, who ridicule God and man, are doing so well, but they must
be saddened and be overwhelmed with misfortune. This is what God does
and has done since the beginning of the world, as the examples of the
first patriarchs show. Cain, the murderer, is the first to build a city;
Ham wins the very best part of the earth.

\(43\) What wonder is it, then, that in our day the Turk and the Pope
prosper and are very fortunate? For in all ages it has been found in the
world that the wicked flourish like the grass of the field, Ps. 92:8,
while the pious and godly suffer and are afflicted daily; as the 73rd
Psalm, vv. 13, 14, 18, finely says: \"Because they flourish, they are
set right on the slippery slope, so that they are brought down to the
ground.

\(44\) It was very hard for Lazarus that he had to see in his sorrow and
pain that the rich man had everything in full and superfluous: but is
not the sight of the rich man after his death in hell a very miserable
and pitiful thing? Luc. 16, 23. Therefore we should not let the
happiness and welfare of the wicked trouble us at all, but should open
the eyes of the spirit and consider that in this world they have their
joy and pleasure in perishable and deceitful things. But we, who suffer
and live in the fear of God, have

**[668 in. 14-16. interpretation of I Genesis 10, 7-9. W. 1. 1003-1011.
669]{.underline}**

the hope of the eternal kingdom, whereas the wicked will be in eternal
torment and punishment.

**V. 8. 9. But Chus begat Nimrod. He began to be a mighty lord on earth
and was a mighty hunter before the Lord. Therefore it is said: this is a
mighty hunter before the Lord, like Nimrod.**

**45** Nimrod is not counted among the other sons of Chu because he may
have been illegitimate. But his history Moses treats diligently and
praises him before all descendants of Noah. For just as he reported of
Hanoch, the son of Cain, before the Flood, that he was the first to seek
a regime and to build a city, which he had called by his name, and I
believe that it was located in the place where Babel stood after the
Flood (for as the histories of the Gentiles also testify, it was a
beautiful flat place): So after the Flood Nimrod was the first to seek
the dominion of the whole world, and was not content with his land,
which was toward the south, but went much farther, to the places after
the east, which belonged to Shem. And is this the reason why Moses
treats his history so diligently and extensively, and sets him high,
that by his example the wicked may be terrified and the pious comforted.

46 The name Nimrod is significant. For he is called Nimrod from marad,
which means to be derogatory, to be renegade, and to be contrary; either
because he made war upon his brethren, and especially upon the families
of the pious, that he might spread and enlarge his land, or because that
nation began at that time to fall away from the sons of Shem and their
religion, and sought a special power and dominion over all the sons of
Noah.

47 Therefore Moses adds: \"He began to be mighty on earth\"; but not by
God\'s command, nor that the fathers Shem and Arphachad would have it
so, but by tyranny. Now we should not think that such a thing could
happen without war, murder and blood.

will have been shed. Therefore, after the Flood, he was either the first
Turk or the first pope in the world. For his hand was stretched out
against all churches and police, until he came by tyranny to a regiment,
which did not belong to him, but to Shem, as also the priesthood. But
such a son of the devil had to be like his father, because the devil is
a murderer, Joh. 8, 44**.**

48 But that he is a mighty lord on earth is not in itself evil, for in
his place he may well exercise dominion and power; as he has undoubtedly
held the best place on earth: but he is not content with his border, but
reaches around and takes others also who push against his.

\(49\) And what is worst of all, he not only wants to be a mighty hunter
on earth, but also before the Lord; that is, he has not only wanted to
be mighty in the temporal government, but also to have a government and
power in religion: to this he applies himself and exercises his tyranny,
as the pope does now and in our time. And he who has such power and
tyranny does not, as hunters do, chase after hares, deer or wild pigs,
but deceitfully sets after the pious, the saints, the prophets and
priests of God: these he chases, catches and strangles, who are dear to
God, who have faith in God and in whom God Himself dwells through His
Spirit.

50 For who will doubt that the holy fathers did not always have their
flocks and meetings in which they instructed the youth, preached,
prophesied, called upon God and gave thanks? For where the word is not
always practiced and practiced, the church cannot be or exist; and the
church has always had its sacraments or signs of grace and ceremonies.
For Cain and Abel sacrificed to God in the same way that they were kept
by their father, and at that time sacrificing was a divine service. So
also Shem had his gathering and meeting, preaching, worship, sacrifice
and other ceremonies, which have remained until Abraham.

**[670 Ill, 16-18. Interpretation of Genesis 10:8, 9. w. 1. 1611-1014.
671]{.underline}**

\(51\) This hunter, who is not satisfied that he can tyrannize in the
worldly regime, but also wants to have power and dominion in the church,
establishes new worship services, and oppresses those who lived and
walked rightly before the Lord. As Moses clearly distinguishes between
conduct and reputation before God and before men. Therefore, what is
good and right before God, the world always considers evil and wrong.

52 Thus Nimrod was considered in his own eyes and in the eyes of the
whole world to be a mighty hunter before the Lord, that is, he was
considered to be a high priest and head of the church, and indeed to be
such a one as the pope now wants to be considered and held for. For with
the eyes of the flesh the papacy cannot be seen nor judged to be evil,
but those who have the Holy Spirit and keep the Word of God can judge
it. Just as the pope cannot suffer this judgment from us, because he
wants to be the head of the church, so Nimrod also usurped this title
and name with the sword and by force, because he wanted to be a mighty
hunter before God, that is, a lord in the church.

\(53\) Thus the Scripture presents us with such a tyrant, who not only
subjugates himself to usurp foreign dominion, but also takes religion by
force, and does it with the most beautiful appearance, so that no one
notices that he is dealing with it, that he may be a hunter before the
Lord, or that he seeks dominion in the church. As the pope also did, who
called himself a servant of all servants.

54 With this appearance Nimrod has also painted and maligned his plots,
so that one would think him pious, God-fearing, kind, and who would be
useful to the secular government and necessary to the church; otherwise
the common people would not have fallen to him in such a heap. But
actually and in truth Nimrod is an apostate and tyrant, an executioner
and devastator of the human race; after that also a persecutor and
strangler of holy people and righteous people.

The priests, who have taken pains and worked hard to take away this
glorious title and seek the salvation and prosperity of the people. For
the godly, who keep the word of God, cannot and should not remain silent
about the plots and pretensions of ungodly people. If they do so, they
will be threatened with the sword and war, and the church will be
tyrannically dealt with in an unjust manner.

55\. That therefore Nimrod is called a hunter, you must by no means
understand that he was such a hunter, as other lords and princes are,
who often indulge in hunting, and are so senselessly eager for it, that
they also forget their countries and people\'s business thereby and want
to be taken much rather for brave hunters than for wise rulers: but
Moses indicates that Nimrod did not hunt wild animals, but hunted and
pursued men, and especially those who ruled the church with the
doctrine.

\(56\) Therefore this title should be given to all godless princes and
rulers and painted on their coats of arms, as Moses does here, who says
that a proverb has been made of Nimrod. As if he wanted to say that
Nimrod\'s title had subsequently become a common title of all tyrants
and princes who, following Nimrod\'s example, had not only taken over
countries, cities and worldly regiments in order to increase their
dignity and power, but also wanted to have the right to the church; As
in our time the bishop of Mainz does, who, in addition to having robbed
and sucked his episcopate, also grieves and burdens the church by not
wanting to leave the pure doctrine in it and forcing and urging the
people to ungodly and idolatrous services.

57 But this one Moses calls a strong or mighty hunter, whom no one has
been able to resist. For without that the tyrants are renegades and
faithless, they also have the power of a tyrant, so that they can arm
themselves and easily accomplish what they desire. And I do not doubt at
all, Moses wanted to represent with this description and painting a
legend of all tyrants, who also in the later times against the worldly

**[672 m, 18-20. Interpretation of Genesis 10, 8-12. W. 1, 1014-1017.
673]{.underline}**

He said that Nimrod was a mighty persecutor of the saints of God and an
enemy of the Word and the Church, and that he would rage against the
regiment and the Church with violence and tyranny. What follows now
belongs to the description of the kingdom and rule that Nimrod has
acquired.

V. 10. **And the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, Erech, Accad and
Calne in the land of Sinear.**

\(58\) Behold, how this wicked and most wicked wretch first sets upon
the people of God and attacks this lineage from which Christ was to be
born; for at last, after the Flood, he obtains Judea with the Orientals.
Now it is known that Sinear is called the same flat land, on which
afterwards Babel was built, which was the beginning of the kingdom of
Nimrod.

59 This text is interpreted in this way, that the city of Babylon was
divided into four parts, called Babel, Erech, Accad and Kalne. For Pliny
writes that it was so large and had such a wide circumference that there
were six and forty districts and communities of people in it. And
Aristotle also writes that Babylon was not a city, but a province, so
enclosed and surrounded by a curtain wall; so that it is no wonder that
such a great city was divided into four main parts or estates; as Rome
was divided into four estates, as patricians or senate, knights, common
people and peasants. And Hebron is also called Kiriath Arba, because it
was four holy.

60 Some interpret this text in this way. That I do not follow this
opinion, however, gives me cause that I see that in the prophets Kalne
is praised very much and was called Seleucia afterwards, from which
Seleucus made a trade city, to weaken Babylon with it and to make it
powerless. Now it would have been very bad to dream that Seleucia was a
part of the city of Babel, from which Seleucia was far away. And even if
I can indicate nothing about Erech and Accad, what they are,

I do not agree with this opinion of the quadruple healing of Babel.

61 Thus we have enough that we know that Babylon may have been built by
Nimrod in the same place where Cain had built his city Hanoch before.
Item, that the kingdom of Babylon began from Nimrod, and thereafter
always improved and increased so, that it is counted and counted by
Daniel as the first monarchy. But because the kingdoms also have their
appointed and certain time, how long they are to stand, and after that
they perish: so the histories of the holy scriptures show that the same
royal sovereignty and power afterwards fell from Babylon to the
Ninevites and Assyrians, although it also came again to Babylon.

62 But here it is asked: Whether Babel was built before the famous tower
in the land of Sinear was erected by the sons of Ham? And I am of this
opinion, even though I have nothing substantial or certain that could be
said about it, that I believe that the same building was erected by
Nimrod, so that he wanted to make an eternal name for himself in the
world and among his descendants. But since he saw that such a building
was confused and prevented from heaven, he only then began to build the
city of Babel. And that I follow this opinion, gives me reason the name
Babel. For the fact that this name was given to the city because of its
success is indicated by the work itself. Thus we have the first king and
ruler of the world, who, even though he is an enemy of the church and of
God, has brought under him the rule of the whole Orient.

V. 11, 12: **From the land afterward came Assyria, and built Nineveh,
and Rehoboth, and Ir, and Calah, and Resen, between Nineveh and Calah.
This is a great city.**

63\) After the kingdom and government of Babylon were confirmed, Assyria
came out of it in time, who also built a city called Nineveh. Which city
is also remembered in the histories of the Gentiles and finally turned
there and

**[674 L. in, 20-22. interpretation of I Moses 10, II. 12. w. 1,
1017-1020. 675]{.underline}**

The empire and regiment of the whole Orient has fallen. But by what and
at what time Babel fell and was devastated is nowhere to be found.

64 And of this city of Nineveh it is also said that it was divided into
four circles or cities, as Jonah\'s history Cap. 1, 2. indicates that it
was very large and wide, such a city is now known in Europe. If it was
now divided into four circles, then Nineveh was the middle place and
best part of it, in which the royal court was. Rehoboth, however, was
the place where the merchants dwelt; Jr, where the council sat; and
Calah, where the husbandmen dwelt. Of these places Resen was a little
further, where the gardeners lived. For we have nothing certain about
this, but have to guess and trace, as it were, in such old histories
alone.

65 There is also a dispute about Asshur, whether he is the one who is
remembered in the story of the family and tribe of Shem, or whether he
is another one? Since I cannot say anything for certain about it, if I
had to guess, I would assume that Assyria, the son of Shem, came out of
the land of Babylon, just as Abraham came out of the land of the
Chaldeans by God\'s command. For he did not go out of his own country,
but was commanded by God.

66 But Assyria was driven out of the land by the wickedness and tyranny
of the family of Ham, because he could not bear the wickedness, false
worship and idolatry of the descendants of Ham. Therefore he left room
for their madness and nonsense and went to our ancestors, the
descendants of Japheth; and that he might be a little nearer to them, he
built the city of Nineveh. Therefore God loved Nineveh, as can be seen
in Ezekiel and Jonah, and decorated it so that it would be a monarchy:
therefore Ezekiel Cap. 31, 9. compares it to a very beautiful tree,
which spreads wide, is thick and high.

67 And to the rest of the family of Shem was sent Jonah, after whose
preaching Nineveh was converted, repented, knew God, and was saved.

Ion. 3, 10. 3, 10. And it is not without cause that Jonah calls it a
great city of God. For the Jews to dream that he called it great, that
it was great and wide, is very ridiculous; but what God does is great,
even if it concerns only one man. Rather, Nineveh is called a city of
God because it had the right religion and was preserved by God for the
sake of the pious man Assyria, who, impatient with idolatry, left the
old dwelling place at Babylon and turned to the descendants of Japheth
at midnight and built a small church there.

68 This supposition of Assyria pleases me better than others; namely,
that he went out from Babylon, so that he might escape the vexation of
idolatry, and also thought how he might leave a church to his holy
descendants. Since the histories give no account of all this, we can do
nothing but guess and assume.

69 Because Moses says here of Nineveh, as he did above (v. 10.) of
Babylon, that beside it other three cities were built, as Rehoboth, Ir,
and Calah, I now direct myself to this thought, that such four holy
cities were not one place, surrounded and enclosed with one wall, but
four cities, situated in different places and yet under one prince\'s
territory and rule.

\(70\) As in Silesia are the six cities, which, though they are
dissimilar in name, place, and location, yet each of them has the name
of being called one of the six cities, and all of them are under one
lord. So Kalne, being Seleucia, can be called one of the Babylonian four
cities. Now in our time the Swiss have many and mighty cities, which
have all one council: as also with the Greeks the assembly of the
Amphictyons was. And so perhaps in the empire of Babel and Assyria there
were also four cities.

71 And will the kingdom of Assyria in

**[676Interpretation of Genesis Iv, II-20. W. 1, 1020-1023.
677]{.underline}**

It is highly praised and glorified in Scripture, not only for the police
and external government, but much more for the sake of religion, and
that it believed the sermons of Jonah the prophet, who was sent to it,
Jon. 3, 5. But it had not only a king or monarch, but also other high
estates, as princes, high priests 2c. If they had been like our princes,
cardinals and bishops, they would not only not have admitted the prophet
Jonah, but would also have strangled him. But this pious generation of
Shem, even though it had gone astray and fallen away, nevertheless
accepted God\'s word again and converted, and was also accepted again by
the Lord in grace.

But afterwards it fell away again. For so it is wont to go, that angels
become devils, and the church and pious Christians become heretics.
Therefore it was also destroyed, as Isaiah Cap. 37, 22, perhaps under
Asserhaddon, the son of Sanherib, since the sons were at odds and
discord with each other after their father\'s death. And the same
monarchy was transferred and came to Babylon, but not to the old city of
Babylon, which Nimrod had built and was now desolate, but to the new
Babylon, whose first monarch, Nebuchadnezzar, destroyed and desolated
the kingdom of Judah.

V. 13. 14. **Mizraim begat Ludim, Anamim, Leabim, Naphthuhim, Pathrusim
and Casluhim. From there Philistim and Caphthorim came to you.**

These are also mostly mere names and, as it were, the remnants of these
countries and people. Ludim, one thinks, are the Lydians, Leabim the
Libyans. Pathrusim, however, are thought to be those who are called
Pathros in Isa. 11, 11, and are now perhaps those who have a part in
Africa, or, as others think, the Numidians and Mauritians; for Isaiah
relates and places them with the Egyptians.

Seventy-four: That the Jews here fable after their manner, that
Pathrusim and Casluhim have changed with their wives, and out of

that the Philistim and Caphthorim went out, that is, were born, is a
foolish and loose fiction. For the word \"go forth\" is not to be
understood of birth, but of wandering and departing, namely, that the
Philistim and Caphthorim did not want to dwell with the Pathrusim and
Casluhim. This, however, the Jews invent for the sake of their fame,
which, however, the grammar does not suffer. For \"to go out\" does not
mean to be born of adultery. So now we have the three parts or regions
of the world, namely midnight, evening and noon; now we still have the
morning or Orient before us.

V.15-20. **But Canaan begat Zidon his first son, md Heth, Jebusi, Emori,
Girgasi, Hivi, Arki, Sini, Arvadi, Zemari and Hamathi. Therefore find
spread out the families of the Cananites. And their borders were from
Zidon, through Gerar to Gasa, until one comes to Sodoma, Gomorrah,
Adama, Zeboim, and to Lasa. These are the children of Ham in their
families, languages, countries and people.**

75 Zidon is known. Moses saw the Hittites, the Jebusites, the Emoreans,
the Girgosaeans and perhaps the others as well. But they were
exterminated afterwards partly by the people of God, partly by other
pagans who settled in their countries. Zemari is known, as well as
Hemath, which is Antioch.

Here see and now think back. Canaan was cursed by his grandfather Noah:
here he is not only superior to others with many children, but also
occupies the very best and most delicious place on the whole face of the
earth. For these nations, which are mentioned here by Moses, have left
this place, which their father Ham had taken. For the region toward the
south was allotted to Ham, but this part with the Orient had fallen to
the pious Shem. Because the wicked always have more happiness and
prosperity in this life than the pious and holy, the descendants of the
wicked Ham, who were cursed, have driven the blessed lineage of Shem out
of its border and land.

**[678nr . 25-27. interpretation of Genesis 10, 15-22. W. 1, 1023-1026.
679]{.underline}**

and settled in Palestine, **Syria** and the other surrounding countries
**as far as** Babylon.

All of which shows that man was not created for this life. For since the
wicked prosper in this life, there must be another life after this, in
which they will be punished and suffer; just as the pious will find and
receive in another life the reward for the suffering and affliction they
must bear and endure in this life.

And I have no doubt that the land of Canaan was the greatest delight and
glory of all the earth. For this reason I also gladly fall for those who
believe that paradise was in the same place before the Flood. Neither
does he sin who believes that in the same place where Christ was
crucified and with his death restored life to the world, there was the
tree which, having been deceived by the serpent, did harm and brought
destruction to man.

The Canaanites, however, have not always had such happiness and
pleasure, for they have been driven out and exterminated for their
ungodly nature by the people of God, who must ultimately prevail and
triumph, even though something of the ungodly still remains. As it is in
our flesh, in which something remains of sin, even though we have been
justified, so that we may not be idle, but have something in which to
exercise our faith and prayer.

80 The border from Zidon to Gaza includes the line of the sea, which is
called the Mediterranean Sea, in which there have been very rich and
beautiful cities. And Zidon lies after midnight, but Gaza after noon.
Not far from Zidon was Tyre, the most famous trading city in all of
Asia. After that Ptolemais, Caesarea, Apollonia, Joppa, Azotus 2c lie
towards evening. Sodoma has been the border after the morning. Lasa, it
is believed, was the city that the Romans called Caesarea Philippi, in
the lineage of Dan.

**Third part.**

**Of Shem and his lineage.**

**And Shem, the greater brother of Japheth, begat children also, who is
the father of all the children of Eber. And these are his children:
Elam, Asshur, Arphachad, Lud and Aram.**

81 Here one asks: Why Shem is called the father of all the children of
Eber, when he is not the son of Shem, but even the grandson of
Arphachad, who is the third son of Shem; and the Jews almost give this
opinion, that it is because of this Eber that the people of God have
inherited the name, that they are called the Hebrews; although they
would rather that this name be derived from Abraham. However, this
opinion seems to me to be better. This boar was a father of Peleg, at
which time, as Moses says afterwards, the languages began to divide,
since Nimrod and the descendants of Ham built the Tower of Babel.

82Now we have said above that Assyria went out of the land of Sinear
because he would not consent to the idolatrous worship of Nimrod.
Because he was not sure of his life among the idolaters, he turned to
the midnight, where the pious and godly family of Japheth lived.

In order that there might be a distinction among the children of Shem,
Moses called Shem the father of all the children of Boar, so that it
might be known that Christ would be born from the descendants of Boar.
This is such an honor that he did not count the other sons, even though
they were of excellent standing, as Shem\'s children before this Boar,
the father of the Lord Christ.

The Persians of Elam were famous not only because they had Cyrus, the
greatest and most powerful prince, as their monarch, but also because
they had the knowledge of God and the right religion that Daniel had
preached and taught them. From Arphachsad many

**[680 D. m. 27-29. interpretation of Genesis 10:21-32. W. 1:102\^-1028.
681]{.underline}**

easily the Greeks called their Arbaces, who killed the Sardanapalus.
Assur are the Assyrians. Lud, one respects, are the Lydians. Above,
however, in the Canaan family Ludim were called the Lydians. Aram is
Syria, which is two, as one knows from the histories: one in
Mesopotamia, the other in Phoenicia. From Aram, one thinks also, Armenia
is called.

**V.23. But the children of Aram found these: Uz, Hul, Gether and Mas.**

These are all unknown to us, except Uz, from which country Job was.

**V. 24. 25. But Arphachad begat Salah, Salah begat Eber. Eber begat two
sons. One was named Peleg, because in his time the world was divided;
his brother\'s name was Jaketan.**

Eber is the fourth after Shem, and after Shem he is especially praised,
because he is also among the grandparents of the Lord Christ. At that
time it happened that Nimrod invaded the Orient from the south and drove
the pious family of Shem out of it; therefore the same holy patriarchs
had to leave their seat, as it is said above about Assyria.

**V. 26-32. And Jaketan begat Almodad, Saleph, Hazarmaveth, Iarah,
Hadoram, Uzal, Dikela, Obal, Abimael, Seba, Ophir, Hevilah and Jobab.
These are all the children of Jaketan. And their dwelling was from Mesa
until one comes to Sephar, to the mountain toward the east. These are
the children of Shem in their families, languages, countries and people.
Now these are the descendants of the children of Noah, in their families
and people. From them find spread the people on earth after the flood.**

These are all peoples in India, of whom we know nothing, as we know the
least of all parts of the whole earth about India; otherwise we might
have something clearer and more recognizable from the sameness of the
names, although they are now being changed by the sailors.

The mountain Sephar is perhaps Ararat or Imaus. Which names, as often as
I

I have to think about the misery of the human race. For although we have
a very glorious gift, namely our reason, we are nevertheless hurried and
overwhelmed with misery and wretchedness, so that we do not only not
know our origin and the line of our ancestors, but also God the Creator
Himself. For consider all the histories of the nations, what would we
know about the origin of mankind if we did not have the one Moses?

Aristotle was a very perceptive man, that I also consider it that he did
it to Cicero far before and was at the mind above him. Although I like
to compare Aristotle with Cicero, Cicero cannot be blamed for not being
able to emulate Aristotle, because his studies were not a little
hindered by worldly business and trades. However, since Aristotle comes
to the thought where man comes from, his reason pulls him by force to
the conclusion that there is no first and last man. Plato, as I consider
it, has never seriously discussed this, but has wanted to ridicule the
other philosophers who were in his time; therefore, I will not bring his
opinion and teaching here.

90 Aristotle was serious with his thoughts about this. However, see what
clumsy thing follows from it, if you want to follow it! For first of
all, it will necessarily and inevitably follow that the soul is mortal.
For philosophy not only denies a single unlimited thing of potency
(possibility) \[for when one thinks of a certain single thing as
different from other certain things, one thinks of it as determined and
limited by this difference, thus not as an unlimited thing\], but says
flatly that many unlimited things (infinita) are impossible. For
example, these two infinites, an empty space and the filling of this
space by a body, cancel each other out \[as soon as one disregards all
determining properties of a body, as substance, weight, color, and thus
thinks of this body as an infinite, by considering only its extension,
then this infinity falls into the category of an unlimited thing.

**[682 L. IN. SS. so. Interpretation of Genesis 10:26-32. W. 1:10SS-UM.
683]{.underline}**

limited with the former, the extent of the empty space, in one\]. An
unlimited in reality recognizes the philosophy, as we see the people
originate and pass away, in such a long series of years, which Aristotle
holds for one unlimited according to the potency. \*)

Our reason can prove such wisdom, namely, that if we do not have the
word, we cannot understand or explain our own origin. But although I
prefer Aristotle to Cicero for the sake of reason, I see that Cicero
disputes such things much more wisely. For he is wary of these thoughts,
of the unlimited, and avoids them as a dangerous place, but directs
himself to religion, that is, turns his thoughts to the contemplation of
the creature, which is the ver-

\*) Cf. Aristotle Phys 4, 8.Since there is no body in the void, which
could escape, then the stereometric content of the empty space would
have to penetrate into the inserted body, when a body is put into the
void, but now this body also has a stereometric content, which, apart
from all qualitative determinations of the body, remains the same and
occupies the same stereometric empty space, so that two, and in the same
way also several, stereometric contents would be in one place. But this
is impossible and inconsistent.\" - Furthermore Aristotle

3, 6.\'. \"It remains only that the unlimited is according to potency;
but one must not take that which is according to potency in such a way,
as, for example, with the existence of the potency of a certain statue,
this statue will also once be, that likewise a certain unlimited, which
would be according to the actus, will also be, but, since being is taken
in many meanings, the unlimited exists in the way, as, for example, also
the day and the festival exist in that it always becomes another and
again another; for with these, too, there is something according to
potency as well as something according to the actus. But since being is
taken in many senses, the unlimited exists in the way that, for example,
the day and the festival exist in that they always become another and
another again; for in these, too, there is something both in potency and
in act, for the Olympiad is both in that the festival can occur and in
that it does occur. In addition, the unlimited is clear both in time and
in men and in the division of magnitudes, for in general the unlimited
exists in the sense that always another and again another is taken, but
that which is just taken is always limited, yet always different and
again different. Accordingly, the unlimited must not be taken as a
certain individual, such as a man or a house, but as one speaks of day
and festival, for which being is not there in the sense of a being, but
always in a coming into being or passing away, and even if limited each
time, nevertheless always a different thing and again a different thing;
only, however, this takes place in the case of magnitudes in such a way
that what is taken each time remains, whereas in the case of time and
men in such a way that it passes away, but without there being a gap.\"
Editor\'s note.

He sees the beautiful unity of the movements of the heavenly things; he
sees the certain changes of times and certain kinds of things that grow
out of the earth. For he sees the beautiful unity of the movements of
the heavenly things above; sees the certain changes of the times, and
certain kinds of things that grow out of the earth; sees also that man
was created to understand these things and to use them.

\(92\) Therefore he directs his opinion to conclude both these things:
First, that God is the eternal mind, which governs all things by its
wisdom and providence; second, that the soul of man is immortal. And
yet, in concluding these things, he is so violently hurried and carried
away by his thoughts that he loses this opinion, which he thus grasps,
at times under his hands. For the disputation of the unlimited is
violently torn to many a strange thought, and our reason again takes
away our thoughts from religion, when we see that this nature is laden
with so many miseries and misery.

This text reminds us of our misery and ghastly blindness, holding up to
us such things of which the whole world knows nothing. For what more do
we have of the best and most distinguished part of the other world than
mere names? But of the first world, which was before the Flood, I will
say nothing. The Greeks, as well as the Romans, have taken care that the
history of their tragedies and history should remain and be preserved:
but is this not a small thing, if you count it against the history of
the previous times, of which Moses here only tells the mere names and
not their history?

Therefore, it should be considered that this tenth chapter is like a
mirror in which we can see what kind of people we are, namely, such a
creature, which has been so damaged and made dilapidated by sin that we
would not know or know our own origin, even God, our Creator, if God\'s
word did not point it out to us from afar as a little spark of divine
light. What can one do in the world that is more foolish and futile than
to be aware of his wisdom, riches, gifts, and the

**[684 L. in. 3O-S2. Interpretation of I Genesis 10:26-32. cap. I I. W.
I, IV31-1WS. 685]{.underline}**

walt and other things, so utterly ephemeral, boasts?

95 Therefore we hold our dear holy Bible in high esteem and as the most
precious treasure. For this very chapter sums up, as with a string, all
that has taken place in the world from the beginning to the middle and
end, whether or not it is considered to have nothing but mere and dead
words and names. For from Adam comes the promise of Christ to Seth;

from Seth to Noah; from Noah to Shem, and from Shem to this boar, from
whom the people of the Hebrews have the name, as being the heir, to whom
the promise of Christ is directed and decreed before all peoples of the
whole world. The holy scripture points us to such knowledge, and those
who do not have it live in error, blindness and godlessness without all
measure and end, because they do not know of themselves who they are or
where they come from.

**The eleventh chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of the building of the tower of Babel and the confusion of languages,
as a punishment of the same, in general.**

This chapter also belongs to the excellent and special example of the
most holy patriarch Noah and his family, especially those who were pious
and God-fearing from the same, so that we may see what faith and
godliness were in these holy men, since great wickedness, envy and
tyranny ruled and prevailed in the children of men.

\(2\) For a time after the Flood, the whole earth was in a blessed and
good state, for the people of it all had the same language, which served
not a little for unity and was especially useful for the preservation of
doctrine and religion. For the fresh memory of the exuberant wrath of
God, which God had shown in the Flood, kept their souls in the fear of
God and reverence for their ancestors.

3 Ham, the son of Noah, first disturbs such a blessed state. For he goes
down as one who had forgotten such great wrath, and first despises the
authority of his father, whom he should honor,

and makes a mockery of him, as we heard above. After that he leaves his
father and his pious brothers and wins a new kingdom on earth. Finally,
from his eldest son, his grandson Nimrod is begotten, who strengthens
himself through violence and tyranny and causes many a plague to the
pious family of Noah, thus bringing about a power and dominion for
himself and remains the sole master.

\(4\) Therefore, just as from Adam\'s two sons, born to him, two
different peoples emerged (for Cain went out from his father, despised
the true church and set up a special one without God\'s command), so
this also happens here in the sons of Noah. For from Ham the false and
lying church has its origin as from an origin of all godless being and
wickedness. And this is the history, which Moses tells in this chapter
as the beginning of the evil and sorrow, which arose against the church.

I.

But what the sin of those who built the tower of Babel was, is not
clearly expressed in this chapter. Therefore, of these two things,
namely, of the building or tower, and of the sin of those who built it,
one finds various thoughts and judgments, and the bolder each one is,
the more freely and boldly he expresses his opinion of both.

**[686 8. m, 32-34. Interpretation of Genesis II. W. 1, 1035-1037.
687]{.underline}**

pieces. So the common rabble also went to it and made up fables about
it. They say that the tower was nine miles high, but since the language
was confused and the third part of the tower was thrown down by strong
winds and thunderstorms, the earth also sank, so that now no more than
the third part still stands. But the height was so great that at the top
of the tower one heard the angels singing.

But we leave such foolish fables and fairy tales aside, and it is more
worthwhile to consider and think about what the sin of those who built
the tower was, because it cannot really be understood thoroughly from
the text.

Lyra is of this opinion that he thinks that this building was started
and made by the descendants of Ham for this reason, so that if God
wanted to punish the world once again with the Flood, they would have a
place in which they would want to remain safe. That I do not believe
this, however, is due to the clear and public promise which Ham also
heard, namely, that it would not come to this, that the whole world
would perish once again by the Flood. Ham knew well that in the flood
the water had gone fifteen cubits high over all the high mountains.
Therefore, I do not think that they could have been so foolish as to
think that such a height could be built in the air and executed so that
they could be safe from a flood.

\(8\) Therefore I consider that the greatest sin is that they say,
\"Come, let us build a city and a tower. For such words point to sure
hearts, which rely on temporal fortune and force and not on God, also
despise the church, because it is without all appearance and force.

\(9\) That Lyra therefore says that they wanted to create a safe place
for themselves against the Flood with this building, I consider to be a
hasty allegorical fable, so that the fathers wanted to depict such
people, who could bravely despise God, and thought that they had
protection and protection against God\'s wrath in their power. For from
a safe and

If you think up and invent whatever you want about a raw heart that is
without any fear of God, you still cannot sufficiently portray and
depict the godless nature.

\(10\) And I have no doubt that this story gave rise to the fable of the
giants who discussed how to lift the god Jupiter out of heaven, and for
this purpose they set the mountains apart. Just as the fable of
Deucalion is taken from the story of the Flood and written. For such
things were also made known to the Gentiles from the preaching of the
fathers. Therefore I think that this sin was nothing else than a very
great security, hopefulness and contempt for God. For this is what the
wicked are wont to do when they are puffed up by happiness and
prosperity, that they think they are sitting on God\'s lap, become very
defiant, and dare to do what they desire.

\(11\) Just as the sin of Harn was not only a sin against the church and
religion, but also against the police (for at the same time he laughed
at his father, the most holy patriarch, and despised his doctrine and
religion; for, as we have just heard, he departed from his father and
set up a new police force for himself): so Nimrod, his son\'s son, also
sinned against the church spiritually and against the police worldly.
First of all, he did not respect the right religion, and he also
committed injustice and tyranny against his cousins, whom he expelled
from their paternal border and seat. For there is no doubt about it:
those who went after the morning, as Moses says, will have been
Nimrod\'s and other descendants of Ham. For Moses clearly indicates this
in the beginning of this chapter. Therefore such sins also had their
punishments, of which Moses will report soon after.

\(12\) Therefore let these words be interpreted in the most severe and
cruel way, which Moses puts simply, that they exhort and encourage one
another to build a tower and a city. For thus Moses wants to say: Is
this not a great hope and contempt?

**[688L .m, 34-SS. Interpretation of Genesis II. W. 1, 1037-1040.
689]{.underline}**

How could they not have asked God about it and consulted Him, but have
subjected themselves to such a great thing on their own initiative? They
drove the pious race of Shem out of their land and seat, and intended to
subjugate the whole world, but especially the church. Therefore, this
sin is an abominable apostasy from the church, from the Word and the
angels of God Himself to the devil, and includes not only the sins
against the first table, but also against the other table.

Therefore, the emphasis is that they say, \"Let us build a city and a
tower,\" not to God, nor to His church, but to suppress it. Item: \"Let
US make a name.\" For those who speak in this way truly do not care that
God\'s name be sanctified, but all their diligence and pretension is
directed solely to making their name great and widely famous. And no
doubt they will have bravely despised the small and lowly tabernacles of
the holy fathers and brethren, because they have built so exquisitely
and gloriously.

\(14\) Neither is it said in general that they say, \"The top of the
tower shall reach unto heaven. For this is not to be understood of the
height alone; but by this they point to the place of worship, as if God
dwelt first at this tower. For this is the way the devil uses to adorn
himself with the title of deity, and wants us to take his idolatry and
superstition for the right religion and worship.

In our time, the Church has no more deadly enemies than the Turk and the
Pope. But now we see that they both boast of the name of God, and intend
to preserve everything with this title. In the meantime, we must be
scolded for heretics, devil\'s children, apostates and rebels.

\(16\) This has been the case throughout the ages, even in these first
times before and after the flood; for here Ham\'s descendants are
portrayed as despising the humility of the church, the fear of God, and
the right worship of God, and not only did they build the city of
Babylon according to worldly advice and counsel, but they also put a
semblance of religion on it.

that it should be considered and believed that this place is first of
all heaven and the most pleasant seat of God.

\(17\) Therefore it is true that it is said that every mameluke and
apostate is a persecutor of his order from which he has fallen away.
Because Ham and his descendants have left the church, he has neither
sought nor undertaken anything else, except to suppress the church and
to lift himself and his own up. So also the devil, after he has let go
of God and the angels or the heavenly church and has departed from them,
does nothing else but that he pursues God and the church with bitter and
cruel hatred and resentment. And so that he may have a continuation of
this, he disguises himself as an angel of light, 2 Corinthians 11:14,
and subordinates himself to be God. In the same way, Nimrod makes
himself a god in the middle of Babylon and creates his own church, so
that he can suppress the real church.

\(18\) Now the pious and godly should do the same, namely, that after
they have left the devil\'s church and fallen away from it, they also
begin to be enemies of it. Thus, by the grace of God, we are holy
deniers and apostates: for we have fallen away from the Antichrist and
the devil\'s church, and have come to the Son of God and the true
church, with whom we must also stand and fight and contend against the
false church.

19 Thus Moses indicates here that the sin of apostasy was this, that the
descendants of Ham, Nimrod and others fell away from God, from the Word,
from the fathers and from the church, not only as far as the outward and
worldly community is concerned, but much more as far as religion and
worship are concerned; for they lived according to their vain
inventions, lusts and desires.

020 For to raise up a tower, and to build a city, was no sin in itself,
since the saints also did the same. And Assyria, who I believe to have
been entirely holy, built the city of Nineveh, because he could no
longer dwell beside the wicked. But the sin is most of all in the fact
that they built on this building.

**[690L. m, 38. 37. Interpretation of Genesis 11. w. 1, 1040-1048.
691]{.underline}**

They despise Noah and the true church and strive for their own regime,
and in addition respect and pretend to be those who are first of God and
whom God listens to and gives happiness and welfare to; but Noah is
abandoned and rejected by God.

\(21\) Therefore, in this history, the ungodly nature is depicted, with
all the attitudes, practices, attitudes and thoughts of all the ungodly,
but especially of the hypocrites, who consider themselves holy and
God\'s closest friends, and who want to rule and be powerful on this
earth. And if one wanted to give this sin another name, one could call
it a real blasphemy, blasphemy of the name of God, a sin against the
third commandment of the Sabbath, and an abominable idolatry, by which
the honor of the living God is turned into a calf, that is idolatry in
the heart. And such sins do not remain alone, but give birth to others,
namely hatred and enmity against the true church, persecution, tyranny,
murder, robbery, fornication and adultery. For the false church is
always a persecutor of the true and right church, not only spiritually
by false doctrine and unrighteous worship, but also physically by
strangulation, violence and tyranny.

**II.**

\(22\) Moses says that this sin was followed by the confusion of
languages as a punishment. This seems to have been a small punishment,
but it is really a terrible and horrible punishment, if one wants to
think about the great damage that followed this confusion and separation
of the languages. For where there is a single language, it is first of
all a strong help and encouragement for people to keep together and live
in unity with one another. And this is also the origin of the saying in
which it is said: \"Like and like like like each other. For a German
likes to talk and deal with someone who is of his own kind and language.
But since there are many different and unequal languages, there is not
only no companionship, but there also grows in the heart resentment and
enmity against such a people whose language one cannot understand. So

a Frenchman is an enemy of a German and despises him; but the Italians
despise and hate all other nations that do not speak their language.

\(23\) Therefore, from this confusion of tongues, it can be seen and
felt that their hearts have been divided and divided among themselves,
their customs have been perverted, and all their thoughts, ways, and
customs have been changed; that such a division of tongues may rightly
be called an origin and cause of all evil and misfortune; for it has at
the same time created disorder and confusion in the worldly and domestic
government.

\(24\) And even though this has been a great pity and harm, it is
nothing against the fact that through this separation of languages the
church has also become disordered, disturbed, and given place and cause
to innumerable idolatries and superstitions. For who would not see that
the Magisterium has almost been abolished by this change of languages?
For Eber, who undoubtedly kept the first and right language, could not
teach and instruct the others, whose language he did not know and who
could not understand him.

\(25\) Therefore, in the New Testament, this is a great blessing and an
extraordinary miracle, that on the day of Pentecost the Holy Spirit,
through various languages, gathered all the nations into one body, the
head of which is Christ. For Christ brings them all to one faith through
the gospel, even though the various languages remain, and tears down the
wall and the fence, not only by reconciling us to God through his death
and speaking to us in a new language, but also by making peace and unity
by heart, so that we, like various flocks, are brought under one
shepherd and gathered into one sheepfold. This help and benefit of the
Lord Christ is common to us all; therefore the disparity that is in the
outward life neither harms nor hinders.

\(26\) Therefore, for this gift also, we have to thank him, that he has
made this most severe punishment, which has been an origin and cause of
all unhappiness and disunity, through

**[692 L. m, 37-39. interpretation of Genesis II. W. 1, 1043-1016.
693]{.underline}**

His Holy Spirit and brought to us a holy unity, although the diversity
and inequality of languages remains. For where this mediator, Christ, is
not recognized, there is disunity and abominable blindness in the hearts
as well as in the languages.

\(27\) Therefore, if we look through all the histories of all peoples
and times, we find that from this disparity and diversity of languages
arose many uprisings, wars and great changes in customs and religion, as
well as many thoughts and delusions of the people. That is why God
wanted to turn around and abolish such a great plague and misery by a
new miracle.

\(28\) If I do not understand an Italian, he does not understand me:
therefore a natural cause of anger and enmity grows between us. But if
we both understand Christ, then we love one another as our members,
which we are among one another. But where Christ is not, there still
reigns this Babylonian plague, namely the division of languages, which
certainly also causes a division of hearts and makes not only the
household government and police, but also religion and the church
restless and disorderly.

\(29\) This abominable punishment admonishes and warns us to beware that
we do not become disparaging of the word, or prefer ourselves to others,
as if we were more pious and holy. Because the descendants of Ham did
this, a terrible punishment followed, which, as one might say, caused
more damage to the human race than the Flood itself. For the flood alone
destroyed the people who were at one time, but that punishment lasts
until the end of the world; although Christ has helped us in this
through his spirit. But how very small is this portion who accept the
word and believe! The other large group is divided in itself with the
heart, as with the language, and does the most pleasant service to the
devil, who is a father and founder of all wars and disunity.

Thirdly. Because we have now heard about the

Sin and punishment of those, who built the tower, it is not without use,
that one counts the time together, namely, how many years there were
between the Flood and this son Peleg, under whom the tower of Babel was
built and the separation and confusion of the languages happened. Now
almost a hundred years passed after the flood, when this happened, and
at the same time Noah was seven hundred years old; whom during his life,
when he reigned and preached to them of such great wrath of God, all his
church and the lineage of the holy fathers despised these godless
people, namely Ham with his grandchildren, who soon forgot such great
and terrible wrath of God. This must have offended the pious Noah and
his descendants that his descendants looked at him and warned him in
vain of what they were about to do. That is why the same holy man is
laughed at again as an old fool and fantasist.

\(31\) Therefore, if we want to compare our trials, crosses and troubles
with this suffering, plague and temptation of the holy father, they are
nothing compared to it. For although we see great unhappiness, misery
and calamity in the world, we do not see it for long, and are therefore
more blessed that we will be taken out of such a bad world the sooner.
Noah, however, had to see the wickedness of his ill-bred descendants at
four and a half hundred years. What do we think, what kind of misery he
will have to see during this time? Therefore, in this case, the pious
son Shem was far superior to his father, who had to see this misery much
longer and lived for five hundred years after the Flood. Therefore, they
are martyrs, to whom all people should look at all times and learn to be
patient according to their example.

32 St. Peter 2 Epist. 2, 7 preaches about Lot the righteous that his
soul was tormented and martyred because he had to watch the ungodly and
shameful works of the Sodomites. And of Mary, Simeon says Luc. 2, 35,
that a sword had passed through

**[694 m, S9-t2. Interpretation of Genesis 11:1-4. W. 1, 1046-1080.
695]{.underline}**

their soul will go. For holy people cannot look at the wickedness of the
world without great pain and sorrow in their hearts. But, as I said, our
cross and suffering, even of those who have been before us and will be
after us, is nothing compared to those holy fathers who have had to see
such a perverse nature and wickedness of the world for five hundred
years and more.

Therefore let us also patiently suffer such sad images and arrows of
Satan, which he shoots into our hearts. For we shall not have it better
than the holy fathers before us; though, as I have said, we have it much
better because we have a shorter time to live. This is what I recently
wanted to tell you as a preface to this chapter. Now let us also look at
the text.

**Second part.**

**Of the Tower of Babel and its punishment in particular.**

V. 1, 2: **Now all the world had one tongue and language. And they went
eastward, and found a plain land in the land of Sinear, and dwelt
there.**

34 I have said about the word mikkedem, morning, in the second chapter
above. For my opinion is this, that the morning or Orient is called this
country, which is closest from the country Canaan to the morning; as in
the books of the kings also the Arabs are called children of the
morning.

\(35\) What place Sinear is is known from the tenth chapter; for that is
the name of the land of old, which afterward was called Babylon.

**I.**

**V. 3 And they said one to another, Come, let us make brick, and lime.
And they took goat to stone, and clay to lime.**

This is a clear testimony that the city of Babylon and the tower were
built of bricks or burnt stones, just as Rome was built of bricks. And
methinks that this manner of building was still new at that time, from
which one had previously, since

They did not know how to burn bricks, nor did they know how to use lime
to brick them together.

**V. 4 And they said: Come, let us build us a city and a tower, and let
the top thereof reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name: for we may
be scattered abroad.**

\(37\) What does this mean, and how did this word come to their tongue,
that they prophesy to themselves that they would be scattered abroad? Do
they prophesy, as Caiaphas did John 11:49, 50, and speak things they do
not know? For this commonly happens, that the wicked, as Solomon also
says, Proverbs 10:24, prophesy their own misfortune, and what they fear
befalls them. As also Ezekiel says Cap. 11, 8. 9.: \"The sword that you
fear, that I will bring upon you, says the Lord GOD. I will thrust you
out from there\" 2c. Again, the hope of the godly is not in vain, but
what they hope for and believe will surely come to pass and they will
not lack it. But this is not a prophecy of Caiphas, but has another
cause.

\(38\) And in such texts I generally follow this rule, that just as the
words and deeds of the godly cannot be understood in any other way than
from their mind and heart, so I also believe that the words and deeds of
the wicked cannot be understood unless one knows the mind and mood of
the spirit that drives them, namely, the devil. Now this is always his
mind and spirit, that he is at the same time contrary to God Himself and
the church. Just as the thoughts, words and deeds of the godly are
directed solely to the glory of God and the benefit and salvation of the
church. Whoever is guided by this goal and rule, no pretense or glitter,
which the devil always uses in his words and works, can deceive or
seduce him. For whoever hears that this or that word or work does not
agree with God\'s word, and says that it comes from the devil, he judges
and says right. Then he is also right in you when he says it.

**[696 e. m, 42. \<3. Interpretation of Genesis II, 4. W. i. iaso-i \"s.
697]{.underline}**

and says that this was said or done out of a sense and intention to lie
and strangle.

\(39\) I followed this rule when I wanted to give my judgment and
opinion of the Pope\'s teaching. Because I saw that this teaching did
not want to agree with God\'s word, I concluded from the beginning that
such teaching was from the devil and directed to deceive and kill people
with it. No pretense that the desperate rogue and land cheat deceived
the whole world could lead me away from this opinion, nor could it
penetrate me. Because this rule is therefore not lacking when one wants
to judge and rightly interpret the words and works of God and the devil,
the pious and the wicked, we do right when we also follow it in this
text.

40 The descendants of Harn, as Nimrod and the others, had overrun this
land, which had come to Shem as an heir of the promise of God and was
due to him. And because they were tyrannical heads, they desired not
only to drive the family of Shem out of it, but also to establish a new
police and church for themselves. Although it is not described what they
did against the right church and the right ruler of it, Noah and his
pious descendants, it can still be understood from the same actions,
because we want to look at our adversaries\' work and intentions a
little more diligently at the present time. For Satan remains who he is,
and this is his business for and for, that he incites the ungodly and
drives them against the true church.

41\. Because Noah and the other godly fathers saw that they were thus
oppressed and afflicted, and that new acts of worship were being
performed before their eyes, they prophesied out of their reason, even
though they were certain from memory and the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit what the punishment would be, and concluded: \"Behold, Adam was
punished after he sinned in Paradise, and the punishment of the same sin
is still hanging around our necks with all of us. Thus Cain was punished
for the death he had committed against his brother, and for his

The people of the world were also punished by God for their ungodly
delusions, and the whole world was finally destroyed by the Flood for
the sake of sin. Therefore, it will certainly not pass without
punishment that they have subjected themselves to tyranny and at the
same time have confused, falsified and corrupted religion. Since God had
promised that He would no longer destroy the world with the Flood, they
concluded from the inspiration of the Holy Spirit that a punishment
would follow; so that just as they, the wicked, put all their effort and
strength into suppressing the true church, so the true church would be
preserved and scattered throughout the world.

\(42\) And this prophecy, because it was intended to strengthen and
comfort the true church and all believers, was not spread by Noah in a
corner or secretly, but publicly in many places with a strong spirit:
for this reason it was made known and revealed to the generation of the
wicked, who could not have so completely thrown to the wind and despised
it, even though they surely despised such words of the Holy Spirit. For
so it is with the wicked, that though they know that they sin, and that
the punishment is not far off, yet the certainty drives back the fear,
and they break through freely.

\(43\) So these words indicate here that they may have had such a
conscience, which was confused and upset, but nevertheless they
continued safely and despised all punishments. Just as Ovid says of
Medea: \"I see what is better, I agree with it; but still I follow
evil.\" I have also heard at one time that Carlstadt said here in this
place, where he had graduated several doctors, that he knew well that it
was a sin to make doctors of theology, and yet he did it. This is truly
not a small sin, that one is so hardened against his conscience that he
boasts of his sins with knowledge and will.

44 So now we have, as far as this text is concerned, what the mind and
spirit of the wicked and the devil is, from which we can easily
understand and judge their words.

**[698 D.m, 43-4S. Interpretation of Genesis 11, 4. 5. D. I. lass-1VSK.
699]{.underline}**

It is not enough for this godless generation of Ham to know that it sins
against him, that it expels pious and God-fearing people from theirs:
but it also laughs at the punishments and makes fun of the serious
threats that it hears from the father Noah. Just as our papists smile
with pity when they hear that we threaten them with the future of the
Lord Christ and the last judgment. For so they think: If we have such a
long time, there is no need for us.

\(45\) The wicked do the same thing. They hear from the father Noah the
punishment of dispersion, and yet they say with great certainty, \"What,
shall we be dispersed? But let us first build a city and a tower, that
we may receive a name, and that it may be remembered what we have done.
So they do not entirely believe that there will be a scattering; they
are not sure that it will not happen, but they go on about it and
prepare to start a new building for the contempt of the church of the
pious. Therefore, these are the very proudest words of Satan and his
children against God.

Thus we see that the papists act in the same way; therefore it is
impossible that the tyranny of the popes can last much longer. For Rome
is so defiled and burdened with all kinds of sin, shame and vice that it
cannot be worse than hell itself. In addition, they also practice an
abominable idolatry, irritate and embitter kings and princes, so that
they confirm their godless nature and suppress the truth. Now it cannot
be lacking, they must be in such great sins so not at all without fear
of the punishments, which we also prophesy to them; and yet they boast
and, as the prophet Isaiah Cap. 48:4, they have \"a brazen face\" and
act as if they fear nothing. That is why they do not renounce their
ungodly nature, but boldly continue and increase it.

47 Thus the godless being always keeps its way, that it mocks and laughs
at God in both parts, namely in hope and fear. For these two affects are
in

one another in the ungodly; just as they are also with one another in
the pious, and those who have the right faith. Although the pious always
fear more than they hope, hope and faith finally become the strongest in
them and overcome fear. On the other hand, in the wicked, even though
they have fear, the strongest thing is unbelief, unfaithfulness and
malice, which drive out all fear and make them safe, so that they
despise danger and pass through it freely. But at last it befalls them
that they fear, and they lack hope; as we see that the godless
generation of Ham was miserably scattered, but Noah remained and was
preserved with his own.

Therefore this whole history should be interpreted and drawn to the
consolation of the church, which, although it is challenged and plagued
in many ways by the wicked, finally wins and is on top; but the wicked
perish and are prophets of their own misfortune. As Caiphas prophesies
Joh. 11, 48.: \"If we leave him, the Romans will come and take our land
and people\", and in the prophet Hosea Cap. 7, 12. it also says: \"I
will punish them as one preaches in their gathering.\"

**V. 5 Then the Lord came down to see the city and the tower that the
children of men were building.**

\(49\) What the wicked feared, and what they surely despised out of
exuberant malice, as said above, they now encounter. Therefore, this is
a correct theological text, which also shows us how both the pious and
the wicked should think and feel. For we see that this is how it
happens: while the sinner is at work and in heat, he does not see God,
does not speak of Him, does not feel Him either. For he thinks that God
neither sees nor feels what he is doing.

50 Thus, when Adam brought the apple to his mouth, he did not think of
the word. Therefore, if you now want to look into his conscience as it
was then, you will find that he does not care much more about God and
His word, except as if God were a dead and void thing; as such thoughts
are of the

**[700 L m, 4S-47. interpretation of Genesis 11:5. \". I. KS6-UM.
701]{.underline}**

Psalm 10 v. 11: \"The wicked says in his heart: God has forgotten, he
has hidden his face, he will never see it. For so Cain thinks, when he
makes himself over his brother and strangles him, that God is asleep and
does not see what he is doing. And this happens because God is
long-suffering and does not let the punishment go soon when one has
earned it.

Thus the pious make me believe that God is asleep and closes his eyes,
while they cry and sigh for salvation and help, but God is silent with
help and salvation. Therefore there are so many such laments in the
Psalms; as Ps. 13, 2. ff. 44, 24. ff. 35, 23. 7, 7. 10, 12: \"Lord, how
long will you forget me? Why do you sleep? Get up! Wake up! Lift up your
hand\" 2c. And such sayings, in which God indicates that He sees
everything that people do, and nothing is hidden from His eyes, but He
is such a God who does not want godless beings 2c., belong mostly to the
comfort of the church.

\(52\) Therefore, the Scriptures speak here of how God is minded when He
pretends not to see the wicked\'s iniquity, nor to hear the prayer of
the pious. This is the mind of God, and this is what we think, and we
seriously think that God is asleep, because he either does not punish
sin soon, or does not hear the prayer of the pious as soon as possible.

Thus the text says here that God has descended, as if He had not been
present before. For while the wicked continued ardently in this
presumption and contempt, and the prophecy of righteous Noah was laughed
at, everyone thought that God was not at home and did not know what the
children of Ham were dealing with. But when the measure of sin is full,
God descends, that is, only then does one feel that He is present and
angry. Thus it is written in Genesis 22:12: \"Now I know that you fear
God,\" as if God had not known about Abraham before.

\(54\) In the same way, the papists also think that God has died and can
neither see nor hear, and that he is not present; therefore, they
certainly continue to rage against the church, oppressing and
persecuting it in many ways. For

they say, as it is written in the 73rd Psalm v. 11: \"What should God
ask of them? What should the Most High regard them for?\"

For this is the way of sin, that it lies and rests for a time, as I said
above in chapter 3, while the day is hot, that is, while lust and sin
reign, and man, being overtaken and devoured by the devil, does not
respect God\'s word, but surely despises it, as if God were asleep, or
were nothing at all.

\(56\) In the evening, when the heat abates and the day becomes cool,
God begins to stir in Paradise, walks around in it, and His voice is
heard, which is no longer friendly and sweet, as it was before the sin,
but terrifying, so that Adam cannot bear it. Therefore, he hides himself
under the trees, wanting neither to hear nor to see God, but he cannot
be hidden.

The poets have pretended that when the hound of Cerbern barks in hell,
the souls in it are terrified. But actually it is a real fright when one
hears the voice of the angry God, that is, when one feels and senses the
conscience. For then one feels that God, who before was nowhere, is
everywhere, and of whom one before thought he was asleep, now hears and
sees everything and his anger burns like a fire, rages and strangles.

This is the kind of language that the Scriptures use and to which one
must become accustomed. God leads down, but not physically or
personally, for he is everywhere; but he lets himself be noticed, ceases
to be long-suffering, and begins to discover, punish, and remit sin. So
that safe men, who before thought he was far away and his wrath, now see
that he is all too near to them, and are terrified of him.

\(59\) Therefore this text belongs to the end that we may be frightened
by it and learn to beware of sin. For God will not remain silent
forever, but just as he frightened Adam, Cain and the whole world with
the Flood with his future and present until death, so he will also
attack us once where we do not forestall him through repentance.

**[7028 . m, 47-tZ. Interpretation of Genesis 11, 5. W. I. UKS-I0W.
703]{.underline}**

To the pious, however, this descent of the Lord is a very joyful and
pleasant thing, which is why they always desire and wish for it through
their heartfelt prayers, even though they often doubt it because of the
weakness of their flesh. For the pope, the Turk and other enemies of the
church let themselves be seen as if they have taken hold of themselves
by force in such a way that nothing can be taken away from them by any
strength. But God will descend in His time and disperse both the Pope
and the Turks. For against such our weakness and the security of the
wicked, the Scriptures testify that God will finally descend, visit and
open eyes, ears and mouth. The godly believe this, but weakly, but the
wicked despise it all the more surely.

61 And so this example should also serve us to learn from it that the
longer God tolerates idolatry and other sins and remains silent about
them, the more unbearable His wrath will be when it is revealed.
Therefore we should consider it a great blessing that he does not leave
our sins unpunished for so long; just as the 30th Psalm, v. 6,
admonishes the church to give thanks that his wrath is short and lasts
for a moment and that he delights in life. \"Weeping lasts through the
evening,\" he says, \"but joy in the morning.\" And Ps. 89:31, 33: \"If
his children forsake my law, and walk not in my statutes, I will punish
their sin with a rod, and their iniquity with plagues.\" Therefore this
is a wrath of grace, when the punishment hastens and keeps us from sin.

\(62\) But if God is silent about sin and looks through the fingers, as
it were, an unbearable wrath follows, of which there is no end. For such
a wrath was the flood, and this one, of which Moses says here that God
lets the descendants of Ham have happiness even while they sin, and lets
them continue in their sins until they build a city and a tower. But the
disaster that comes upon them after that is all the greater.

\(63\) Therefore, we should not doubt it, but consider it certain that
the Turk is the one.

and Pope, who live so long in happiness, have the most terrible judgment
and punishment before them, the like of which no man has ever felt or
experienced since the beginning of the world. For so long has God never
kept silent about a man\'s ungodly nature and highest blasphemies;
therefore their punishment will be far more severe and greater than the
Flood, this dispersion here and the punishment of Sodom has been. For it
will be an everlasting wrath.

\(64\) Moses says that God does not descend alone, but descends \"to
see,\" and I have said how this is to be understood. For until now God
has shown Himself and revealed Himself as if He did not see. Thus the
wicked also considered it and were certain that God did not notice such
their intention.

But that he calls these tyrants and proud builders Adam\'s children or
\"children of men\" shows a special contempt. And he does it in the same
way as he did in chapter 6, v. 2. 3. above, namely, that he makes a
distinction between the right and the wrong church and between the
children of God and the children of men. For he calls the children of
men those who do not have God\'s word and are cursed and damned
hypocrites. With what, saith he, do such deal? They build a city and
tower against me and my church. Which is truly a ridiculous presumption,
because they are the children of men.

For this reason, it is a comfort to the true church that God not only
sees, but also laughs at the wicked who set themselves against them, the
plots and schemes with which they circumvent; as Psalm 2:4 says, \"He
who dwells in heaven laughs at them, and the Lord mocks them. But their
laughter is dangerous and deadly, for it is followed by the fierce wrath
of God and scattering. \"He will,\" says David Ps. 2:5, \"one day speak
to them in his wrath, and with his fury he will terrify them.\"

67 That we therefore see that the pope, following the example of Nimrod,
is also building a fortress to crush the church with it, because he is
setting the Turk and the world on us, should not frighten us; for
without a doubt

**[704 L. m, 4g-52. Interpretation of Genesis II, 5-9. W. I, I0W-10S4.
705]{.underline}**

God laughs at his futile attempts and will also overthrow him with his
wrath one day.

\(68\) So the Holy Spirit comforts the true church, which is plagued by
the church of the devil, that it should not think that God does not
respect it. The Lord, he says, sees what the wicked are up to, and now
he is preparing to descend, so that they may also experience and see
that their plots are hidden from God, however surely they laugh at all
threats, and make themselves believe that their power cannot be
increased or broken; but, he says, they will see themselves deceived.

Now God does not use storm armor or anything else to break down walls
and throw them down, but only causes their languages to be confused.
This is actually a wonderful way to fight against cities and to break
down walls, but it is the most certain and easiest way; as Christ also
testifies in the Gospel Luc. 11:17: \"Every kingdom that is divided
against itself becomes desolate. For if their languages had not been
confused, neither would their hearts have been divided. But now, because
of the confusion of languages, by which also the hearts are separated
from one another, there fall Babylon, Nineveh, Jerusalem, Rome, and in
sum all the kingdoms.

**V. 6 And the Lord said, Behold, there is one people and one language
among them all, and they have begun to do this; they will not cease from
all that they have undertaken to do.**

70 The word samam is well known, for it means to undertake something
with a certain intention and to consider it, whether it be good or evil;
as it also means here: They have undertaken to do such a thing, have set
it in their minds so stiffly and will not let themselves be turned away
from this undertaking. This is said as if it were a complaint of God,
and he was saddened by such an undertaking of men, who were so sure and
did not turn their backs on Noah and the godly Shem to their great harm.

All these things are prescribed for our consolation. For our faith is
weak and the cross hard and heavy, even if we are patient. Therefore,
when we see such attacks of the wicked and mighty upsets, we think that
the church is about to be overthrown and that the wicked will take over
and overwhelm everything.

Against such thoughts of despair this text goes mightily. For thus the
Holy Spirit wants to say: You must not look only at what men think and
intend; for they are stiff-necked, proud and sure men. But rise a little
from the earth and go up to heaven with your thoughts, and see what God
is up to and how he is minded; who indeed is not idle nor asleep, but
looks upon such security of men with sorrow, and grieves him as much as
you. Therefore have no doubt, he will come one day and put to shame such
stubborn people, who are of such a stiff-necked mind and nobility. Thus
the words of God show the sobs and groans of the God-fearing, who are
frightened and offended by such a stubborn opinion of the wicked, who
are certain in their hearts that they want to accomplish what they have
set out to do, even without the thanks and will of our Lord God.

Thus we see that after the holy fathers saw so many astonishments of
godless people who revile and blaspheme God and His word, they also had
to deal with this challenge of a weak faith; otherwise they would not
have lamented and sighed in such a way that God Himself was also caused
to indicate to them for their consolation that such behavior of the
godless also hurt Him. Now follows the punishment.

**II.**

**V. 7, 8, 9: Come, let us go down, and there confound their language,
that none may hear another\'s speech. So the LORD scattered them abroad,
and they ceased to build the city. Therefore their name is called
Babylon, because the LORD there confused the language of all the
countries, and scattered them abroad into all the countries.**

**[706 L.m,sL-\". Interpretation of Genesis 11:7-9. W. 1. 1O64-I0S7.
707]{.underline}**

This is the description of the terrible punishment from which war, death
and all kinds of misfortune have arisen throughout the world. For no one
can believe that this punishment has ceased, but it continues and still
continues, and therefore the church in particular feels great
discomfort. For how often has it happened that for the sake of a small
ceremony, in which nothing special was involved, the churches have
become divided. So Pope Victor put all the Oriental churches under ban,
because they did not want to keep the Easter feast at the time when the
Occidental ones kept it. For the Oriental ones kept it on the day when
the Jews still keep it today, but the Occidental ones preferred to use
Christian liberty.

Such things also happen in the secular regiment, and in countries and
republics they are actually no more harmful plague than separation. For
what would the Turk have gained from us Germans, or could still harm us,
if we had been one and had stood together with the same mind, spirit and
nobility? But because we are divided for the sake of a paltry title, he
is gradually making Germany tired and weary and taking one country after
another.

76 So that we also are struck and punished with the confusion of
languages; and all kingdoms have felt this plague from the time that
Babylon was built. For Sallust has well and truly said that a weak and
small good soon increases and becomes great where one lives in unity;
but where one lives in discord and is divided, no good is so great, it
rises above it and deteriorates. And the Greeks have a beautiful fable
of Eris, who incites people to discord and strife by means of a golden
apple: I almost wanted to say that such a fable has its beginning and
origin from this history. For the sacred stories have become known also
to the pagans through oral speeches.

77 Therefore, this most harmful plague in the world, namely discord and
disunity, should be called a Babylonian calamity by proverb, thereby
reversed and turned into

Basically, religion, secular laws and order, good morals and what is
good in this whole life is disturbed; as the examples are simultaneously
in the church, secular and domestic government before eyes.

\(78\) What this means, that Moses here and elsewhere speaks in the
plural, since he says only of One God, I have indicated above in the
first chapter, namely, that it is a sure testimony of the Holy Trinity
that we believe that One God is: the Father, who begets; the Son, who is
begotten; and the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and the Son.
And let us ask nothing of it, that the Jews make such a mockery of it,
that they say that God has thus spoken with the angels. For we are not
created in the image of angels, but they, the angels, are God\'s image
with us. Yes, as the words testify, we believe that the same God is in
the three persons of an inseparable being and unity. For the angels
cannot confuse languages, but this is a work of the Creator, who alone
can change and abolish a language; just as he alone can create that one
speaks a language. But a creature cannot do this. The angels can take
language from a human being, as many examples of Scripture show; but in
a human being they can neither create nor change it.

79\. Therefore, we should keep this right opinion and understanding,
that God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit, that is, the
one Godhead itself, speaks to itself here and says: \"Let us descend.
Therefore, this descent is a work of the one God Himself, of which the
angels cannot be partakers, so that He may frighten and crush the wicked
after they have committed sin.

And thus Moses indicates that in the divine essence or in the one God
there are more persons than one. But how it would happen and what this
union of persons would be, he does not explain: for this should be
reserved for the honor of the New Testament, which clearly expresses all
three persons, namely, that in God there is one person who begets; one
who is begotten;

**[708 L. m, ei-\". Interpretation of Genesis II, 7-10. W. i, ios7-1071.
709]{.underline}**

and another that proceeds from the Father and the Son, namely the Holy
Spirit. That therefore the article of the Trinity in the Old Testament
was included in the common faith, in which the holy fathers died and
were saved. Therefore we should not allow the godless and blinded Jews
to deprive us of such testimonies. For such clear words, and which are
so properly set, are not to be counterfeited, and to be forcibly
directed and drawn to an unskilful opinion and understanding.

**Third part.**

**From the genealogical register of the ancestors of Christ from the
Flood to Abraham.**

**I.**

**V. 10. These are the generations of Shem: Shem was a hundred years
old, and begat Arphachad, two years after the flood.**

This last part of the eleventh chapter cannot be considered as if there
were anything special in it, since it reports nothing else but the
families of the fathers; but in truth this narration of the families is
very necessary, especially for the sake of our time, which has to have
such an example. For we hear that after the confusion of languages, not
only in the secular and domestic government, but also in the church,
many a disorder and confusion has taken place. So that we do not get
such ideas and think that the devil had so much power and authority that
he was able to completely take away the light of the Word, which is
there as a sun, from the world and devour the church at once, the
generation of the pious is prescribed for us, so that we may see that
through God\'s mercy something of the church has still been preserved
and that it has not been destroyed to the ground.

82\) So after Seth there remained of the church Methuselah and Noah with
his family. But after the Flood, when the ungodly generation of Ham
multiplied rapidly, and

Having made everything full of troubles, the Church was ruled by Noah
with his son Shem and his grandchildren. So that we see that the article
of our faith is true, that we believe that there is a holy catholic
church at all times, from the beginning of the world to the end. For God
has always kept a people with whom the Word has remained and through
whom religion and pure doctrine have been preserved in the world, so
that everything would not fall into a godless nature and there would be
no knowledge of God among the people.

Therefore, this register and narrative of the generations of the pious
holds before us the most noble main doctrine that God has never
completely abandoned His Church, whether it has been stronger at one
time and weaker and smaller at another. Just as the doctrine has been
purer at one time and darker at another. And in the face of such great
wickedness of the world and the enemies of the word, we should also hold
on to such hope; just as Christ also comforts us Matth. 24, 22, that the
days of the last time will be shortened, namely so that the church will
be preserved and the Antichrist will not turn everything into vain error
and lies.

These grandsons of Shem are the heirs of the promise of Christ, which
God has therefore preserved and protected, so that there may be persons
in whom the church or the Word may be found. For this cannot be
separated from each other: where the Word is, there is also the church,
there is the Spirit, there is Christ and everything; as ungodly also the
Pope cries out against it, and does not want the church to be there,
since he is not a head.

\(85\) And the fathers followed one another in the flesh; as also
afterward in the law the priesthood stood upon such persons as came from
one another in the flesh or after the flesh. But in the New Testament
the church is not bound to certain persons of one sex according to the
flesh. For Christ has not begotten children in the flesh, but the church
is free of all such things, and is where the Word is. Again, where the
Word is not, even though there are titles, ranks, and offices, the
church is not there, because God is not there either.

**[710 L. m, S6-S8. interpretation of Genesis 11:10. w. 1, 1071-1074.
711]{.underline}**

86\) Furthermore, we have similar examples in other lines that followed
these, which testify that God, out of His special counsel and according
to His unspeakable mercy, never rejects the human race in the time of
His wrath and anger, so that He does not leave anything left over from
the church and keeps a small group, as Isaiah chap. 1, 8. 9. and chap.
10, 20. says. This is how Jeremiah, Daniel and others were preserved in
the time of the Babylonian prison. God raised them up and kept them with
Himself through the promise of the Word, so that they could also pass on
a church to their descendants.

Therefore, when the wickedness and sins of the ungodly synagogue became
full in Roman times, a remnant was preserved as a seed, through which
the Gentiles also came to the knowledge of Christ. So that the church in
the world has always been preserved by God through him who crushed the
serpent\'s head.

88\) After this consolation, which this narration holds out to us from
the account of the years, it is also lovely that one can see from it
what form and condition the church had, and who those were who governed
it, and at what time and with whom each one lived.

89 Noah lived after the flood four and a half hundred years. Who will
now judge and say what trouble and work he will have had, that he has
punished the godless Nimrodic church? what it also cost him for pleas
and supplications, that he kept the pious in himself, that they did not
go to the godless? Of course, not a day has gone by that the good old
man has not had to fight and contend against agitation, mobs and sects.
That is why I said above that these fathers are the most distinguished
martyrs, because they have fought so many battles against the wicked and
for such a long time.

90 And Noah saw his seed unto the tenth generation. For he died when
Abraham was eight and fifty years old. Shem lived after Abraham five and
thirty years. Therefore he lived with Isaac an hundred and ten years.

years, and with Jacob and Esau fifty. O how beautiful a church has this
been, which has been ruled for such a long time by so many fathers who
lived at the same time with each other! For this is how God wanted it,
that among so many adversities such lights of the church should shine,
so that not everything should turn to idolatry.

\(91\) But of all these, the pious Noah is the highest and noblest, who
had seen the previous world for such a long time, and now hoped that his
descendants, who were begotten from him, would be warned by the terrible
example of the Flood, turn back to it, abide by the word, and keep
themselves in the fear of God.

But the good old father misses far. For when barely a hundred years had
passed after the Flood, Nimrod set upon the pious race, drove them out
of his own, and following the example of his father Ham, who had made a
mockery of his father, who was drunk not with wine but with sorrow, he
set up for himself a new church and new services.

So the church has had the same form and happiness from the beginning of
the world until now. We would also like to meet the upsets and create
counsel; but these examples teach us that, as Christ says Matth. 18, 7,
upsets must come, and Paul 1 Cor. 11, 19: \"There must be mobs among
you.

Therefore, let us be patient and learn to tolerate the devil\'s fierce
raging and blows, so that he may take it upon himself to break up and
weaken the church, but to strengthen his church. For we are no better
than the fathers, who, with much sweat and with great toil and labor,
have accomplished scarcely so much as to preserve the word, and have
only delivered some from the devil\'s jaws.

95 For the Nimrodic church had almost swallowed up Abraham himself. He
was held back by the word of the Lord,\' which indicated to him that he
should let the godless people go and look for another land. This, I
believe, was done by Shem himself. For because he had the regiment

**[712 \". m. \"-m. Interpretation of Genesis II, 10. 11.W. i, 1074-um.
713]{.underline}**

As he led the church and had the promise of Christ, he was held in great
honor by his grandchildren and his ministry was actually God\'s
ministry. What he also commanded and commanded, his grandchildren
accepted as a word and commandment of God.

96\) Because it is written in Genesis 25:22 that Rebecca asked the Lord
for advice, I understand that she asked Shem, to whom God had commanded
the government of the church, for advice; for Shem died when Jacob and
Esau were fifty years old; and then God speaks Himself when the saints,
who are full of the Holy Spirit, speak. About this time the kingdom
began in Egypt, for as history indicates, Abraham went down into Egypt.
Therefore, the most important lesson in this chapter is to see where the
church was at that time and by which fathers it was ruled, which fathers
also lived at the same time.

97 After this, this chapter also reminds us that after people were
allowed to eat meat, they became much weaker, and began to bear children
and die sooner than before. As we have therefore eaten death with an
apple before, so we shall henceforth sooner catch our death with all
kinds of food and gluttony. For if we were content with simple food, and
did not use foreign spices to give pleasure, we would undoubtedly be
able to live longer.

When I was young, I remember that many of the rich drank water and used
the simplest food, which was easy to prepare. Some of them hardly
started drinking wine in their thirties. Nowadays, children are
accustomed to wine, not bad and small, but strong and foreign wines,
even distilled or distilled wines, which are drunk sober. What wonder is
it then that they hardly reach half their lifetime and the very fewest
live to see their fiftieth year? Just as the devoured apple caused and
brought death upon us, so we lose it,

If we have anything left of life, by gluttony and all kinds of food and
drink.

**II.**

**V.11. And Shem lived after that (when he had begotten Arphachad) five
hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.**

99 Here it might surprise the reader why Moses, since he tells the whole
life of Shem, does not add the words: \"and died\" as he did above (Cap.
5, 8.)? But this is easy to report. Moses wanted to use the word
\"died\" so that the example of the resurrection and eternal life, which
God had shown to the first world in the person of Heuoch, would be all
the clearer and more evident. And is this why Moses wanted to boast so
that even if a careless reader, who said of all the others: \"He died\",
would come to Enoch, he would have to keep still (since it is not said
of him: \"He died\", but: \"God took him away\") and think where God had
accepted him, where he was and what he was doing? For such thoughts lead
even an inattentive reader to conclude that there is a certain hope of
immortality and of another life, which is not before the world, but
before God.

100 Here also another question arises: How Arphachad was begotten two
years after the flood, because he is the third son of Shem? as Moses
indicated in the previous chapter (v. 22). For the first son of Shem was
Elam, from whom the Persians came; and the kingdom of Babylon belonged
to him, but he was driven out of it by Nimrod. Assyria is counted for
the other son, who did not want to be with the cursed idolatry of Nimrod
and also went away to Assyria and built the city of Nineveh there. These
two are followed by Arphachad, of whom Moses says that he was born two
years after the Flood, and yet also expressly says that Shem was a
hundred years old when he begat Arphachad. Now Shem was a hundred years
old at the time of the flood 2c.

One answers this, the other that. But first of all, it is not such a
great danger, if one does not actually

**[714 L.UI, so-\". Interpretation of Genesis II, 11-26. W. i, um-um.
715]{.underline}**

can know. For the other, that I answer nevertheless also something on
it, it is not inconvenient that one understands this, so Moses here
says, that Arphachsad was commanded two years after the Flood, from the
time, when the Flood began; that this is the opinion, that Arphachsad
was born two years after, when the Flood had begun. But the flood lasted
one year and ten days.

102\) But this is raised, and some say, How then, if this be so, can
this be true, that Elam and Assyria were born before Arphaxad; for then
they must all three have been born in one year? Answer: This does not
hinder us either, if we put at the same time that for the first time two
of them were born with each other at once. But as I said, our faith is
not endangered by this, even if we do not know this. For it is certain
that the Scriptures do not lie. What is therefore brought up and said,
which serves to save the honor and glory of Scripture, is useful and
good, even if it is not so completely certain.

**V. 12, 13: Arphachad was five and thirty years old, and begat Salah;
and after that he lived four hundred and three years, and begat sons and
daughters.**

Here you see that the fathers, after such great damage and sorrow to the
human race, hastened to beget children, otherwise they would have
abstained from them longer because of sadness and heartache; as Adam and
Eve abstained after their son Abel was strangled by his brother.

**Salah was thirty years old and begat Eber, and lived four hundred and
three years after that, and begat sons and daughters. Eber was four and
thirty years old, and begat Peleg; and after that he lived four hundred
and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. Peleg was thirty years
old, and begat Regn; and lived after that two hundred and ninety years,
and begat sons and daughters. Regn was two and thirty years old, and
begat Serug; and lived after that two hundred and seven years, and begat
sons and daughters. Serug was thirty years old, and begat Nahor; and
lived two hundred years after that.**

**year, and begat sons and daughters. Nahor was nine and twenty years
old, and begat Tarah; and after that he lived an hundred and nineteen
years, and begat sons and daughters. Tharah was seventy years old, and
begat Abram, Nahor and Haran.**

104 Here we come to the boar, of which Moses spoke above (Cap. 10, 21.)
and called Shem the father of all children boar. Now I have said above
why this happens, namely, first of all, for the honor of the Lord
Christ; then also because around the time of this boar the terrible
confusion of the languages occurred. Because Sem especially loved his
lineage and wanted to honor it above others, he chose him to be the
regent and high priest of the church, so that it might be known where
the church and the Lord Christ came from. Therefore, it can be seen that
this boar was a very high man who held on to the pure doctrine, the
faith and the promise of the first fathers in the midst of the
desolation that Nimrod caused in the church of God.

105 Because of his constancy and virtue, the church received its name
from him by the authority and power of the holy patriarch Sem, and it is
called Hebrews, who have kept the doctrine and faith of this holy father
Eber, and the church has kept this name until the time of the Lord
Christ.

Therefore let us despise and reject the thoughts and imagination of
Rabbi Solomon, who seriously pretends that the Hebrews were thus called
from the passage through the river Euphrates, and who is followed in
this opinion by Burgensis, who has a desire for such wrangling. Lyra
understands it better, although he does not indicate the cause of this
name so clearly, namely, that the children of Eber have kept the pure
doctrine and true religion, which Eber had diligently preserved and
defended, so that it would not be counterfeited by Nimrod and the other
apostates. And Abram was also from this church, who lived with Eber
throughout his life. Therefore he was also called an Eberian, that in
the promise he had

**[716L . m, 83-\"7. Interpretation of Genesis II, 14-26. W. 1,
1079-1V8S. 717]{.underline}**

> and lived in the faith of Eber. For Eber died when Abraham had already
> been dead four and sixty years.

\(107\) Thus you have the history of the first world, which Moses
therefore so diligently described, that it might be known how the
promise of Christ has continued to come and to be propagated throughout
the ages. Therefore, if anyone wants to call this the history of the
first church, he will not be mistaken, for the Holy Spirit cares nothing
for the ungodly. So they too will soon be forgotten among men and buried
in hell. But that God takes care of the right church, we see, and
therefore the Holy Spirit so diligently shows how it was planted from
the beginning of the world.

For this reason, the church has always held this first book of Moses in
high regard and esteem. For if one were to lose this one book, one could
not know how the church would have fared for two thousand years.

We, who have followed these patriarchs for so long, hold these holy
rulers of the first church, Adam, Seth, Noah and Shem, high and dear,
and judge from our cross and suffering, which makes our short life much
easier and more bearable, that their hardship must have been far, far
greater. For they had to stand and fight against the devil\'s and the
world\'s fury, turmoil and temptation for many hundreds of years, and
finally, through faith in the promise of the woman\'s seed, they were
victorious and overcame all adversity, until they were finally reclaimed
from this battle by God, leaving behind them a generation that was well
educated and followed in the footsteps of its ancestors. Therefore,
although the Church has never sat in peace and constant tranquility, it
has endured and remained standing in the most cruel storms and
temptations.

\(110\) That such a treasure and good deed may be remembered forever,
Moses has faithfully and diligently described all these things in these
eleven chapters, so that he may also teach us, who have heard the
doctrine of the Holy Spirit.

The fact that we have and keep our faith and religion healthy, pure and
righteous is what drives us to believe that the ungodly will fall in our
time, but the church will prevail and triumph.

**[To the Christian reader D. Martin Luther.]{.underline}**

Therefore, I hope that this work of mine and its interpretation will be
of some use and pleasant to devout Christians. I also have no doubt that
we, who have fallen into this old age and frenzy of the world, will not
be blamed. No one will blame us, but will gladly take it as a good
thing, if we have not everywhere attained the spirit of such great and
noble men, who were rulers of the first world and planted and handed
over the doctrine and religion with the right worship pure and
unadulterated up to Abraham, who after the first two thousand years
ruled the world from then on. We want to act and declare the same
history, as much as God gives us grace for our undertaking and
diligence. To God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, together with
the Holy Spirit, be praise and glory for these and all other benefits
forever and ever, Amen.

**Fourth Part.**

**From the holy father Abraham.**

Here we will start the third part of this first book of Moses. The first
describes the history of the first world up to the Flood; the second
describes what happened after the Flood up to Abraham; all of which is a
very short history when compared with those stories of which the world
thinks much. But in this it surpasses all the glorious histories of the
world, in that it shows both that God spoke to the holy man and that the
promise of the future Christ happened to the patriarch Shem on condition
that Japheth also should be made a part of the same promise. This
promise shone forth at the same time like a sun, so that the pious
people could see the day of the Lord.

**[718 m. 67-7v. Interpretation of Genesis II, 14-28. W. i. ivW-iow.
719]{.underline}**

Christ from afar, and in this hope overcome what the ungrateful world
and the fierce enemy, Satan, would inflict on them in terms of
unhappiness, misery and distress.

112\) Now follows the third part or the third book, in which not only a
new generation but also a new promise is mentioned. For why would we not
call this a new world or generation, to which a new word is sent down
from heaven? And this is a precious ornament and a special honor that
God shows Abraham by speaking to him and holding out to him the promise
of the seed in which all nations shall be blessed.

You will not find such things in any secular histories. For what is
special and praiseworthy in them all belongs to the honor and special
freedom given to man by God, since he is commanded to rule over the fish
of the sea and over the birds of the air, that is, in secular histories
you will find nothing else than such stories, which were arranged and
accomplished by human reason, wisdom and skill. In contrast, God\'s word
is a much greater and nobler treasure and gift. Just as the Spirit, by
whom the hearts of Christians are governed, is a greater gift than
reason can ever be. Therefore, these are all temporal things, but these
are heavenly and divine things, for which reason we rightly esteem them
great and marvel at them.

114\. Although many patriarchs were still alive in Abraham\'s time (for
when Noah died, Abraham was eight and fifty years old, but Shem lived
after Abraham\'s death one and thirty years, so also after him some of
his ancestors lived): We rightly say that a new world and a new church
began with Abraham, because God begins to distinguish His church from
all nations anew with Abraham, and adds a very clear and glorious
promise of the Lord Christ, in whom all nations shall be blessed.

\(115\) Therefore, we are justly starting a new book here, because a new
light is shining down from heaven, indicating that out of

Abraham\'s generation Christ shall be born; preaches also in the most
delightful way about his ministry, namely, that he will bring blessing
to the whole world, that is, do enough for the sins of the world, in
this way reconcile us again to God and give us eternal life. To this
comfort also comes this, that he announces and determines the place
where Christ shall be born. For since the land of Canaan is promised to
the lineage of Abraham, and Christ is to be born of Abraham\'s lineage,
it is certain that Christ will be born in the land of Canaan and of the
Jews. Such. The church did not have such light before Abraham;
therefore, a new church is coming into being and growing, because a new
word is beginning to shine.

V. 27. 28. **This find the families of Tarah: Tarah begat Abram, Nahor
and Haran. But Haran begat Lot. And Haran died before his father Tharah
in his fatherland at Ur in Chaldea.**

This is one of the darkest and most difficult texts in the Old
Testament; therefore it has caused many questions, which a diligent
reader will find here and there in the old and new teachers. Whether or
not I would lack the right understanding, I will protect myself with St.
Paul\'s opinion and do right by it according to my discretion. For since
he also comes about such difficult matters, he says in 1 Tim. 1, 4 that
one should not pay attention to the genealogical registers, because they
give rise to innumerable questions. There is another error, however,
that ambitious minds consider this a great praise and glory, if they can
judge freely from difficult and dark sayings of Scripture and then
defend their opinion stiffly and firmly; and this is a disease that is
implanted in our frail nature, from which an interpreter of Scripture
should diligently guard against.

117 Such dark sayings can also be found in pagan books, which are
usually called a grammarian\'s cross, that is, over which one must toil
and agonize. Sharp-witted minds may well try their hand at them, for
there is no danger in doing so; but in the sacred Scriptures

**[720 L.m. 7V-72. interpretation of Genesis 11:27, 28. w. 1, 1V8S-IO8S.
721]{.underline}**

One must hold fast to the truth alone and defend it stubbornly. But
about dark things, and there is something doubtful, one should let
others judge.

The first question in this text is whether Abraham, because he is
mentioned here in the first place, was the firstborn or not? and about
this question Lyra and Rabbi Solomon come to a hard and serious
discussion. Lyra says that he was not the firstborn, and makes his
calculation thus: Sarah, he says, was Haran\'s daughter, but Abraham was
only ten years older than his wife. For so he speaks below in the 17th
Cap. V. 17: \"Shall a child be born to me a hundred years old, and Sarah
ninety years old?\" Therefore it seems to be impossible that Abraham
should have been older than his brother Haran, whose daughter is only
ten years younger than Abraham.

This is a strong proof based on calculations. For if Abraham is only ten
years older than his brother\'s daughter, and yet is made older than his
brother, it follows that Haran was at most eight years old when Sarah
was born. Now this does not add up at all.

120 Why, you may say, is Abraham placed first? To this Augustine gives
this answer: One should not look at how among Abraham and his brother
one followed the other in birth, but one should pay attention to the
fact that here is pointed to the future honor and glory, so that Abraham
has surpassed all his brothers. For he must be placed in front as the
head and the tribe of the following generation. This is Lyra\'s opinion,
against which truly nothing can be raised, if Sarah was a bodily
daughter of Haran. However, she may have been brought by the mother whom
Haran married as a widow, or she may have been taken by Haran himself as
a daughter; so that she is called Haran\'s daughter, but not a
biological daughter. And so in this way Sarah was Haran\'s daughter,
Lyra\'s argument and proof concludes nothing.

\(121\) Rabbi Solomon does not take this account into consideration, and
concludes according to the letter that Abraham was the firstborn; in
which, although he honors and praises Abraham as a father of the Jews,
as the Jews gladly and diligently do, I myself am of the opinion that I
believe he was the firstborn.

The other question is much more difficult, but neither Lyra nor other
teachers have paid attention to it; namely, that Abraham loses sixty
years. For the calculation, so the text brings with itself, is easy.
Tharah was seventy years old when he begat Abram: but now Abram, being
five and seventy years old, goeth forth from Haran, wherein Tharah died.
If you add these years together, you will find a hundred and five and
forty years. But since the history counts the years of Tharah, it
reports clearly that he died after he had lived two hundred and five
years. Therefore the question is, how can these years be proved?

Now it is not at all appropriate to follow bold people in such a case,
who, as soon as such a heavy trade occurs, may therefore say that it is
an obvious error, and boldly and without shame dare to improve other
people\'s books. For my part, I do not yet know how to answer such a
question, since I have diligently collected and calculated the years of
the world. Therefore, with humble confession of my lack of
understanding, I now conclude, as is reasonable (for only the Holy
Spirit knows and understands all things), that God, out of certain
counsel, has thus ordained that these sixty years should be lost to
Abraham, so that no one would dare to prophesy something certain about
the end of the world from the certain reckoning of the years of the
world. For although God knows the signs of the last day and wants them
to be seen and seen, he does not want anyone to know anything certain
about this day, nor even the year, so that devout Christians may
practice their faith and fear of God in anticipation of this most
wonderful and joyful day.

**[722 L. 111, 72-74. interpretation of Genesis 11, 27-36. W. 1,
1V89-10S1. 723]{.underline}**

I don\'t know any other way to answer this question.

\(124\) And I have said these things concerning these first two
questions, lest any man should weep that I knew not of such questions,
or that I had not read of them. Even if we are lacking in this, that we
believe that Abraham was the firstborn, it is still such a lack that
does no harm to the faith, nor does it condemn us. I have not expressed
this opinion for the sake of praise, but I know that God does not
distribute His gifts so that we can rule over others and have power, or
despise the opinions and good will of others, but so that we can serve
those who need our advice and help in such cases.

125 It is easy to understand that the text goes on to say that Haran
died before his father in the land where he was born. For he wants to
indicate that Haran died before Abraham left Chaldea with his father
Tharah. But I will gladly pass over the Jewish gossip about this, which
Lyra also relates, namely, that Haran was thrown into a fire and thus
died, but Abraham was preserved in the fire because he had a stronger
faith. For Joshua is more to be believed, who clearly says in his 24th
chapter, v. 2: \"Your fathers dwelt in time past beyond the water,\"
that is, in the land of Mesopotamia, \"Tharah, Abraham\'s and Nahor\'s
father, and served other gods.\" This is a much different testimony than
the one the lying Jews give to Abraham, which faith they praise only for
the sake of fleshly glory and honor, so that they may have such a father
to boast of all the more. But if they want to praise him as the
Scriptures praise him, they must confess that he was a godless idolater,
for Joshua testifies to this.

Therefore this is a terrible example, that Nimrod\'s mob or heresy has
multiplied at Babylon in such a way that it also defiles and corrupts
the descendants of the saints with its poison. The pious man Sem kept
the right worship and did not deviate from the pure doctrine, but how he
is despised by the Nimrodites.

and have been mocked, since even Tharah, Nahor, and Abram step away from
him and go to Satan\'s church!

How we should therefore be warned and admonished by such an example, to
lay aside all security and live in the fear of God, since we see that
not only these fathers, who were related to one another, were led into
error and idolatry, but also the right tribe of the church itself, as
Tharah and Abraham. So this is also a glorious and beautiful example of
God\'s grace and mercy, that He does not reject such idolatrous people,
but keeps them from their error and sets them right again by His word.

The pope makes of his saints vain pure angels, yes, rather wooden idols
and sticks, which have nothing human about them. The holy Scriptures,
however, show that the most distinguished heroes of the Church were
human, that is, they often fell and sinned and yet were again accepted
by the gracious and merciful God. Therefore, such examples serve very
usefully to instill the fear of God in the heart and to maintain faith
or trust in the grace and mercy of God.

V.29. 30. **Then Abram and Nahor took wives. Abram\'s wife\'s name was
Sarai, and Nahor\'s wife\'s name was Milcah, Haran\'s daughter, who was
a father to Milcah and Iishca. But Sarai was barren, and had no child.**

The teachers are almost all of this opinion, that they consider Iisca to
be the one who was called Sarai above and whom Abraham took as his wife.
But it seems to me that this is why Haran is called the father of Milcah
and Iishca, so that Moses could show that Sarai was not a natural
daughter of Haran, but was either his stepdaughter or a daughter taken
in his place. But I do not want to prevent anyone from following what he
thinks is most similar to the truth; nevertheless, our faith must not
suffer any danger because of this.

130\] But the fact that the Scripture says that Sarai was barren is
because we have

**[724 L.m, 7\^-76. interpretation of I Genesis 11:29-32. W. 1.
1091-1094. 725]{.underline}**

see that bearing children at the same time was praised and glorified as
a great blessing of God; as the Scripture refers to Sarai\'s barrenness
as a special sorrow and misery. With this misery the Almighty God
punishes or rather tempts this holy man in this sinful life, in which we
are as in hell because of sin, so that while all the wicked have many
children and servants and a large family, he alone must have a barren
marriage. However, God did not want to tempt Abraham alone in this way,
but this had to serve so that this miracle and God\'s mercy, power and
truth would be all the more powerfully proven and praised, namely that
Sarah, as a barren woman who was now obsolete and unfit to bear
children, nevertheless gave birth to a son, from whom such a large
nation and such a large family was begotten and built.

\(131\) So also in this text we should pay attention to the fact that
the Holy Spirit makes a distinction between the hereditary disease of
nature, which is corrupted by sin, and His work, that is, bearing
children, and does not cancel this gift and blessing for the sake of the
corrupted nature, but also in this corrupted nature, which goes about in
fornication and fierce lust like an unreasonable animal, praises the
gift of bearing children as an excellent blessing from God. For if this
were not so, the Scriptures would not have thought of the barrenness of
Sarah, who is married to Abraham.

V.31, 32: And **Tarah took Abram his son, and Lot his son Haran\'s son,
and Sarai his son Abram\'s wife, and brought them from Ur of Chaldea,
that he might go into the land of Canaan: and they came to Haran, and
dwelt there. And Tharah was two hundred and five years old, and died in
Haran.**

This is the other knot, but easier to untie and more correct than the
first. For the fact that this text seems difficult is due to the fact
that in the 7th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, v. 2. 3, Stephen
says that God of glory appeared to Abraham when he was still

Moses said that Abraham had been in Mesopotamia before he lived in the
land of Haran, and that he had said to him, \"Go out of the land and
from your friendship, and go to a land that I will show you.\" But here
Moses says that Abraham went to Haran according to his father\'s will;
and in the following chapter he says that Abraham was called out of
Haran by divine command after his father\'s death, which occurred in the
land of Haran. Whoever now wants to remain humble with his wisdom and
not indulge his thoughts too much, could easily bring together and unite
what Moses and Stephen say; and I will also indicate my opinion of this
below in the 12th chapter. For here it is enough to say that Tharah and
his family, seduced by the Nimrodic mob, have left the faith and become
idolaters. However, since he is admonished by the holy patriarch Shem,
he undertakes to leave the Nimrodic society.

133\) Of the third question, which arises here, we must also say
something, and is a grammatical question: What is Ur in Chaldea? whether
it is a name of a place, or of an idol in Chaldea; because ur means a
light or fire, as also Urim is called 2 Mos. 28, 30. the little badge,
which Aaron had to wear on his ephod, of which the Lord gave an account.
But even though it cannot be said for certain what it was, it is certain
that it had the name of light or radiance. And I am of this opinion that
I consider it that Ur was a name of a place, which was thus called, as
often happens, from the idolatrous worship that went on there especially
in the Schwang. In Germany we also have such names of places, but they
have been attached to them for other reasons, as Lichtenfels,
Lichtenstein, Lichtenberg.

But it can be seen that this false worship was caused by God showing His
grace to the fathers by a light or fire that fell from heaven and
consumed the sacrifices that were done in honor of God. For this was a
sign that God was pleased with such sacrifice and service, as Elijah had
done.

**[726 L in. 7\"-7\". Interpretation of Genesis 11, 31. 32. W. i.
im4-iosr. 727]{.underline}**

History 1 Kings 18:38; and God commands in the Law, Deut. 6:12, that the
fire on the altar should burn and never be extinguished, from which the
sacrifices had to be kindled and burned; and the pagans also followed
this, as the histories indicate. So I think that Nimrod\'s mob,
according to the example of the right religion, set a special fire, so
that the right worship of the fathers would be held in low esteem and
despised, as if they had nothing special nor something ahead of them.
From this fire the name of the place subsequently fell, that Ur was
called a city, in which this service was most flourishing and the people
ran to it; as afterwards there was a great running to Jerusalem among
the Jews, and in our times to Rome. And Joshua Cap. 24, 2. shows that
Tarah himself, Nahor and Abraham followed this idolatry and considered
it right.

135 That the examples of all times in the world teach that the word of
truth and the right worship are despised by the common multitude of the
people. For this reason, when new teachers appear, their ears are
pricked, and they proceed in the same way as Genesis 5, B., Cap. 29, 19,
\"that the drunkard may go with the thirsty. The false teachers are
nimble and ready to teach, so the common people are exceedingly eager to
hear; and by this the word and the right services are lost.

The Anabaptists come with a new doctrine that children should not be led
astray, because they are without reason and do not understand the Word,
and therefore cannot have faith. Because the common man of us does not
hear such things, he falls in with them and accepts the doctrine with
great acclaim. Thus the sacrament-obsessives Zwingli, Oecolampad and
their like argue that Christ, when he says: \"This is my body,\" does
not mean that he distributes his body with or under the bread, but that
only bread is taken and wine drunk, and not Christ\'s body and blood.

137\. the common man thinks of such teachers.

But we, who do not let ourselves be led astray from Christ\'s word, he
considers to be neither purer nor better than the papists themselves.
This is the custom of the world, which has a disgust for God\'s word;
and what is new, it accepts and considers it right. And this is what
made the city of Ur, of which Moses speaks here, famous, so that it
received a name and became famous before other cities in Chaldea because
of its new worship.

The Hebrew word chasdim means the Chaldeans. But I am of the opinion
that for the sake of the new worship Ur is called ur chasidim, as if you
wanted to say: a city of the saints; as Rome was called the most
distinguished church and head of all other churches. But Moses reverses
the word, as if he wanted to say: You are not chasidim, saints, but
chasidim, Chaldeans; because the prophets have pleasure in such
interpretations of one word to another, as Micah Cap. 1, 11. shaanan
nenut zaanan and Hosea Cap. 10, 5. beth el calls beth aven.

139 And the footsteps of such idolatry, as the histories of the pagans
testify, remained with the Persians for a long time afterward. For the
king of Persia had a sacred fire, which the histories call Orimasda with
a mutilated Hebrew word; the same was led before him on a horse with all
its glory; just as the pope has the body of the Lord Christ, as he calls
it, led before him on a horse, which is unhorsed but beautifully
adorned; but he deceives both himself and others with it, for it is not
the body of the Lord Christ, but only bread. For Christ does not want
that when bread is carried around for the spectacle, his body should be
there, but when it is taken or eaten according to his order and
appointment in the church. But the pope misuses this splendor to confirm
and affirm his error about the one form of the sacrament.

Thus godless nature and superstition remain one time like the other. For
although the outward practices and signs or the outward service of God
are changed, the same sense and precept remain.

**[728 \". m, 78-8\". Interpretation of Gen. 11, 31. 32. cap. 12, 1. w.
1, 1097-1101. 729]{.underline}**

men. Just as the pope does not use today\'s day of the sacred fire to
worship it, but he has other practices and ungodly practices, which,
although they seem to be different, are of the same opinion.

141\) Therefore, as it was in Ur in Chaldea almost from the beginning of
the world, so it remains until the end of the world; for the people
leave the word, persecute the faith, and take up something new, which
alone must be the right service of God, as they dream. But the Jews hold

that Ur was not the name of a place, but a fire where those who
condemned Nimrod\'s idolatry were thrown; as they tell a fable about
Abraham and Haran. But I do not follow their opinion, but hold that it
was the name of a place, to which there was a great gathering from all
places as to a very holy service; as afterwards the most distinguished
services were at Jerusalem, Bethel and Shechem, in which places God
revealed Himself to the fathers by various ways and works.

**The twelfth chapter.**

**First part.**

**About Abraham and his profession.**

**V. 1 And the Lord said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy father\'s
country, and from thy friendship, and from thy father\'s house, unto a
land which I will shew thee.**

This is the third age (as it is called), in which the holy scripture
begins the description of the church at a new stem. For so far the line
has gone from Adam through many patriarchs to Noah, and from him to
Abraham, under which line the church received a great blow, because the
ungodly nature had so multiplied and taken over that even the
descendants of the saints were carried away into error. That is why
Moses had to show how the church was replanted and revived by God in
such great distress and danger, so that it would not perish and the true
religion would not be completely destroyed.

2\. and this history is held up to us as a special example of God\'s
grace and mercy, which should also comfort and strengthen us in our
time, so that we can be certain that God will also

At this time, when everything seems as if religion is about to perish,
he preserves his church.

\(3\) And although in these histories, which we have just had, many
great and important things are also included, they are nevertheless very
short. In these histories, however, which now follow, the Holy Spirit
will spread out and act and explain everything more extensively: that
thus far the church has been like a little stream flowing gently and
quietly, which now becomes large and strong and rushes along like a
mighty water, until through the wonderful blessing of God the holy
people so multiply and strengthen themselves that they fill the whole
earth like a mighty sea with their name. Therefore, it is very pleasant
and comforting to see how the church has begun and increased. And we see
that the prophets also took pleasure and joy in such thoughts; for
Isaiah remembers such wonderful government and planting of the church
more than once.

4 Now Moses, when he spoke of Noah, called him and his family a
righteous man and without change. But here he does not give such a title
to Abraham, no doubt because Abraham was with his father and his
brothers.

**[730 \". m. M-R. Interpretation of I Genesis 12, 1. W. I,
731]{.underline}**

to whom, as Joshua Cap. 24, 2. was idolatrous, and not pious or
righteous before God, but before Nimrod, which idolatry he followed.
Therefore Moses was silent about the person of Abraham and praised
nothing about him. For idolatry is to be punished and not praised. But
he praises and glorifies God\'s mercy for our consolation, that he did
not let such an idolater remain in idolatry any longer, but called him
out of this church of the wicked to another place.

5 Such a glorious calling is worthy of praise and commendation, as
Isaiah praises him highly in chapter 41, v. 2, with these words: \"Who
raised up the righteous man,\" that is, Abraham, \"from the going forth?
that is, who called him to preach righteousness wherever he went? for
such is the meaning of the Hebrew words le raglo. And the epistle to the
Hebrews Cap. 11, 8. 9. says: \"By faith Abraham was obedient, when he
was called to go forth into the land which he was to inherit; and he
went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he was a stranger in the
promised land, as in a foreign land\" 2c. This is also what Moses says
here, since he says that he was called by God to go out of his land.

For this grace and benefit, that he is freed from idolatry, does not
come from his own merit or fortune, but is God\'s gift, who shows him
mercy and calls him out of it. Just as Moses admonished his people that
they had been chosen by the Lord, not that they had earned it for him,
but that they loved God, and kept the oath that he had sworn to their
fathers, Deut. 29:12, 13. So we see here that the beginning and the end
coincide. For what is Abraham but a hearer of God who calls him, that
is, such a person who does not do but lets it happen to him, and only
such a thing in which divine grace and mercy work.

7 Therefore this text serves to prove and confirm the doctrine of grace
against the doctrine of one\'s own merit and good works, which reason
exalts and praises so highly. For if you

If you wanted to ask what Abraham was before he was called by the
gracious God, Joshua Cap. 24, 2. that he was an idolater, that is, he
deserved death and eternal damnation. But in this misery God did not
reject him, but called him and made him, who was nothing before,
everything. I will believe that if one wants to speak of external
virtues, he was an honest man and, as much as possible for nature, a
very pious man, who did not give in to fornication, avarice or other
vile lusts, but overcame such blind stimuli of the corrupt nature with
reason and moderation, or even kept them in check.

For the Babylonian religion of Nimrod had the greatest appearance, since
it served God under the rays of a light, which is the most convenient
form or figure of the divine majesty. As the holy scripture also calls
God a light, 1 John 1:5, Psalm 104:2. Besides this very apparent
worship, they also led an honest walk and a chaste life; hence it came
to pass that this religion was also adopted by the descendants of the
holy fathers.

\(9\) For superstition is indeed a harmful ruler who reigns in the world
at all times and whose rule people eagerly accept. And especially in
this apparent and glittering religion Abraham himself is the devil\'s
serf and captive, who does not serve God as he wants him to be served,
but as he sees that he is served by others, who in number, strength,
honor and power far surpass the small remaining group of the holy
fathers.

\(10\) Therefore Abraham, as I have said above, is nothing but matter,
or such a thing as the divine Majesty, by the Word, to summon him,
seizes and establishes in him a new man and patriarch; so that this rule
is not lacking in any man, but stands and remains absolutely thus: Man
is of himself nothing, is also able to do nothing, and has in himself
nothing but sin, death, and eternal damnation; but the Almighty God
works in him.

**[732 D m. W-84. Interpretation of Genesis 12, 1. W. i. 1104-1107.
733]{.underline}**

so much by his grace and mercy that he is something and is redeemed from
sin, death and eternal damnation through the given seed, the Lord
Christ.

\(11\) The patriarch Shem, as I can think, was just at that time in the
land of Canaan, not alone, but with his church, and lived, as it is
written afterwards, in Salem, and was called the priest of the Most
High: therefore he could not have been alone, but must have had with him
those whom he taught, which may have been the children of Elam, Assyria,
Salah, Eber 2c., who all fled the church of Satan at Babylon and
followed the holy patriarch. And yet, God pretends not to respect them
all, and chooses as patriarch only the idolatrous Abraham, who is the
devil\'s prisoner, and was not left by anyone with the Nimrodites, but
remains with them of his own free will.

12 But why does he do this? May he not rather take one of those who
followed the holy patriarch Shem and kept the right worship? Answer: For
this reason he does it, that he may praise and magnify his grace and
mercy toward us, which in truth, as Paul says in Eph. 3:8, is \"riches
beyond measure. In the same way, he then calls Paul to be an apostle to
the Gentiles, as Paul writes about himself in the same place, who was
the worst of men, a death-slayer, blasphemer, and who burned with hatred
against Christ and his church; if he could have called any of the two
and seventy disciples or any other excellent man in his place. But he
does not do so, namely, to show us how abundant his grace and mercy are.

13 Now this is not written so that the ungodly may be strengthened in
their ungodly nature and sin all the more freely and boldly, but so that
the fainthearted and fearful, who are always provoked to despair because
of their sin, may have a consolation and learn to hope in such a
merciful God according to such examples. For God\'s wrath

and sin is a fierce thing, and a conscience cannot bear it unless it is
strengthened and comforted by God\'s word. Therefore, we are in great
need of such examples that show us God\'s infinite and abundant grace
and mercy, so that we may learn from them to call upon God and hope for
forgiveness of sins.

\(14\) It is indeed a great unspeakable grace and gift that Abraham is a
father of the Son of God according to the flesh: but what is the
beginning of such glory? None other than that Abraham is an idolater and
one of the greatest sinners, who serves such a God whom he does not
know; and yet God\'s Son wants this grandfather to be and be praised in
his line and line; just as some of Christ\'s other grandparents were
also great sinners. But why is this done? First, that he may show and
prove that he is a Savior and Beatificator of sinners; second, that he
may remind us of his abundant kindness, that when sin oppresses us we
may not despair; third, that he may also lead us astray and shut up the
way to glory and hope. For because Abraham is called in this way, he
cannot say, I have earned this, this is my work 2c. For even though he
was blameless and without fault in the sight of men, as far as the other
table is concerned, he was still an idolater who would have deserved
eternal death if this calling had not come, through which he was
redeemed from idolatry and finally received forgiveness of sins through
faith; so that this saying might remain: \"It is not up to anyone to
will or to walk, but up to God\'s mercy\", Rom. 9, 16.

\(15\) The Jews do not know how to praise Abraham enough and do not
measure him; they may say that he was thrown into the fire because of
the cursed idolatry of the godless Nimrod at Ur in Chaldea, but that he
was preserved by faith. They think to gain a great honor for their
people, but they lie shamefully about it; as their own prince and ruler
Joshua, Cap. 24, 2, publicly punishes and refutes them. 24, 2. The same
is done by the monks, who in their

**[734 m. \"-M-interpretation of I Genesis 12, I. W. l. 1107-1110.
735]{.underline}**

They do nothing else in their sermons than to praise their Franciscus,
Dominic, Augustine beyond all measure; and whoever can do this best and
elevate such saints to the highest, they consider him the best preacher.
God, however, must be at the back of their minds, and at times they
remember him with such praise that he has adorned such great saints with
such gifts.

\(16\) Now this is a philosophical preaching, taken from reason and
rightly Turkish, which thus pretends that we come to salvation and
righteousness by our own works. Therefore we should follow Moses\'
example when we want to preach about saints, and yet not forget that
Abraham, when he dwelt in Ur in the Chaldean country, was an idolater
and an idolater; That is, we are to teach that even the most exalted
saints were men who could have fallen into sin and did fall horribly;
but that they were preserved and subsequently adorned with various gifts
is all a work of the mercy of God, who calls us by his word and does not
reject us.

\(17\) For in this all saints are like Abraham, that as long as the
divine calling is not yet there and they do not have the word, they are
in death and condemnation, even though they may appear to be pious and
holy. But when they are called and enlightened by the Word, they
believe, give thanks to God, live holy and please God, but in such a way
that they then also need forgiveness of sins: therefore they are humbled
and are not proud, even though they live most holy.

But here a question arises: How Abraham might have been called? and:
Whether he heard this voice of calling from God Himself? I am completely
of this opinion and believe that he was not called without means from
God and without the ministry of preaching; as it is said afterwards that
God visited him and talked with him, even that he was his guest, Gen.
18:2: but I believe that this commandment to go out of the land of the
Chaldeans was brought to him either by the patriarch Shem himself or by
others sent by him.

19\. For the pious Shem did not only suffer that Tharah and his children
had to perish in this fire of the Chaldeans, that is, in the Nimrodic
idolatry, but that he saw from divine revelation or divine inspiration
that from his lineage Abraham alone would be the one from whose loins
the Savior and Redeemer of the entire human race should come; Therefore
this revelation moved him so that he could no longer suffer him among
the idolaters, especially because his father Noah was now hardened. For
Abraham had to leave Ur by God\'s command almost sixteen years after
Noah\'s death.

20 But that Moses writes that the Lord called him out of it, is to be
understood as meaning that some holy people called him out of it by
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. For what men speak from God\'s Spirit,
God Himself speaks; as Christ says Luc. 10, 16: \"He who hears you hears
Me.\" The Hebrew word lech lecha, where in Latin and German it says:
\"Go out,\" is very important in Hebrew, and if one wanted to translate
it from word to word, one would have to give it: \"Go you out of your
country.\" For he wants to indicate that the whole religion in which
Abraham lived until now is godless and cursed. As if Shem wanted to say:
If you stay in this place, you will not be saved; but if you want to be
saved, leave this country, leave your friendship, leave your father\'s
house, and go as far as you can from these idolaters, with whom there is
neither faith nor fear of God, but only idolatry, false faith and error,
which follows where God is not known. For if there had not been godless
and unrighteous worship at Babylon, God would not have commanded Abraham
to go elsewhere. Therefore, the very word \"Go forth\" concludes and
holds the first tablet; Abraham hears it and begins to fear God, that
is, he believes this threat and is obedient to the holy counsel;
therefore, such a glorious promise follows it.

021 But as the pious Shem preached unto Abraham, so David preacheth

**[736L. m, SS-\". Interpretation of Genesis 12, 1. \" 1, 1110-1US.
737]{.underline}**

also to his people Ps. 45, 11. where he says: \"Listen, daughter, look
at it, and incline your ears, forget your people and your father\'s
house.\" This is a serious admonition that the Jews should not despise
the word of the gospel, but that they should prefer this doctrine to
their law and all that they have, and forget their fathers altogether.
If you do this,\" he continues in v. 12, \"the king will delight in your
beauty,\" that is, he will accept you kindly by his grace and adorn you
with his Holy Spirit, righteousness and other gifts. Therefore this is a
glorious benefit of the word or ministry, that it indicates or reveals
this sin, which reason alone cannot recognize, but also considers it the
highest righteousness and most pleasing service of God. For idolatry is
recognized only through God\'s word.

\(22\) And here the Jews, if they wanted to praise their father Abraham,
should praise him. For until now he had lived in idolatry, had no true
knowledge of God, and was without faith and fear of God, even though he
did not appear to be a wicked man. But because the word reveals right
worship and condemns idolatry, he does not do as our papists do, who,
when admonished, continue stiff-necked and with hardened hearts,
defending false worship against their consciences and holding to it: but
he is content and soon obedient, when he hears the word commanding him
to depart from Babylon, since he had house and home; he does not dispute
with himself, as the wicked do: How if we were more pious than they that
bid us hence? For we are also the descendants of the patriarch Sem, and
the friends of him; and there shall be some saints in this land: why
then should I go away alone?

23\) Abraham has no such thoughts, but when he hears that the religion
which had hitherto led his father\'s house and all his friendship is
condemned, he abandons it, follows with his will the God who calls him,
and does not allow himself any opportunity to be deceived.

and benefit, which he has before his hand, which is truly an excellent
obedience, which we praise and admire. For a householder to leave his
house, his possessions, his goods, his dear country, his dear friends,
and to go into misery, not knowing where to set his foot and have a
lasting place, is indeed no small test of obedience, which few would
follow.

\(24\) And yet it is much greater and more serious that he allowed
himself to be persuaded that the religion in which he was brought up and
educated by his parents was ungodly, false and contrary to God; as we
have experienced that it is most difficult to win those who have been
brought up in the papist religion, which is obviously ungodly and
blasphemous. Yes, we ourselves, who have long since abandoned the
teachings of the pope, often have much trouble and work until we
overcome this misery, which has become twofold through habit, since we
were both born as hypocrites and then also strengthened in hypocrisy by
false teachers.

\(25\) Therefore we praise Abraham, who, as soon as he was admonished by
the holy Shem, departed from that which nature had given him, and to
which his parents brought him up from his youth, and in which he was
also strengthened by long habit. Which, although it could not have
happened in the conscience without a great struggle, faith and the word
finally won and retained the victory. If, therefore, the fathers of the
monks, such as Augustine, Franciscus, Dominic 2c., are held against this
man, they are nothing against him.

We must not forget Sarah, who faithfully follows her husband, since he
is obedient to God, and also forgives her fatherland and dear
friendship, also leaves behind her household and food, which was
undoubtedly well ordered, and follows an uncertain hope. And there is no
doubt that her friends will have admonished her to let her husband go,
especially because they understood what advice and nobility Abraham
would draw from it. But the pious, God-fearing woman has not listened to
all the good words, bit-

**[738 L. Ill, 88-90. Interpretation of Genesis 12, 1. W. 1, 1U2-11IS.
739]{.underline}**

The servants also used to be much more pious and obedient than they are
now. The household was much more pious and obedient than it is now, and
did not want to stay with the father of the house or leave him.

The monks consider this a great praise, that they leave everything, when
they find much more in monasteries than they leave in their parents\'
house. But whom will you compare to this monk, Abraham, here, who leaves
his fatherland, friendship, paternal inheritance and goods, house, farm
and everything, and simply follows into the misery into which God calls
him? Among others, he has a companion in this monkhood, his pious Sarah,
who does not see what kind of shelter she will have for the first night,
when she could live at home in comfort.

Now she does not follow her husband out of marital fidelity and love
alone, but has had help from the Holy Spirit, who has so moved and
stirred her female heart that she should leave everything behind and
follow God, who also called her, as the one who desired to be blessed
and not to be condemned with the idols. Therefore St. Peter 1. epistle
3, 6. praises this obedience and wants the women to follow these
beautiful and holy virtues of Sarah: \"What daughters,\" he says, \"you
have become, if you do well and are not so shy.\"

29 Therefore this is the right praise of the holy patriarch, that he
lets himself be punished, and recognizes that he is an idolater and
godless, and is terrified of God\'s wrath, which is threatened to him.
Secondly, that he goes out and does not know where? For he leaves his
place, which was certain, and follows an uncertain one. For though he
was sure in faith, yet in appearance he was uncertain; yea, he had not
yet a seat anywhere, as history shows. David praises this very
powerfully and gloriously, and presents it as a clear example in Ps.
39:13: \"I am both thy pilgrim and thy citizen, as are all my fathers.\"

\(30\) How can anyone say that David was not the king and lord of the
land promised to the seed of Abraham? For though Abraham wandered in
misery, he was a king.

they have been well off and have had great goods. This is true; however,
they have been in misery and have had the goods that they carried with
them as if they did not have them; as the first epistle to the
Corinthians Cap. 7, 31. testifies: \"Use the world so that you do not
abuse it.

This is how the saints live in the world at all times. They are well
versed in housekeeping and worldly offices, govern cities and people,
have children and servants, build the land, engage in merchandising or
other crafts, and yet they realize that they are in misery with the
fathers and are strangers; for they need the world as an inn, from which
they know that they must soon wander; so they do not set their hearts on
worldly business, but what is bodily they attend to with the left hand,
but the right hand they stretch upward toward the eternal Fatherland.
And since it happens from time to time that there is a misguidance and
unwillingness either in the worldly regiment or in the household, they
are not moved by it, or only a little. For they are content with the
fact that they know that the eternal dwellings have been prepared for
them by the Son of God, and that they may have it their way here in this
hostel.

\(32\) For this reason the Scriptures rightly praise the faith of these
most holy people, Abraham, Sarah and Lot, and set it before our eyes as
a clear example for us to see throughout our lives. And yet this is the
very beginning of faith and the first profession; but the other
profession will be greater and more glorious, for which reason we must
then also exalt Abraham\'s faith the higher. Now only bodily food, a
place to live and a dwelling place are dealt with, as all these things
are so difficult, but Abraham is confident of this and carries a strong
courage, overcomes everything with his great spirit, and follows God,
who calls him into a misery, of which they see no end.

\(33\) Now where are the idle and lazy monks who pretend that they have
left everything? Jerome, Augustine, Gregory may well remain silent; for
they are

**[740 L. m, sa-W. Interpretation of Genesis 12:1, 2. W. i, ms-1129.
741]{.underline}**

Nothing, if one wanted to hold them against this stranger of ours, who
wanders in the country, follows the command of God, and with strong
faith clings to this one word, that the Lord will show him another
country, in which he has to dwell better.

**Second part.**

**From the promises made to Abraham.**

**I.**

V. 2. **And I will make you a great nation.**

34 This is a special, excellent text and one of the most distinguished
of all the Scriptures. Therefore, it is not to be touched and run over
lightly, but diligently studied, carefully unraveled and explained. Just
as we interpret the punishment of idolatry, in which Abraham lived, and
relate it to the law, by which sins are punished, so we might call this
great consolation or promise the gospel. But what God promises so
briefly and, as it were, in a summary, will be more abundantly and
extensively explained and reported in the following chapters.

35 Therefore, you must first of all consider that the things which the
Lord promises Abraham here are impossible, unbelievable and untruthful
things, if you want to judge them by reason, because they are invisible.
For if God intends to do such a thing to Abraham, why does He not leave
him in his land and with his friendship, in which he undoubtedly has not
been without a great reputation and name? Is it easier to get food and
honor among unknown people, with whom one does not have a foot in the
door, than at home, where one has fields and friends, relatives and a
well-ordered household?

\(36\) Therefore, there must have been a great and high power of the
Holy Spirit in Abraham to put such impossible, unbelievable and
incomprehensible things into his heart.

And so he looks at them as if they were true and already existed,
especially because he was now beginning to grow old. For he was at five
and seventy years, but Sarah was ten years younger and barren.

\(37\) How thinkest thou then that all these things rhyme with this
promise, I will make thee a great nation? for he signifieth that his
seed and seed shall be a great nation. But where shall he get children
and descendants, because he has a barren marriage state? This holy
patriarch overcomes such great burdens of unbelief and such high
mountains that assail faith and make it difficult, all by faith, and
crosses over, clinging and hanging on to the one thing alone: \"Behold,
this is what God promises you, therefore you will certainly not lack it,
even though you can neither see the way nor the way, nor even the time
when this promise shall be fulfilled.

038 And the Lord called Abraham\'s seed a great nation, not only for
temporal or bodily stature, but also for spiritual stature, that it
should be in this bodily life. For this people must be distinguished
from all the kingdoms and peoples of the whole world, however great and
mighty they may be. For God gives land and people, kingdoms, and sets
time for them, how long they shall last, as Daniel Cap. 2, 21. But He
gives them out of His secret counsel, so that even those to whom He
gives them do not know; for they think that it happens accidentally and
by chance that one becomes a king or inherits a kingdom, and do not see
that God sends and rules from heaven.

\(39\) This is why the name of happiness is so common and famous among
the Gentiles, since they do not know what happiness is. But this people
has had this advantage over all the peoples and kingdoms of the world,
that God has revealed Himself to them in His word with many and various
miracles and signs, testifying that He is the God of this people.

\(40\) Whether it may be considered, therefore, that the history and
commerce of the Jewish people are not equal to the splendor and triumphs
of the Gentiles, and that the other kingdoms, as the baby kingdom, are
not equal to the kingdoms of the Gentiles, is a matter of opinion.

**[742 \" m,\"-St. Interpretation of Genesis 12, 2. W. 1, 1120-1122.
743]{.underline}**

The Jewish regiment is far surpassed in power and riches by the conical,
Persian, Greek and Roman regiments; but if you want to look at this
people\'s regent, namely, God Himself, who, as it says in the prophet
Isaiah Cap. 31, 9, had his hearth at Jerusalem and was, as it were, a
fellow citizen there, it will seem to you that the victories and
triumphs of all kingdoms and peoples are a stink and a waste in
comparison, and that this history alone is worthy of being held in high
esteem, praised and glorified, because it is certain that they were
directed and accomplished by this Father of the house, who is the one
and only God, Creator and Sustainer of all things. For although he also
governs the other kingdoms, he does so secretly, so that even those to
whom such benefits befall and who feel them do not know it.

41 But in this people he reveals himself; in this people he wants to be
known, praised and honored. That is why he chose the tabernacle for
himself and ordered a temple to be built for him, so that he would have
a certain place among this people, to whom he would reveal himself in
words, signs, miracles, customs and ceremonies, so that people could
feel and recognize everywhere that he was present and could almost be
grasped with his hands. Moses put this privilege in these words: \"I
will make you a great nation\".

\(42\) The Gentiles are far above this people in power and goods, and
their history and commerce are considerable, so that everyone is
astonished at them; but all this is nothing compared to this special
privilege and freedom, which Moses (Deut. 4:7) excellently praises,
namely that this people has a God who is near to them, that is, who
dwells in their midst and reveals himself in the word, service and holy
prophecy.), namely that this people has a God who is close to them, that
is, who dwells in their midst and reveals himself in words, in worship,
in the holy prophets, who were full of the Holy Spirit and taught this
people about God\'s will.

These are righteous and perfect goods, which the world does not
understand, for it does not have them at all. Therefore Moses calls his
people a great people in a much different way than Cicero and
Demosthenes. Although it was also great in the flesh, if you want to
consider which its

The origin was the lonely Abraham, from whom came such a great nation
that the Scriptures compare it to the sand of the sea and the stars of
the sky (Genesis 15:5).

44 But the Lord does not yet speak of the spiritual blessing and eternal
life that was promised to this people. For what this people had in this
life were still bodily and temporal goods, so that they would also have
a reputation for greatness and God would dwell among them, speak, rule
and protect them. These are also excellent gifts, which cannot be
praised enough, that God so to speak closed himself into this people,
that he not only dwelt among them, but also wanted to become a man out
of them. But this belongs to the spiritual and eternal goods, of which
we will soon say.

\(45\) So Abraham saw none of these things, and he also had cause to
believe none of them, if he would have followed the flesh; for he had a
barren estate: and though Isaac was born unto him afterward, and he saw
his grandson Jacob fifteen years old, yet such a beginning, as every man
must confess, was very weak and small against so great a promise. That
is why the holy man had such excellent faith that he believed all this
as surely as if he saw it before his eyes, and did not doubt the
promises made to him by God.

46 Now let us also hold our unbelief against this so great faith. We
know that Christ will come at the last day and destroy all his enemies,
Turks, Jews, pope, cardinals, bishops, and what is more of the godless
people who either persecute the word or despise and neglect it out of
hope. We also know that Christ wants to be with his church between the
times before he comes, and to preserve pure doctrine and right worship.
But do you think, if we believed this, that any accident, however it may
come, could grieve us? Do you also think that the certainty we feel
would rise in our hearts, so that we would think about it, as we do now?

**[744 nl. v4-\". ) Interpretation of I Genesis 12, 2. W. i, 1122-112\".
745]{.underline}**

as if the day of the Lord had not come for a thousand years?

47 Therefore our faith, if we want to believe it, is truly a weak faith,
and we are of little faith in the truth, which we cannot be compared to
the holy Abraham, who holds on to such an invisible thing with certain
faith, as if he already had it in his hand and felt it. He hears from
the Lord: \"I will make you a great nation\", and yet he sees that he is
like a barren tribe; for his spouse is barren. But when she finally
becomes pregnant by the man out of God\'s promise against nature and
gives birth to a son, he sees that the promise stands on this same son,
who nevertheless had to provide himself with many countless accidents
(as this life is uncertain); so he also sees that out of Isaac also a
certain heir of the promise, namely Jacob, is born: So there is still
nothing here that would agree with the promise, and yet his faith is
certain, firm and unwavering, that he will have a very great lineage.
This is the first part of this promise.

\(48\) The wicked Jews think that goyim, that is, nations, is a shameful
name; for so they call those who do not worship with them, as we
reproach the wicked who are outside the church: but they do not see that
in this promise of their Father the true church is thus called; for this
name belongs to the whole generation and to all the descendants of
Abraham: I will make thee legoi gadol, \"a great nation.

**And will bless you.**

In the Scripture the word \"bless\" means to increase and improve, so
that this part of the promise belongs to Abraham\'s believing that he
will not only have a great generation, but that it will also happen to
him that it will be strengthened and increased from day to day.
Therefore this is the first gift, that Abraham should become a great
nation, that is, that his generation should have a kingdom, authority,
goods, laws, ceremonies, a church 2c. For this actually means a people.

50\. the other gift is that this people also

As the 89th Psalm v. 31 ff. points out: \"If his children forsake my
law, and walk not in my statutes, if they profane my ordinances, and
keep not my commandments; then will I punish their sin with a rod, and
their iniquity with plagues. But I will not turn away my mercy from him,
neither will I fail in my truth.

\(51\) This people has often been afflicted; the tribe of Benjamin has
almost been strangled; the kingdom of Israel has been completely
disturbed; the tribe of Judah has been afflicted and weakened in many
ways, first by the Babylonian kings and then by the Assyrians and
Egyptians. Nevertheless, by God\'s help, this people was preserved until
the promise of Christ was fulfilled, since the right blessing and
increase began in the first place, when the multitude of the Gentiles
came in place of a few unbelieving Jews, and Abraham\'s seed was rightly
compared to the sand of the sea and the stars in the sky. Therefore it
still remains and will remain until the end of the world.

No kingdom in the world has had such a blessing. For what is this time
in which the four monarchies or principal kingdoms have prospered? But
Abraham\'s seed shall remain forever. Who now wants to see the beginning
of this blessing, he reads successively the histories of Moses, Joshua,
the judges, the kings 2c., then he will find that this people was
certainly a great and blessed people.

**And want to make you a big name.**

\(53\) This is to be praised and said of you far and wide, even among
the nations; as Deuteronomy 5:6, 6, 7 declares: \"This will be your
wisdom and understanding among all peoples, when they hear all these
commandments, that they will say, \'What a wise and understanding people
these are, and a glorious people! For where is there such a glorious
people, to whom gods draw so near, as the LORD our GOD?\"

54 Now the Jewish people were famous not only because of the promise and
worship, or because they were entrusted with what God had spoken, but
also because of the good men and the right men.

**[746 \". ui. ss-ss. Interpretation of Genesis 13:3. 3. W. i,
1125-1128. 747]{.underline}**

For the sake of heroes. For whom shall we hold against David, against
Hezekiah, against Daniel, against Joseph, against Samson, against
Gideon, against Joshua, and against all such high men, whether they be
prophets, or kings, or princes?

55 Therefore the Gentiles marveled greatly at this people and praised
them for blessedness. Naaman the Syrian carried with him to his land
earth from Jerusalem, 2 Kings 5, 17. Thus commanding their people and
praising the Jewish worship Nebuchadnezzar Dau. 4, 31. ff., Darius Cap.
6, 26., Cyrus Ezra 1, 2. 3. and what is of other gods and worship they
reject and condemn absolutely. Who would say that these are not great
things?

\(56\) But someone might say, \"Abraham did not see this, but died long
before. This is true, but he believed it and rejoiced in it with all his
heart; and if he had already experienced it, such joy would have been
spoiled for him by Satan, who defiles and disguises the worldly and
ecclesiastical regimes with so many aversions. But now he has a perfect
joy, because he knows that everything that other nations would have of
righteous wisdom, they would inherit and take from his lineage.
Therefore he justly boasts of his great name, which he did not make for
himself, but for the Lord.

**And shall be a blessing.**

\(57\) A wonderful promise is this, that this people shall not only be
multiplied and blessed in body and spirit among themselves, but that
this blessing shall also extend to the surrounding countries and
peoples. Thus this blessing, which was bestowed on Abraham, was shared:
Pharaoh in Egypt, Job, the king of Nineveh, the kings of Babylon
Nebuchadnezzar and Evil Merodach, the Persian kings Darius and Cyrus,
and others, whose histories do not exist, innumerable: and all these
things Abraham, though he did not experience the time when they were
fulfilled, saw in his spirit and believed.

**V. 3. I will bless those who bless you and curse those who curse
you.**

\(58\) The church is never without enemies and adversaries, for the
devil is an enemy to it, and therefore he pursues it in many ways and
causes all kinds of danger and misfortune. Because Abraham\'s lineage,
as the true church, should also try this, the Lord threatens here that
the enemies of the church should be punished, because he wants to punish
them himself. Thus Pharaoh perished in Egypt, whom this very threat sank
into the Red Sea, Ex. 14, 28. By which also the kings of the Gentiles,
Sihon, Og. 2c. were thrown to death, and their kingdoms destroyed, Deut.
2, 33. cap. 3, 3; indeed, the kingdoms of the whole world have been
overthrown and destroyed, as the Babylonian, Assyrian, Greek, Roman
empires 2c., because they have offended and insulted the church.

Again, God also promises blessings to those who do good to the church;
as He built houses for the midwives in Egypt, so that they were not
hostile to this people, Ex. 1, 20. Thus, by this promise, the harlot
Rahab is preserved with her family, Jos. 6, 25. 6, 25. A diligent reader
can find such examples for himself, how God has shown benefit in many
ways to those who have either done good to the church or to the noble
members of it, namely teachers or prophets. Thus were blessed: the widow
of Sarepta, 2 Kings 4:1-7, the Moor in Jeremiah Cap. 38, 7, and others.

**II.**

**And in you all generations on earth shall be blessed.**

Until now, the Lord promised Abraham only physical blessings and goods.
For although these are also rightly called spiritual blessings, that God
dwelt in this people and revealed Himself to them through signs,
miracles and His word in the holy prophets, they were all blessings of
this temporal life. But now follows the true promise, which should be
written in letters of gold and praised and glorified in all languages.
For it brings and offers the eternal

**[748 2- m. W-ioo. Interpretation of Genesis 12, 3. W. 1, 1I2S-11SI.
749]{.underline}**

The promise of the blessing of the treasures cannot therefore be
understood in a fleshly way, as if it were to remain in this nation
alone, like the previous promises. But if this promise is to be poured
out and distributed to all nations or generations on earth, as the words
clearly indicate, then we will not know of anyone else who has
distributed this blessing among all nations, except the Son of God, our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

\(61\) Therefore this is the simple, true, and irreproachable opinion:
Hear, Abraham, I have made glorious promises to you and your family, but
that is not enough; I will also honor and adorn you with such a
blessing, which shall go forth and go out to all families on earth. 2c.

62 And Abraham understood this promise very well. For he thought and
concluded: \"If all generations of the earth are to be blessed through
me, then this blessing must not be on my person alone, because I will
not live that long. For this reason I am not blessed by myself, but the
blessing has come to me through God\'s mercy; therefore all nations will
not be blessed for my person or by my power. But it will come to pass
that from my lineage one will be born who will be blessed by himself,
and will bring with him this blessing that will reach so far and wide to
all the generations of the earth: therefore he will have to be God and
not a man alone; although he will also be a man and will take our flesh
upon him, so that he may be my seed righteous. To such thoughts of the
holy patriarch Christ undoubtedly looked, since he says Joh. 8, 56.:
\"Abraham, your father, was glad that he should see my day; and he saw
it, and rejoiced.\"

63\) Because he says, \"All generations on earth,\" this is not to be
understood in width only of the generations of one time, but in length
of all generations, as long as the world will stand. And this saying is
in complete agreement with the command of Christ Marc. 16, 15. 16.: \"Go
and preach the gospel to every creature. Whoever

If any man believe and be baptized, he shall be saved: but he that
believeth not shall be damned. That this opposition has now stood for
one and a half thousand years and will continue to stand and remain
until the end of the world, and the gates of hell, tyrants and the
wicked will try and rage against it in vain.

\(64\) But it is especially to be noted that he does not say that it
shall come to pass that all nations shall gather themselves to the Jews
and all shall become Jews, but says that the blessing which this people
shall have shall come from him to the Gentiles, that is, to those who
are not circumcised and know nothing of Moses and his law.

\(65\) Therefore we hold this blessing rightly against the curse under
which all men are because of sin, which has been lifted by Christ, and
the blessing has been given to all who will accept him and believe in
his name. This is a wonderful deed of God, that we, saved from sin, from
death and from the power of the devil, come into the company of the
angels of God and are made partakers of eternal life.

From this promise flowed all the preaching of the prophets about Christ
and his kingdom, about the forgiveness of sins, about the gift and
sending of the Holy Spirit, about the preservation and government of the
church, about the punishment of unbelievers 2c. For they have seen that
these things certainly follow one another and are attached to one
another: if a seed of Abraham is to accomplish these things, he must be
a natural and true man. Again, if he is also to bless others, and indeed
all generations on earth, he will also have to be something higher and
greater than a seed of Abraham, because Abraham\'s seed itself needs
such blessing for the sake of sin.

Thus the Holy Spirit wrapped up the mystery of the incarnation of the
Son of God in such short and simple words, which the holy patriarchs and
prophets subsequently explained further in their sermons, namely, that
through the Son of God the whole world was to be redeemed, hell and
death destroyed, the law done away with, sin forgiven.

**[750 \" m, im-i\". Interpretation of Genesis 12, 3. W. i. iisi-iiss.
751]{.underline}**

and eternal life and salvation will be given freely to all who believe
in him. Therefore this is the day of Christ, of which he says John 8:56,
which Abraham did not see with his bodily eyes, but in his spirit, and
rejoiced. Because these things were invisible and impossible to the
flesh, they were also incredible.

\(68\) And this text is not only useful for teaching and admonition, but
also goes against the unfaithfulness of the Jews. For since God promises
Abraham a physical blessing, namely that his descendants shall be a
great people, they may say of themselves whether they are now a blessed
and great people. But since experience and hardship force them to
confess and say that they are a poor, afflicted, little people, what
else can be concluded from this text but that either God is lying in His
promises, or they themselves are mistaken and are not the true seed of
Abraham. To assume the latter would be ungodly, so this follows
inevitably. For what is a blessing is known.

\(69\) Therefore this is called a people, having authority, land and
people, laws and liberty. But what do the Jews have of this today, who
are scattered now and then, plagued in many ways, and almost have to be
prisoners wherever they go? They may well dream that in Babylon (I do
not know where it is) and among the Turks they still have great power,
honor and wealth. And it is true that they have a stay with the Turks
for the sake of treacherousness. For what the Jews learn and find out
about secret plots in all Christian courts, they immediately bring
before the Turks; and some princes do not only foolishly, but also
ungodly, by making themselves so common with the Jews and favoring them,
which they do not have with the Turks, but are captured and robbed by
them; as I have certainly learned from those who lived not only in
Constantinople, but also in Damascus, where there are said to be many
Jews.

70 Therefore the wretched Jews will not confess that they are not the
true seed of Abraham, that is, that they are in error.

If they are in the wrong and under the wrath of God; if they are
contrary to the right religion, let us bring them and convict them that
they are blasphemers and that they punish God with lies. For what else
is left?

\(71\) Just as we said about the blessing and the great nation, so we
say about the great name that God promises to Abraham. For what name
have the Jews in our time? Are they not the scorn and derision of all
men? For there is no more despised nation now than the Jews; as the
prophets threaten them, that it shall come to pass with them, that they
shall be the scorn and derision of all nations. Where then is the great
name? Must they not bear this testimony against themselves, that they
have lost such a name? And yet Abraham\'s seed must have a great name,
for God does not lie. But see here also whether those who hold to the
Jews and bless them will be blessed again? And there are examples before
the eyes not only of common people, but also of great rulers and lords,
who can bear witness to this blessing, which they feel because of
fellowship and friendship with the Jews, namely, that they suffer damage
to property, body and soul.

Now the Jews may reproach us with what is written in Ps. 109:11: \"Let
the usurer suck up all that he has, and let strangers rob his goods\";
and they will argue that it is not the Jews who suffer this from
Christians, but Christians from Jews. For it is common knowledge what
harm they do to the state with their great and inordinate usury. But to
this I answer thus: That first of all reason itself teaches that usury
is contrary to nature and therefore truly a sin; for which reason
Christians have this rule: \"Lend, that ye hope nothing for it,\" Luc.
6:35.

Those who are disciples of the Lord Christ follow this rule and guard
against usury, as against a certain sin. And experience also teaches
that great goods, if they are driven together with usury, are cursed by
God and do not remain long with each other. Therefore, if the Jews
consider usury to be their blessing, let them

**[752 \" m. \^interpretation of Genesis 12:3. W. r. uss-uss.
75A]{.underline}**

keep it and rejoice in it. For everyone knows that it is sin, and that
certain punishments are attached to it, as Scripture teaches from time
to time, and the Jews prove this with their examples.

For behold, whether they themselves are not sucked dry? They gather
their goods together by individual pennies and pennies, but where they
live they have to pay a great deal of money and tribute for their
dwelling, and yet the Christian authorities show them great kindness and
charity in comparison with what they have to suffer from the Turks. For
they would spare neither their lives nor their bodies if they did not
have so much benefit from their treachery, for which they, the Jews, are
very well trained and skilled out of hatred and enmity against the
Christians.

\(75\) But be it as it may, and let the Jews boast that they are rich
and have great goods; item, that they give nothing on usury, but take:
how small then is all this, of which they must confess that they have
lost it? For they have been driven out of the land that was given and
blessed to them by God, and have lost their kingdom and worship, without
which they are in the deepest darkness and have no understanding of the
Holy Scriptures, and in sum, can have no hope of being saved without
imagining and inventing something of God\'s grace and goodness. Since
all this does not cause wretched people to confess their misery, which
is above all misery and sorrow, they may boast that it is their blessing
and happiness that they may lend to others on usury and not take on
usury.

How much better it would be for them to go begging from house to house,
than to gather goods together with such great sin, which then end up in
other people\'s hands! And yet, with this great fortune and gift, of
which they boast so greatly, there is great and innumerable harm and
misfortune; for they have nowhere to live, are hated and despised by
everyone, and live most miserably in filth and filthiness, and can do no
honest work and labor.

men. And who can tell all these plagues and punishments of the enemies
of Christ?

\(77\) Therefore this is a strong proof, that we may confirm our
religion and faith, and show and disgrace the unfaithfulness of the
Jews, that they have already lost all that is promised to Abraham here,
and especially this which is promised to him at the last, namely, the
blessing which should go forth and extend from Abraham\'s seed to all
nations and kindreds of the earth.

78 And it is true, they are cornered by this proof; therefore they lie
and pretend that this part of the prophecy was fulfilled in Solomon, the
son of David, and say that he was the blessed one among the nations,
that is, he was famous and praised by everyone. But what does it matter
to this text that he was praised and glorified by others, since the
words are that this seed will bring blessing to all nations? But what
did Solomon serve and do for other peoples?

79 Therefore this text obviously forces us to confess that the Messiah
or Christ came long ago, who brought this spiritual and eternal blessing
with him into the world. -But because the unbelieving Jews threw it away
and did not want it, it was given to the Gentiles; but the wretched Jews
were at the same time deprived of bodily and spiritual blessings, as
experience shows. For they have now been in great misery and eternal
imprisonment for almost one and a half thousand years, and have had
nothing at all of these promises of which God speaks here with Abraham.
If God is true in His promises, it must necessarily follow that they are
liars and have lost this promise because of their unbelief; they are
also no longer Abraham\'s seed, to whom the promises were made.

80 We know in what error all Jews are still today. They are waiting for
the Messiah to strike down all the Gentiles and restore to the Jews a
physical kingdom and dominion over all the Gentiles;

**[754 L. Ill, UL-107. interpretation of I Moses 12:3. 4. W. 1,
1138-1140. 755]{.underline}**

as happened under Ahasuerus, Esth. 8, 10. ff. For the same time the Jews
sat in great power, honor and splendor. But against such a vain hope
this text obviously goes. For it does not say that the Gentiles shall be
oppressed or made servants of the seed of Abraham, but that they shall
be blessed, that is, have help and salvation against death and sin. But
let them still have their blessing, that such is called blessing. For so
it will be found that they are in the highest blessing, that is, forced
by the Gentiles and burdened to the highest. Such is the devil\'s gloss,
who calls such misery and wretchedness a blessing.

But God, who is good, actually calls blessing the redemption from the
curse and wrath of God, and promises that such blessing shall come
through Abraham\'s seed, not only to the lineage of Abraham, but to all
lineages on earth. Such a blessing has now been brought to us by God\'s
Son, Jesus Christ, who was born of Abraham\'s seed of the Virgin Mary.
But because the unbelieving synagogue did not want him, it came far from
him, so that it not only lost the eternal blessing, but also the
temporal and physical one; so that everyone may see that it is a people
under the curse and wrath of God.

For this reason this text serves us very well in many things; it is also
therefore very worthy that those who study the holy Scriptures take good
note of it. For it not only goes powerfully against the stiff-necked
Jews, and not only depicts the person of Abraham, which all devout
Christians should have before their eyes, so that they may learn to
believe according to his example, but also describes, in addition to
Abraham, the happiness and welfare of this entire people, indeed, how
the entire church should fare until the end of the world. For how it
will be in the church until the end of the world, and what has happened
and taken place in it up to now, all this has taken place and will take
place according to the power of this promise, which still stands and is
alive.

83 Therefore, if you want to summarize in a few words the history of the
church from Abraham\'s time to this day, then

study these four verses with diligence. For therein thou shalt see
blessings; thou shalt also see those who curse the church, whom God
curses again, that they must perish, since the eternal blessing of the
church has remained unmoved and unchanged. Therefore, this text
coincides with the first sermon in Paradise about the seed that was to
crush the serpent\'s head. For the church is not without enemies, but is
challenged and afflicted, so that she sighs over it, and yet overcomes
through this seed and finally retains victory and triumph against all
her enemies in eternity. Eternity.

84\. But as God said in the same first sermon about the biting of the
serpent and warned against it, so He indicates here that it will come to
pass that some will be found who curse the seed of Abraham. But this
harm, if we are stung and challenged by the world and the devil, is
small, because we have the dear angels, even God Himself, who blesses us
and destroys our adversaries, as then the explanation of this text is
more extensive in the prophets, since one should look for it. For this
promise is the source and origin from which the prophets have taken all
their promises and threats; therefore we are justly astonished at this
divine wisdom, that so great tragedies and the history of all times, as
far as the church is concerned, are thus comprehended and understood in
few words in this text. Now follows, as an appendix to this promise, how
Abraham obeys his God who called him.

**Third part.**

**Of Abraham\'s obedience and exit.**

**[V.4 Then Abram went out, as the Lord had said to him.]{.underline}**

\(85\) Promise and faith are by nature together, so that neither can be
separated from the other. For what is the use of one promising much and
there being no one to believe it? And again, what is faith good for if
there is no promise? Therefore, promise and faith belong together; and
this requires the

**[756 \" m, 107-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 12:4. \" 1. 1140-1143.
757]{.underline}**

natural order, that after Moses described the promise, he now also says
that Abraham believed, that is, accepted this promise and kept it.

The devil also has his promises, and very apparent ones at that;
therefore a sharp mind is needed to make a right distinction between
God\'s and Satan\'s, that is, between the right and the wrong promises.
Satan\'s promises are received with pleasure and are accepted, and they
also make people secure and insolent; so that they both do not respect
themselves and the divine judgment. As we see, the Jews, the Turks and
with us the false brethren have the most sure courage, and do nothing
less than that they should fear God\'s wrath and judgment.

But if God promises something, then faith must stand in a great and long
struggle; for reason, or flesh and blood, simply judges that God\'s
promises are impossible: therefore faith cannot fail to struggle and
fight against doubt and against reason.

\(88\) The sophists do not see and understand this; therefore, when they
hear that we teach about faith, they think we are fighting over a small
thing. For they do not understand or know that faith is a change and
renewal of the whole nature; that is, that the eyes, ears, and heart
themselves hear, see, and feel quite differently from other people.

For faith is a living and mighty thing; it is not a drowsy and idle
thought, nor does it float and swim on the top of the heart like a goose
on the water, but is like water heated and warmed by fire. The same,
though it remains water, is no longer cold, but warm, and is therefore
another water: thus faith, which is the work of the Holy Spirit, makes
another heart, mind, and spirit, and thus makes a new man.

90 Therefore faith is a busy, heavy and mighty thing, and if one wanted
to speak of it properly, it is rather a suffering than an effect. For it
changes

And since reason tends to keep to the present, faith takes hold of
things that do not appear before the eyes; it considers them to be
present, contrary to all reason. And this is the cause that faith is not
like hearing to everyone; for few are believers, but the greatest number
hold much more to present things, which are felt and grasped, than to
the word.

\(91\) This, then, is the characteristic of right and divine promises,
that they are contrary to reason, but reason will not accept them; but
Satan\'s promises, because they agree with reason, are easily and
unquestionably accepted by reason.

92 Mahomet promises those who keep his law temporal honor, goods and
power in this life, but after this life physical pleasures. Reason
easily accepts this and believes it with certainty; therefore Mahomet
remains at home and does not want to leave his friendship, house and
farm with Abraham, but sticks to the present, remains and rests in it.
Abraham, on the other hand, clings badly to the word that God says to
him, and he shuns and despises all the danger that may come his way,
because he believes that God will be his protection.

\(93\) So that which the pope has devised and pretends, namely, the
merit and intercession of the saints, the ability and power of good
works, all of which are pleasant and pleasing to reason, has an
appearance before it; for it is vain and therefore takes pleasure in
lying, that is, in praising and glorifying its own virtues, and likes to
be told that it can earn salvation by its works, fulfill the law, and
attain righteousness. But this does not mean to kill reason, but to make
it alive.

94 Therefore flesh and blood is easily satisfied with this teaching,
accepts and believes such promises without doubt. But when it hears what
Abraham heard: Get thee out of thy father\'s country, and from thy
friendship, and from thy father\'s house, unto an unknown place; I will
be thy God.

**[758 L. Ill, M. Iio. Interpretation of Genesis 12, 4. W. 1,
1143-114.\" 759]{.underline}**

It soon recedes and considers it foolishness to abandon that which is
present and to follow that which is absent and not present; it fears and
flees from danger and seeks and strives for safety.

In sum, although the devil\'s promises are lies, they are pleasing to
the flesh because they are smooth at first; but God\'s promises, which
are right and true, point immediately to the cross, but after the cross
they promise blessing. That is why reason is annoyed by them on both
sides. What is invisible and far away, it considers nothing; but before
the cross it has an abhorrence and flees from it, as from a misfortune
that is eternal and can never have no end. And this is the very reason
that although God makes abundant promises, there are few who believe
them; for these are the ones whose hearts are ruled by the Holy Spirit,
so that after Abraham they can reject and despise all danger and sorrow,
and cling to and hold fast to the word of God who calls.

96 Therefore this is an excellent example of faith, which Moses holds up
to us in this text and summarizes the history or legend of the most holy
patriarch in few words, namely: \"Abram went out, as the Lord had said
to him. But where did he go out? From Ur in Chaldea, where he had his
house, farm, land, well-stocked household, servants, friends and
relatives; all this he left without delay and followed an uncertain
land, for the Lord had not yet shown him the land he was to have: he had
only this slight hope that the Lord had promised him a blessing, but
when, where, and how he would bless it, he had not yet seen.

97 Therefore, these are short words, and they seem to teach nothing
special. For reason does not see right good works and right obedience,
nor does it consider them pleasing to God, but takes pleasure in false
works colored with a vain appearance.

98 Therefore, in the monks you will find

The monks have nothing more to say in their books than that they praise
their fathers and boast of them that they have withdrawn from the world
and followed Christ. But if you will hold against this obedience of
Abraham St. Franciscus, Dominicus, Bernhardus 2c. and look at and judge
such great trades with spiritual eyes, you will find that the monks are
like children who let themselves be deceived by a shine and appearance,
and pick up overgilded nutshells for gold and admire such. For what have
their saints more in themselves than a mere semblance? Yes, their whole
order and life, of which they think and boast so much, is nothing more
than a perishable make-up, if one wants to hold it against this monk of
ours, who leaves everything in right faith.

\(99\) As it is written of the apples of the lake of Asphalt, in the
land where God destroyed Sodom with fire, that they are beautiful to
behold, but when they are opened, they are full of ashes, filth and
stink within: so the hypocritical obedience of the monks is full of
contempt for God and the true religion. And yet the world thinks much of
it and praises it; but these highest works and most pleasing services to
God, namely such excellent faith and obedience in Abraham, it considers
a bad, low thing and despises them. The world is not in the habit of
doing otherwise, nor is it able to do so.

I do not disagree with this and admit that Franciscus, Dominic, Bernard
and others, of whom it is said that they first brought about
monasticism, had their gifts, and I think more of St. Bernard than of
all the others; for he understood religion rightly and well, as his
books show. But these are all individual gifts that remained with one
person, which should be praised in such a way that nothing is taken away
from the glory of Christ and the mercy of God. But see how it has gone:
these same individual gifts have been directed and used by their
followers to cause sectarianism and to almost suppress and destroy the
name of Christ. For thereupon the

**[760 2. m, Iio-ur. Interpretation of I Genesis 12:4. \". 1. 114S-1149.
761]{.underline}**

These same foolish and wretched people did not trust that they were
Christians and baptized, but that one had accepted the Order of St.
Francis, the other the Order of St. Dominic. This was considered the
most correct way to heaven.

\(101\) Therefore, we punish the monastic life justly and remove the
same aversions that are set apart from the way of truth and faith, and
hold Christ up to the people, who paid for sin with his death and
acquired the Holy Spirit for us. This is the right way to righteousness,
which is not based on our merit and good works, but on the Son of God,
and on the grace and mercy given to us purely and freely without any
merit, which is presented to us in the Word.

\(102\) On the other hand, the monks believe that they are blessed
because they enter a monastery; yet we cannot say that Abraham became
righteous because he went out from Ur in Chaldea and left everything,
but he was already righteous beforehand, because he believed the promise
of God, which was shown and offered to him through the holy patriarchs.
For if he had not been justified, he would never have gone out, and
would not have been obedient to God who called him. Therefore, he heard
the word and believed it, and was justified by it, and then did
righteous works by following Christ\'s calling and walking in it.

For this is the right order, that the inward obedience is followed by
the outward obedience. The monks reverse this. For first, they have no
word to follow, but live in fact, as Anselmus said, in a made religion,
which is prepared and set up without God\'s word according to human
discretion. On the other hand, they think that the same outward change
can do so much that it changes the heart and the whole man: from which
delusion hypocrisy surely follows, that they let themselves dream of a
righteousness when the hearts are unclean.

But how this rhymes so badly with Abraham\'s example, everyone can see.
Abraham leaves his house, his possessions and his friendship and
wanders, but does not know where to? The monks, however, leave their
own, because they had hardly any black bread to eat at home with their
parents, they know well that they will find everything in monasteries.
For what is lacking, as far as the most delicious food and drink are
concerned, for these unruly sows who do nothing but fatten themselves
up? and yet they may so impudently say and boast that they have left
everything and followed Christ.

\(105\) Abraham did not have such pleasure and good days among the
pagans, who plagued him in many ways, as the histories indicate.
Therefore, if you want to hold Benedictus, Franciscus and other monks\'
fathers against him, you will see that they are nothing but dirt
compared to the precious pearls of our monk. One does not like to hear
such comparisons, nor does one earn friendship with them, but
nevertheless they are necessary not only to men, but also to God; since
monasticism has come into such abuse that they have also compared
godless people to baptism.

Here we have the opportunity to say something about obedience, which has
been praised in monasteries to such an extent that there has not been
such an unlearned monk who has not written something about it. 15:22,
23: \"Obedience is better than sacrifice; but disobedience is a greater
sin than sorcery.\" And thus they concluded that no state was better
than the state of the monks. This is a fine conclusion, which rhymes
like a fist on the eye, as they say. Thus one sees that the whole papacy
did not know what obedience was.

107 For true obedience is this, that you do not do what you have chosen,
commanded or commanded yourself, but what God has commanded you by His
word. And that

**[762 \". m, 112-115. interpretation of Genesis 12:4. \". 1, 1149-1151.
763]{.underline}**

To call this a right obedience is clear from this text, which says of
Abraham: \"Abram went out as the Lord had said to him.\" Here you have a
right, exact description of obedience, namely, that God\'s word belongs
to it. For where God does not speak, but is silent, there can be no
obedience.

Now it is not enough for God to speak, but He must speak to you. Thus
God\'s word came to Abraham that he should slay and sacrifice his son;
therefore it was proper obedience and praiseworthy that Abraham would
obey this word, for it was spoken to him. But that Abraham\'s
descendants would do this after him was not obedience, though it was the
same work; for they were not commanded to do this, as Abraham was
commanded. Thus Christ in the Gospel calls the young man to sell
everything and follow him: it would also have been a fine obedience if
he had done it and followed Christ. And although the monks boast that
they do this, and therefore want to be praised for their obedience, it
is not obedience, because Christ never gave them such a command.

109\. Therefore this definition and description of obedience should be
diligently remembered: \"Abram went forth, as the LORD had said unto
him.\" The Lord, says Moses, had told Abraham to go out; therefore this
going out was the most holy work and the most pleasing obedience to God.

110\. But you must also realize here that God also speaks to us through
men. Therefore, even though it may seem bad and insignificant when
children do what their parents command, this is obedience not only to
men, but also to God, who has commanded that one should be obedient to
one\'s parents. This divine word is the right jewel and crown that high
rulers use to paint on their heads, and it makes obedience to them. So
you, who study here, are present from your parents\' knowledge and
command; they want you to be diligent in learning and obedient to your
teachers. Therefore, if you take care that you are

If you do the will and command of your parents according to your
ability, you offer a very pleasing sacrifice to God, \"for obedience is
better than sacrifice,\" 1 Sam. 15:22.

Even if an authority calls the citizens to war by virtue of their
office, in order to maintain peace and to defend themselves against
violence, obedience to God is thereby rendered. For this is what the
Lord has told us in Rom. 13:1: \"Let every man be subject to the
authorities. But someone might say, \"Yes, that is a dangerous
obedience, for I might be slain. Answer: It is one thing for you to
strike another to death, or for another to choke you; for you are going
as the Lord has said to you. Therefore it is a good and holy work to
smite thine enemy to death, if thou hast a command from thy authorities.

In the same way, one should also speak of the common profession when one
is called to teach in an office. You should consider the profession and
voice of a city or a community as if it were God\'s profession, and be
obedient to him, not do as that clumsy monk, who is praised in Historia
tripartita as a holy man, who, when called to the office of bishop, cut
off his ear and threatened to cut off his tongue before he would accept
the office of bishop. This not only nonsensical, but also godless man
did not want to render God the most pleasant service, which was very
necessary and useful for mankind, since he was commanded to do so; since
he should have accepted such an office more cheaply and said with St.
Paul 1 Cor. 9, 16: \"Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel! This is
how early superstition was introduced into the church.

Therefore, we should often remember this short saying: \"Then Abram went
out, as the Lord had said to him,\" and write it on our business and
dealings at home or in the country, in war or peace, in pestilence or
other dangers, so that we will be able to take comfort, even if we have
to die, that we have been in God\'s obedience.

**[764 L. m. iis. ns. Interpretation of Genesis 12:4. \". i, usi-iiv4.
765]{.underline}**

For although the outcome seems sad, it is a great comfort to know that
you have obeyed God. Therefore, you should also wait for His help and
hope for a much greater reward than if the matter had gone according to
your will.

This is the proper praise of obedience, which alone is by God\'s
promises or commandments. For if the two do not exist, it is not worthy
to be called obedience, for you would have it called Satan\'s obedience.
For where one is not obedient to God and his word, it is actually called
obedience to the devil.

For this reason we should give special attention to the word or
profession. For this alone makes righteous obedience and service
pleasing to God; which, if we perform, we can not only protect ourselves
with the testimony of our good conscience, but can also take comfort in
God\'s help and wait for it, because we follow and obey His word even in
certain danger.

\(116\) He who in all his works sees and remembers this little piece:
The Lord has said it, would live forever in full happiness and hope; but
in this the devil hinders us, who does not grant us such happiness, and
brings us by a strange appearance from this right obedience to his
obedience, that is, to such an obedience, which has no commandment of
God, as the obedience of the monks is.

The pope, as I said above, insists on obedience in all his statutes,
because he wants to be the highest bishop and Christ\'s governor, and
thunders with terrible threats that if one is not obedient to him, the
disobedience of the soul will lead to damnation. Again he makes glorious
promises, namely that those who go on pilgrimage to St. Petro and Paul
will have complete forgiveness of all sins. With such promises he adorns
all his works, as the service of the saints, the invocation of the
saints, the mass, so that he may bring the simple to his obedience; and
he has, alas, found all too many of them,

who have obeyed him too much. For how many thousands of men have been
sunk down to hell in this obedience, who thought they were leading the
right road to heaven!

\(118\) And even though ungodly teachers will feel and bear a heavy
judgment of God because of such deceit and seduction, yet the house that
followed him is not excused because of it, for they should have looked
around to see if such obedience was also in such a commandment of God,
as Moses says here, \"The Lord has said it. For where such is not, there
is not God\'s obedience, but the devil\'s. In this way the pope has
filled the world with satanic obedience. For the pope has not commanded
what God has commanded, but what he himself has devised; hence it has
come about that his whole religion has not been righteous, but made and
chosen by himself, and in sum, has been a loud hypocrisy.

Therefore we should remember the commandment in the Revelation of John,
where Cap. 18, 4. 5. says: \"Come out of her (Babylon), my people, so
that you will not be partakers of her sins, so that you will not receive
any of her plagues; for her sins reach to heaven, and God remembers her
iniquities. But how shall we proceed from it? So that we do not let
ourselves be led around by the nose, like a bear; but if the Pope
commands something, we do not follow it as soon as we hear it, but first
ask him and say: \"Squire Pope, I hear well that you command me this;
but show me God\'s word, whether God has commanded and said such things,
then I will gladly be obedient: But if God has not said it, and your
commandment is contrary to God\'s word, as what you say about ungodly
monastic and saintly vows, forbidding marriage, food and drink 2c., I
will not obey you; for I have another command from God, which I must
obey and follow.

120 But against this he saith, I am the head and lord of the church: and
it is written, Luc. 10:16, He that heareth you heareth me. Answer: We
know very well that the pope sees according to these two things and

**[786 m, ne-ns. Interpretation of Genesis 12:4, W. I, IIÜ4-\^1S7.
767]{.underline}**

Christ denied him this, because he said to the apostles Luc. 22, 25:
\"The worldly kings rule, but you do not rule in the same way. And Peter
1 Epistle 5:2, 3. says, \"Feed the flock of Christ,\.... Not as they
that rule over the people.\" But that he says he is a lord of the
church, he proves it with God\'s word, so we want to believe him.

But we know that Christ\'s opinion is far different, namely: \"He who is
the highest among you, let him be the least, and serve others\", Matth.
23, 11, so that the whole rule does not rest on men, but only on God\'s
word. The same should reign in the church, for we have a public command
from heaven: \"This you shall hear,\" Matth. 17, 5.

That the pope therefore also wants to be a lord over the word and bind
and dissolve everything according to his pleasure, that is, prescribe
and command laws (for this is how the servant of sin, 2 Thess. 2, 3, the
pope at Rome, falsely interprets the words of Christ), he will not
achieve this with us; indeed, cursed are all those with whom he achieves
this. For he did not receive this authority from Christ, but arrogates
it to himself like an insolent and godless man.

For is this not a very great and tyrannical pride, that the beasts also
force emperors and kings to kiss their feet? Which would still be
suffered if he asked for it out of love, so that his prestige and power
in the church would be strengthened and increased; for we know that
contempt for the church office does the utmost harm. But that he demands
it as a right and under the article of faith and condemnation, that is
absolutely against God\'s word.

124\) Such things, and much more hurtful, are that he commands that
letters of indulgence be cancelled, that the intercession and help of
the saints be invoked, and other things more than are necessary for the
remission of sins; therefore we contend justly, not only as against a
pope, but also as against a public enemy and adversary of Christ,
because he sets up articles contrary to the gospel of Christ. For

He absolutely emphasizes faith and only deals with it in order to make
his tyranny last; and in this he does not follow the common way of
seeking body and goods, as tyrants do, but he also strangles souls and
puts them into the hellish fire.

So this example of the holy patriarch, who died so many thousands of
years ago, still shines before the church and warns it against
hypocrisy. Therefore these words should be written with golden letters
not only on the walls, but on all our words and works: \"As the Lord had
said to him.\" For they teach us that right obedience is when you hear
and obey the word of God spoken to you. Where therefore such word is
not, there is either no obedience, or there is Satan\'s obedience.
Therefore, in all your life and works, you should look to God\'s word,
not only in the church, but also in the worldly and domestic government.
If you have the word and follow it, you also have obedience; for these
two, word and obedience, follow one another and belong together. But
since one thing is omitted and abolished, namely the word, the other,
namely obedience, must also be omitted and be nothing.

**And Lot went with him.**

Behold, how this is such a strange counsel of God. The promise was made
to Abraham alone and not to Lot, and yet God adds this Lot to Abraham as
a proselyte and companion, and stirs his heart in such a way that he
would much rather go into misery with his uncle than stay at home with
the godless idolaters. This is because the promise made to Abraham not
only promised that he alone would be blessed with his family, but that
he himself would also be a blessing, that is, that others would share in
the blessing through him, even though the promise did not actually
belong to them.

\(127\) As in the Scriptures there are many histories that show such
examples. The king in Egypt was not part of the holy order.

**[768 \" m, us-iri. Interpretation of Genesis 12:4. \". i. us7-um.
769]{.underline}**

He was not a member of the Jewish people, but nevertheless received the
promise or blessing because he accepted Joseph\'s religion and faith.
Thus, because the king of Nineveh accepted Jonah\'s faith, he received
the promise made to the Jewish people, even though he was not one of
God\'s people. It was the same with Job, the kings of Babylon and the
Persian kings, all of whom not only had a special happiness after God
blessed their rule for the sake of religion, but also became fellow
members through the faith of the eternal blessing.

\(128\) Just as it is still possible today that even those who do not
have the gospel, but nevertheless live next to us and we among them, may
nevertheless share in our blessings and enjoy the peace next to us,
which God gives to the church because of His word. For he is rich in
mercy and wants many to enjoy his gifts. Therefore, where he makes
promises, he also sends others to enjoy them, even though they do not
belong to them in the first place; as Ruth, the daughter of Naomi, who
was a daughter of Lot, says to her sister-in-law, Ruth 1:16: \"Your
people are my people, and your God is my God,\" that is, even though I
am not of your people, your God will not reject me for that reason, but
will provide for me and take care of me so that I do not remain a widow
2c.

**Abram was five and seventy years old when he left Haran.**

\(129\) This is a bright and clear text, that Abram, when he was five
and seventy years old, went not out of Ur, but out of Haran. Therefore
we must consider that he made two departures. The first was when his
father Tarah and his sons Abraham and Lot left Ur in Chaldea. And
although the same journey was also made and directed to the land of
Canaan, they were prevented by an accident and remained for a while in
Haran, as the text above clearly shows. But when Tharah had died there,
Abram took his

Changed residence and moved from Haran to the land of Canaan.

\(130\) Now this question, whether Abram was the firstborn, I have
touched upon above. And although Lyra stiffly denies it, because he does
not pay attention to the sixty years that are lost in Abram\'s history;
nevertheless I am of the opinion that he was the firstborn, because the
text here clearly testifies that he was five and seventy years old when
he moved from Haran. But if someone wants to follow a different opinion,
I will not oppose him; but I will consider him a master, who will be
able to unite and compare these five and seventy years with the age of
Tharah, who lived two hundred and five years.

\(131\) This I must also say, that if any man would reckon the time that
the law was given according to the promise of which Paul saith Galatians
3:17, he must begin from this year, which is the seventy-fifth year of
his age. For from this year there are four hundred and thirty years unto
the going out of the children of Israel out of Egypt; for unto the going
into Egypt there are counted two hundred and fifteen years: so also the
people of Israel were so many years in Egypt. If you put these years
together, it follows the number that Moses 2 Mos. 12, 40. and Paul Gal.
3, 17. point to, namely four hundred and thirty years.

\(132\) But we must pay careful attention to the text of St. Paul: \"The
law was given more than four hundred and thirty years after the promise
made to Abraham\"; so it follows that the law does not make righteous,
because Abraham was righteous such a long time before the law was given,
even before he was circumcised and before he set up an altar. This
follows irrefutably. The same text of St. Paul also proves that the
promise was made to Abraham and that he was called to the exodus, not
when he was in Ur, but in Haran. Therefore the text above (Cap. 11, 31.)
says: \"Tharah took Abram and Lot, his sons\" 2c. But here it says:
\"Abram took Sarai, his wife\" 2c.

133 Now, however, contrary to this opinion, the

**[770L. m, 121-123. Interpretation of Genesis 12:4, 5. W. 1, 1160-11S4.
771]{.underline}**

> Text Ap. Hist. 7, 2, where St. Stephen, whose words must be somewhat
> resounding, repeats these very words and clearly says that these words
> happened to Abraham in Mesopotamia. So Moses and Stephen are against
> each other? But how shall we compare them with each other? For they
> are both attested witnesses and yet they are not one with each other.
> The answer to this is that Abraham was called twice, once to Ur in the
> land of Chaldea, perhaps through the patriarch Shem, and then to
> Haran. According to this opinion, these two witnesses are not contrary
> to each other; for Moses relates the other calling to Haran and is
> satisfied with it; but Stephen relates the first.
>
> However, it seems to me that this story is told by Moses diligently
> and actually, and not by Stephen, who took this story from Moses
> alone. Now it is often the case that when one tells something in
> general, one does not pay as much attention to all the circumstances
> as those who want to faithfully describe the histories of things that
> have happened for the benefit of their descendants. Thus Moses is a
> historian, but Stephen relies on the fact that the history is
> described by Moses, and therefore cares little about the
> circumstances, but only sees to it that the listeners may understand
> that the arch-father of this people had neither laws nor temple, and
> yet was pleasing to God and pleased Him. This is the main thing that
> Stephen insists on, namely, that one should see how God did not want
> to make righteous, forgive sin and give eternal life for the sake of
> the temple, circumcision or law, but only for the sake of the promised
> seed, which the synagogue had killed.

**Fourth Part.**

> **Of Abraham\'s traveling companions and of his travels in the
> promised land.**

**V.5 So Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother\'s son, and all
their substance which they had gotten, and souls which they had begotten
in Haran.**

135 For this reason Moses tells us that he praises the faith of Abraham
as great and extensive, as it is indeed a great and wonderful faith. For
we can easily understand from our own experience and from ourselves what
such a long and difficult journey with such a large group of people into
an unknown country and among unknown people entails in terms of effort,
work and danger; yet the holy man overcame all this with patience and
forbearance. For however arduous and dangerous the journey may have
been, he believed that God would be with him with His blessing and that
what He had promised him would certainly be kept and fulfilled in His
time.

136\. And all these things belong to it, so that we may learn to comfort
ourselves with them in all trials; that is, it belongs to the
strengthening of our faith that we do not soon become fainthearted when
an accident happens to us, but awaken ourselves to hope, ask for help
and expect it from God. For one must continue, and it is not enough that
one has well begun, but what you have well begun, with that you shall
diligently continue and continue.

**I.**

137 For behold, Abraham leaves his home at Ur in Chaldea, where his
fatherland, house and farm, possessions and goods, friends and neighbors
are, with whom he had lived, and goes to the misery of Haran, where he
has to set up a new household. When he had been there for some time, he
was driven out again and told to go on to the land of Canaan, which was
so much more distant that he had to endure danger, toil and labor.

But if Abraham had been alone, he would have had less toil and trouble,
even though he would not have been without danger. For he that is alone
and not bound to wife and children, it is a pleasure to him that he must
see and pass through divers places; for he hath but one body to support.
Wherever a house or a city does not please him, he moves to another one;
but this wanderer is

**[772 in. 123-12S. Interpretation of Genesis 12:5, W. i. iuu-u \"7.
773]{.underline}**

Not only that, but he drags with him a large number of souls, among whom
some are very close to him and very dear, such as his wife Sarah and his
brother\'s son Lot with his daughters. In addition, he carries with him
all his goods and possessions, which at that time were not gold, silver
or precious household goods, but animals and cattle. For Mesopotamia is
famous for being a good pastureland and rich in livestock; and this
country takes its name from the fact that it lies between two very large
waters, the Tigris and the Euphrates, which also surround Babylon; and
Mesopotamia and Babylon have almost always been ruled by one king.

\(139\) Haran is also a part of the land of Mesopotamia, though this
name was afterwards changed and called Aram. Whoever has cattle to
maintain must also have many servants. That is why Moses says he went
with the souls they had begotten in Haran. Here he means not only the
daughters of Lot, of whom I think they were born at that time (for from
the year Abraham went out of Haran until the fall of Sodom are five and
twenty years), but also the other servants, menservants and maidservants
with their children. For it will be seen hereafter that Abraham had a
very large household or household people, since he prepared three
hundred of them for battle.

Now I have often said that the Hebrew word nephesh, soul, means a living
body. This householder is dragging such a bunch with him into an unknown
country and to such people who are not of his religion and faith and are
therefore hostile to this stranger. Therefore, no one doubts that they
will have come into danger, great trouble and work. For if his wife has
been in danger so often, what do we think that his household and
livestock will have suffered?

For this reason Moses wants to set before our eyes a special example of
faith, against which we must be ashamed of ourselves. For who can say
that he has experienced the tenth part of such trials and dangers? For
if we, with wife and child

to other places, we do not go to strangers, but to friends and
acquaintances; or if they are unknown to us, they are still related to
us by language and religion. But this wanderer\'s journey is much
different and takes place in a much different way; therefore Paul also
calls him faithful, that he undertakes this journey with such a large
group solely out of trust in the mercy of God, who had promised him that
he would bless him.

However, his companions, who set out on this journey with him, should
not be deprived of their fair praise. For Sarai and Lot\'s wife to
follow their husbands\' opinion and counsel and to go along is not a
small thing; for wives are very timid to travel and do not like to part
from their own.

143\. of the servants and maids, I marvel that they follow. For if they
had been like our servants and maidservants, they would not have moved a
foot for Abraham\'s sake. Where then did such obedience and such a
willingness to follow the father of the house come from? Undoubtedly,
after the wives and servants heard Abraham\'s sermon about the promise
of God, they fell in love with him, believed his words and wished that
they could be blessed by Christ.

144\. Therefore, we may call such companions not only Abraham\'s
household, but a true holy church, in which Abraham was the chief bishop
and high priest, and instructed them of God\'s mercy, which God would
show in His Son, who would first rule and bless His generation and all
those who would turn to Him; But after that he would become man in his
own time and bring upon himself the wrath of God and condemnation from
his people, so that they could be freed from all sin and escape the
eternal punishment of death. Sarai, Lot\'s wife and daughters, and both
of their servants believed such a sermon of Abraham. Therefore they
followed the holy father of the house with the highest pleasure, as they
preferred poverty, danger and all kinds of harm.

**[774 \" m. 125-127. interpretation of Genesis 12:5, 6. w. i, ns7-iiM.
775]{.underline}**

The people of the world suffered because they wanted to lose the
possession of such great promises, which were not yet in the works, but
in mere hope.

And so God also comforted Abraham himself. For this was truly a
blessing, that he was able to find some who went with him into misery,
such pious and God-fearing companions, who also greatly respected God\'s
word and followed it.

That is why the 39th Psalm, v. 13, praises this foreigner of ours when
he says: \"I am a pilgrim with you, like all my fathers\"; for in this
saying David sees the image and quality of faith. For though he was a
king, yet, being in many perils in foreign lands, like Abraham, he had
to comfort himself with the promise alone, and be satisfied with it.

\(147\) And let us also magnify this example, not only to strengthen and
comfort us, but also to obscure the abominable works of our saints, of
which so much is said in the pope\'s church, when in truth they are a
stinking filth, if they are to be held up against the works of this
stranger of ours.

The word asu, had begotten, means not only the begetting and multiplying
of children, but also the rearing and maintenance of both children and
cattle.

**II.**

**And they set out to travel to the land of Canaan.**

149 Here it is to be noted that Abraham has the command to go, he also
has the promise of blessing, but the place where he is to go is not yet
indicated to him. Therefore he is still uncertain in which place of the
earth the Lord wants him to dwell. But that he goes straight to the land
of Canaan, he does not do so because he knows that the same land will be
given to his descendants, because this promise will follow later, but
because he goes after the patriarch SeM, who lived in Salem, from whom
he may also have been called from Ur, which advice and comfort he wanted
to use; because he does not know yet where the Lord wants him to live.

the promise of the seed was upon him until the Lord showed him a place
where he should dwell.

150 Therefore this journey was made in faith, because Abraham did not
yet know the place where he was to dwell. First he went from Ur in
Chaldea, which was his fatherland, to Haran; from Haran to the land of
Canaan; Since he does not always stay in one place, but often has to
change his place of residence because of the malice of his neighbors,
often also because of God\'s command, until he finally comes to Egypt,
from where he moves to the land of Canaan for the second time, in which
he does not always stay in one place, but now has his seat in Hebron,
soon in Bersaba, another time at Mount Moriah. Now if he had been weak
in his faith, he would have overcome his impatience and let go of the
word and put an end to his wandering and traveling. Therefore, it is a
wonderful example of faith that the holy man does not grow weary, but
always comforts himself with God\'s word, places his hope in it, and
does not think that what God once promised is in vain. So he only hangs
on the clouds or on the sky with his hope, which he does not allow to be
taken away.

**V. 5, 6: And when they were come warmly into the same land, Abram
passed through unto the place of Shechem, and unto the grove of More.
For at that time the Canaanites dwelt in the land.**

151 This also belongs to the extensive description of this example, that
Abraham, with such a large group of people and cattle, should subject
himself to such a long journey; and it is a great wonder that some of
them were not too weak and impatient with the challenge, and became
angry that Abraham did not rather stay at Haran or in another place.

152\) Where Shechem is, it is known from Joshua. For when the children
of Israel were passed over Jordan, they came by the way of the land
first to Jericho, then to Ai, and finally to Bethel. Now Shechem is not
far from Bethel after midnight, from the two known mountains, Ebal and
Garizim, nor is Jerusalem far from them.

But there was a very proud and defiant people in the same places
afterwards, as the histories and sermons of the prophets indicate,
because the patriarchs had dwelt there; just as the Pope at Rome is
wonderfully proud and defiant because he sits on St. Peter\'s chair.

Some say of the word elon, grove, that it means an oak, some a field or
a level place; but it is the same, for it takes nothing away from the
text. But Moreh is the name of a mountain, which is thought to be Richt.
7:1 For when Gideon had pitched his camp after midday, the Midianites
pitched in the rock Moreh after midnight. Now it is not known from where
this place was named, for moreh means a teacher. I am of the opinion
that there was a priest in the same place, who taught religion and
worship to those who lived there; and this word is found in the 9th
Psalm, v. 21: \"Give them, O Lord, a master\"; item in the 84th Psalm,
v. 7: \"The teachers are adorned with many blessings. But here is moreh
a special name of the place where Abraham first stayed.

The fact that Moses says that Canaanites lived in the same country is
part of the reason why we should understand the miserable misery in
which the holy patriarch lived. For he did not dwell among friends, but
in the midst of enemies, and among such people as did not use the same
religion and worship with him. According to Noah\'s will and opinion,
the same land was given to the pious Shem, but Nimrod\'s children, who
had come from Arabia on both sides, had taken it by force, so that it
might be seen that the church was at one time as it was at another. For
the wicked robbed and stripped it, and yet God miraculously preserved it
even against the gates of hell.

**V. 7 Then the Lord appeared to Abram and said, \"I will give this land
to your seed.**

After Abraham, as a stranger, has suffered and been afflicted long
enough by the Canaanites, he finds himself in the midst of the
Canaanites.

Finally, so that he would not be overcome by impatience, he would have
the highest comfort in distant temptation. For this is true: If the days
were not shortened and consolation followed when we are overcome by
adversity and temptation, then no man would be blessed, Matth. 24, 22.
Whoever therefore perseveres in faith will certainly experience in the
end that God does not abandon His own. He may delay his help and tighten
the strings so hard that you think they are about to break; but he comes
to our aid at a convenient time and then certainly comes to our aid when
we think we are about to go down. That is why the 9th Psalm v. 10 gives
God this title, that he is a helper in time of need.

The text does not indicate in which year this revelation happened to
Abraham, but from the circumstances it can be understood that it
happened when Abraham was tired of his heavy misery and long maturing.
Before he therefore comes to Shem, the Lord comforts him, so that the
example of this patriarch may also be useful and comforting to the
Church in this matter, and that we also learn that when we are tempted,
we should hold fast to our faith, and take it for granted that God will
be with us and comfort us.

157 Therefore, first of all, a certain place is shown here where
Abraham\'s lineage will have its permanent home. But notice how truly
and masterfully the Lord sets his words. Since this is said to him,
Abraham had neither seed nor land, and since his seed will be born to
him afterwards, he still has no land; yes, as St. Stephen Ap. 7:5 says
of him, he does not have a foot wide. Therefore this promise agrees with
the previous one, which promises that he will have a large nation,
because the land is not promised to him but to his seed. Abraham is
satisfied with this promise and gladly forgets his misery, because he
knows that his family will not fall into such misery and suffering.

But this is a true \"bodily\" promise. For although the saints live by
faith and overcome temporal misery and calamity in the hope of the life
to come, they do not live by faith.

**77ß s. yi. V-iW. \> Interpretation of Genesis 12:5-7. K. i, u \"s-uV.
777**

**\
[7782- m.uo-r\" interpretation of Genesis 12:7. \". i, ii7r-u?\".
779]{.underline}**

Even if they overcome their misfortune, they still need physical comfort
in this life and in such great weakness of the flesh, so that they may
rest from their misfortune and regain their strength and power, which
are weakened and consumed by daily misery and unhappiness.

**And there he built an altar to the Lord, who had appeared to him.**

So now we see that the holy patriarch, how miserable and strange he is,
nevertheless thinks of a certain place and dwelling for the sake of the
promise that was made to him; for now he first builds an altar to the
Lord who appeared to him, that is, he decrees a place where the church
would come together to hear God\'s word, to pray, to praise God, to
sacrifice 2c. For this means to build an altar.

160 And Abraham builds the altar, that is, he is the bishop or priest,
he teaches the others and instructs them in the true worship of God. For
to this end all altars and churches should be directed and serve to
gather together, to hear God\'s word, to pray, to give thanks to God, to
praise God, and to perform the services that he has commanded. Where
this is not the case, churches and altars are nothing but workshops of
idolatry, of which the papacy is full; for there the proper divine
services are missed and all divine service is turned solely to the
blasphemous and ungodly sacrifice of the Mass.

161 But here it is asked, \"Did Abraham have the power to do this, since
he was not commanded to do it by any special commandment of God? For to
perform a service of worship by one\'s own choice and not by God\'s
command is idolatry. Answer: Abraham did not choose this place for the
altar out of his own counsel, but the Lord himself, who appeared to him
there, chose it; for the Lord himself is the first founder, who lets
himself be seen in the place, so that he may be honored there and have
his promise glorified.

162 Thus, when Jacob, as will follow in chap. 28, in the place where he
was sleeping, the angels were standing on the ladder that reached to
heaven,

he said, v. 17: \"Here is the house of God and the gate of heaven. So
that the Lord, who is in this place at first and lets his word be heard
there, also prepares and consecrates it himself, so that it is no longer
common, but holy and serves for holy use and works. For by God\'s word
everything is made holy. Now God\'s word is not proclaimed in this place
by a man, but by God Himself.

Therefore this is the first church built by the patriarch Jacob; but it
was not such a building as our churches are, but a mound of stones made
in the field, where the people came together to hear the word of God and
to offer sacrifices. But the same place later gave rise to innumerable
idolatries, as the sermons of the prophets testify, especially the
prophet Hosea, who prophesied against the kingdom of Israel.

Just as the Samaritan woman in the gospel defends her religion with the
example of the patriarchs when she says John 4:20: \"Our fathers
worshipped on this mountain. For it speaks of this very mountain
Garizim, which either, as I believe, is the rock More, or was not so far
from it. And if reason is caught with this rope, it cannot free itself
from it, because when it hears that Abraham has done this and that God
has put up with this work of his, it closes its mind from that moment
on: Therefore I will also do it, so that I may also please God with it.
But when the prophets said that this would not follow, they were beaten
and killed.

\(165\) And the Shechemites were peculiarly proud and presumptuous, as
Sirach calls them foolish. Because they knew that Abraham had built an
altar on Mount Moriah, they went to the times of Alexander the Great and
built a magnificent temple on Mount Garizim, after they had been allowed
and permitted to do so by Alexander, as Josephus writes in Book 11,
Chapter 8. Moses foresaw such idolatry and did not point out the
examples of the patriarchs to the pious,

**[780 L. Ill, I32-ILL. Interpretation of Genesis 12:7, 8. w. 1,
1178-1178. 781]{.underline}**

as if they should follow them, but leads them to God\'s word and says
Deut. 16, 5. 6.: \"You shall not sacrifice or keep feasts in any place,
but in the place which the LORD shall choose.\" This piece he repeats in
the same chapter not once, but very often. Because the place of the
tabernacle was to be changed many times until the temple was finally
built, Moses wanted them to keep this place and to come together and
sacrifice there, which God indicated and determined with His word.

We see that the holy prophet gave this warning in vain. For the
tabernacle and the temple have been despised by the idolaters, and other
places have been sought for worship, as has happened in our country. For
we have placed much more emphasis on St. Peter\'s Cathedral in Rome than
on all other places where God\'s Word, the sacraments and the keys have
been used in the right way; so that it is known that where these things
are done, God is present and gracious.

**V. 8 Then he departed from thence unto a mountain that was toward the
east of the city of Bethel, and pitched his tent, that he might have
Bethel toward the west, and Ai toward the east: and there he built an
altar unto the LORD, and preached of the name of the LORD.**

This is a new journey and procession, but not far away, but to a nearby
place. For Bethel and Jericho are not far from Mount More, and all these
are on the common highway. But since someone wanted to ask: What was the
cause that he did not stay longer at Mount More, I know nothing that
could be put forward as a cause, except that hatred and violence drove
him away from his neighbors with whom he lived; which he suffered not
only because he was a stranger, but also because he led a new religion
and had his special meetings, and did not want to follow the idolatry
with which he lived.

168\) As I said above about the Scythians and Mount More:

So we have it from the prophets that the idolaters here took cause from
Abraham and set up a temple and altar in Bethel. For Bethel was a good
and blessed name, and means God\'s gift; therefore the idolaters thought
it would be a convenient place to worship; as Jeroboam set up a service
with calves there, 1 Kings 12:28, 29. But below (Cap. 28:19) Moses will
say that Bethel was called Lus before, but got the name Bethel from
Jacob, to whom the Lord had appeared there.

Here, again, one should pay attention to the fact that the holy
patriarch was a God-fearing man. For although those who dwelt with him
on Mount More were hostile to him primarily for the sake of religion, he
nevertheless did not abandon his religion for its sake, but diligently
kept it: So that he also sets up an altar on the road that lies in the
middle between Bethel and Ai, and there he exercises his priestly
office, that is, he instructs and teaches his church about God\'s will,
exhorts them to a holy way of life, strengthens them in the faith, keeps
them in the hope of future blessings and prays with them himself. All
these things are included in the words preach the name of God in Hebrew.

For this reason I have much rather left the words as they stand in the
Hebrew, than follow our Latin text, which understands these words,
preach the name of God, only by calling; in which meaning they stand
Joel 3:5: \"It shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the
name of the LORD shall be saved\" or escape.

But here Moses is speaking of the whole ministry, just as the call
includes the whole of it. For: \"How shall they call on him in whom they
do not believe? How shall they believe, of whom they have heard nothing?
But how shall they hear without a preacher?\" 2c., Rom. 10, 14.
Therefore this is the opinion: He preached from the name of the Lord,
that is, taught his own from the name of the Lord, so that they learned
how God is merciful, compassionate and kind to the human race.

**[782 L. m, 1S4-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 12, 8-10. W. 1, 1178-UM.
78\^]{.underline}**

He promised a seed through which the wrath of God would be removed and
the blessing lost in paradise through sin would be restored and
returned. Such a recognition of God is followed by the invocation that
in all distress and danger we look to such a gracious and kind God, ask
him for help and call upon him 2c. Now ask our popes and bishops, from
whom Abraham received the anointing or smearing, that he led and
practiced such a priestly office among his own?

(v.9) **Then Abram departed, and went out toward the south.**

This is the third journey in the land of Canaan: therefore it is seen
here how a pleasant guest Abraham was to the people of that land.
Although the place where he dwelt in the same land is not mentioned in
the text, it seems that he dwelt at Hebron; and because this was a royal
city, where the Canaanite priests also dwelt, Abraham could have no
place there. Therefore, Abraham\'s wonderful strong courage and
excellent steadfastness in the faith are shown here once again, that he
did not grow weary or tired in so many journeys and so much wickedness
and unfaithfulness of the people, but always held fast to the hope of
the promise that had come to him, and did not conceal the name of his
God, but preached about it publicly, regardless of the fact that he had
so often experienced that this one thing gave rise to endless hatred and
trouble.

Here the Holy Spirit sets before us such an example of a great and
faithful faith. Just now we heard of Cain\'s sin and punishment, that he
had to be a fugitive in the land: but Abraham is holy through faith and
has the promise of a great blessing. Now hold this against his
misfortune, and you will see that he is in the same punishment as Cain,
and must wander as a cursed man in the land promised to him, not for
himself alone, but with his wife, brother\'s son, and son\'s son.

All his servants. This is how the Lord leads His saints miraculously,
Ps. 4:4, so that they will finally, if they remain steadfast in faith,
obtain all that they believe. Therefore we should also prepare ourselves
for such a struggle and exercise of faith and persevere in it. For this
is the reason why such histories are held up to us.

**Fifth part.**

**From Abraham\'s Journey to Egypt.**

**V. 10: And there was a flood in the land. And Abram went down into
Egypt, to abstain there as a stranger: for there was great trouble in
the land.**

There has been no one among all who have read or interpreted this text
who has not been offended by it, even among the Jews themselves. It is
such a strange text, full of questions and vexations, especially where
it is rightly understood; for there are the vexations of faith and
practice. The land of Canaan was promised to Abraham\'s seed, so he
undoubtedly had a strong hope that he would remain there; but look at
history, and you will find that everything goes against his faith and
the promise. That he now clings to the word and does not allow the
contradiction to be driven away is really nothing else than overcoming
hope through hope or, as Paul says in Romans 4:18, believing without
hope in hope; as happens to Jacob in chapter 32 when he wrestles with
the angel.

For he wandered about the land, and found nowhere where he could stay
long. Finally, he had the misfortune of having to leave the promised
land and go to Egypt with all his people because of the famine. But was
not this a hard blow and a severe challenge to faith?

Now let us learn from this what kind of regime our Lord God leads in
this world, namely, a weak and foolish one, if you want to judge it by
reason. Before Abraham came to this land

**[784 L m. M-ISS. Interpretation of Genesis 12:10. W. I. H83-U8S.
785]{.underline}**

But now the holy man comes in and brings with him the promise of God in
a very strong faith, from that moment on there is such a famine that if
he does not look for another place, he will certainly be in danger of
his life. Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Elijah, Elisha and other prophets
suffered such famine afterwards; Paul also under the emperor Claudius.
And in our time we hear that the gospel is blamed everywhere, as if
because of it the grain was more expensive and did not turn out as well
as before the gospel came.

Thus God does, and thus He governs this life, that it is full of all
vexations and offences, not only in the eyes of the wicked, but also of
the pious and godly; although the pious overcome all that vexes them
with the holy Abraham in faith. For when religion is well, and the holy
patriarchs, prophets, and apostles rule, all kinds of trouble and
misfortune arise. But how does this agree with the promises? Ps. 37, 19:
\"In the time of trouble they will have enough\"; item Ps. 112, 7: \"If
a plague comes, he will not be afraid\"; and Ps. 41, 2: \"The Lord will
save him in the evil time\"; and again Ps. 37, 25: \"I have never seen
the righteous forsaken, or his seed going after bread\" 2c.? But does
Abraham not go for bread when he goes from the land of Canaan into
Egypt, so that he may escape the famine?

178\. Answer: All this is done by God\'s special counsel, so that faith
may be established in the saints. But if it lasts for a time, then not
only bodily restitution follows, as Abraham became very rich, but also
increase of faith and greater experience of God\'s grace and mercy.
Therefore Paul says Rom. 5, 3, although the godly groan, weep and mourn
in their cross, they also boast of their cross and suffering, after they
find that God reigns so wonderfully.

So Abraham is also mentioned here.

not to his detriment, but to his great benefit, as will follow. For God
tested his faith with this very challenge, which was indeed not small.
For this is how he was able to think when he had to leave Canaan: Where
is the promise that was made to me because of this land, from which I
must now go, if I do not want to die of hunger with my own? Does God
keep his promise? Does he take care of me?

The holy man first and foremost looks to the spiritual promise of the
eternal kingdom through the Son of God; he comforts himself with this
and at the same time does not give up faith and trust in the physical
promise, but knows that even if he has to leave the country this year
for the sake of the theure, he will still be free to return there at
another time. So he overcomes this challenge with patience and hope of
future blessings.

We should do the same when such emergencies arise. At this time, as I
said above, the common people complain that various troubles are
occurring, that grain is becoming expensive, that pestilence and war are
stirring up 2c. And it is true that these troubles are more and more
frequent now than in previous years; but pious Christians (that I do not
speak now of sins and supreme ingratitude, which cause and provoke God
to punish) should know that all this happens to tempt the faithful. And
one should not follow the foolish and ungodly judgment of the common
crowd, which thinks that such misfortune can only be helped if one again
admits the pope\'s idolatry, if one says mass for the deceased, if one
redeems letters of indulgence, if one goes around the field with crosses
and flags 2c. as in Jeremiah Cap. 44, 17. the Jews say of the queen of
heaven. But how much more credible it is that we are now being punished
for such idolatry, which we practiced under the papacy, especially
because there are still many who insist on it with violence and
stubbornness and despise the word!

182\. you have an excellent example of this here.

**[786 L. m, 138-140. interpretation of Genesis 12, 10-13. W. 1,
1185-1188. 787]{.underline}**

This is an example of how faith is tempted in the saints, and yet the
holy man Abraham does not grow weary, nor does he fall away, like the
wicked, who, as soon as they feel the first temptation, are angered and
retreat, for they abandon the word, without which it is impossible to
stand. But the pious take hold of the word, and hold fast to it as a rod
against temptations, that they be not oppressed.

Although the text says that Abraham underwent this seventh and very
difficult journey for the sake of theuration, it is to be believed that
the godless Canaanites forced him there in an impetuous manner and
pretended that this guest, who had brought a new religion into the land,
was the cause of all this misery, for the sake of which God had begun to
malign their land, which had been blessed before. For the world has
always had such a judgment of the saints. Therefore, the pious man gives
way to the envious and evil people, willingly escapes and ventures into
danger.

And here he is not so completely ruled by the word, but also lets his
reason lead him. For he knew for certain that he would never be allowed
to return to the place from which he had come, after he had been told by
the Lord that he should leave Ur and Haran; therefore he set out and
went to Egypt, because it was a good land, and hoped that there the
grain would be cheaper to buy. For in physical hardships and dangers,
reason retains its praise, that it can see something and advise on the
matter.

Thus the cautious householder, when he is in need, governs his
misfortune with reason; but he does not abandon faith, but believes that
though he is forced by necessity to depart from the promised land, yet
in his time it will be delivered and given to his descendants.

He then went to Egypt, where he stayed for a while as an inn, and from
there he returned to the land of Canaan when he had the opportunity.
This is what Moses indicates when he says that he has traveled to Egypt
and is ashamed that he is

He would be there as a stranger, not that he would seek a permanent seat
and dwelling there; for necessity brought him to it, which he knew would
not last forever, but a year or two.

187\. There may well have been pious people among the Canaanites who
might have advised him to go to Egypt, because they were afraid that he
would be a nuisance to the other neighbors with such a large household
at such a costly time; but still, most of them are hostile to his
religion, and think that such hardships and troubles come to the country
because of him, but do not see that God punishes contempt for the Word
and religion with hardships and other troubles and plagues.

**V. 11, 12, 13: And when he was come nigh unto Egypt, he said unto
Sarai his wife, Behold, I know that thou art a fair woman in
countenance. And when the Egyptians shall see thee, they shall say, This
is his pasture: and they shall slay me, and keep thee. Say, I pray thee,
that thou be my sister, that it may go well with me for thy sake, and
that my soul may live for thy sake.**

This text annoys the fathers and teachers all very much, that Abraham
not only lies, but also causes and forces his wife to lie. But as far as
the lying is concerned, it might be excusable. But it is not excusable
at all that he knowingly and willingly puts his wife in danger of
adultery, and with this lie gives the Egyptians as it were cause to
break the marriage with her, who might otherwise have abstained from it
because she had a husband. But when they hear that she is still free and
unmarried, they think they can kidnap her without sin.

For this reason, this text has not only caused much questioning, but
also much trouble, since Abraham preserves his life better and values it
more than the discipline and honor of his wife and the salvation and
prosperity of others. But we will first speak of the lie, about which
Jerome and Augustine dispute with each other; and makes

**[788 Lam.i4a.i4i. Interpretation of Genesis 12:II-13. W. 1. 1188-1191.
789]{.underline}**

Augustine three kinds of lies; joke lies, white lies, and harm lies.

190\) Joke lies are the name given to comedians\' poems, which are known
to lie when they present a thing as having happened, and yet such a lie
is without harm and pleasant, making people merry and cheerful;
therefore such a lie may be called peccatum grammaticum, a poet\'s lie.

The other is called a lie of service, which we do for the service and
salvation of a pious man. Thus Michal lies when she says that David
threatened to kill her if she did not let him go, 1 Sam. 19, 17. And
Augustine gives an example of a bishop who did not want to betray one
who was hiding with him. Such a lie was told to David by Husai the
Arachite, 2 Sam. 15, 34, and by the woman at the well of Rogel, 2 Sam.
17, 20. Such a lie is called a lie of service not only because it serves
the benefit of another who would otherwise have had to suffer hardship
or violence, but also because it prevents the sin of harming another.
This is why it is wrongly called a lie, because it is rather a virtue
and prudence, so that both the devil\'s fury is prevented and another\'s
honor, life and benefit are served. Therefore it could be called a
Christian care for the brethren or, as Paul speaks, a zeal of godliness.

192 But this is actually called a lie, when our neighbor is deceived to
his harm and destruction and to our benefit. Such a difference, although
it is not really and rightly so, I want to keep as a favor to the
fathers who have established it.

193 As far as Abraham\'s deed is concerned, let us take it for granted
that he did not lie, or at least let us say that it was a lie of service
and prudence that is praiseworthy. The Jews do here like the Stoics,
that is, seven-fold asses, and interpret this work so badly and harshly
and accuse Abraham of such a sin that they say it was punished in the
descendants with the prison in Egypt: so dych

Abraham did not commit any sin with his wisdom and counsel, but as much
as he was able, he governed his misfortune with prudence and caution.

194 He had come to the land of Canaan by God\'s appointment, but was
forced to move elsewhere by the wickedness and violence of those among
whom he lived, and by hard and difficult times. Since it was not his
place to go back to where he had come from, he went to Egypt, which was
famous as a good fertile land. It is possible, however, that at that
time the country already had a bad reputation among its neighbors
because of its tyranny, for it had a very powerful and mighty king. For
where the authorities are not ruled by the word of God, they commonly
abuse their power for tyranny; as at one time one\*) said that one could
engrave the names of all pious kings and princes on a ring. Therefore
such a thing was in Abraham\'s mind and moved him to fear, that he had
to consider how the danger was to be advised, or how one could get away
from it.

How is it then, one might say, that his faith begins to decline? Does he
now doubt God\'s promise that He would preserve him and help him in
trouble and danger? Answer: I cannot deny that his faith has been in
trouble to some extent, for the examples are clear that even very high
people have stumbled and fallen. For was Moses not severely tempted at
the water of the Hader? Deuteronomy 20:12, so we know what a grievous
and horrible fall David had, 2 Sam. 11:4 ff.

Thus, when Abraham leaves the word out of his eyes and heart, and he
follows his reason and considers the danger, he begins to falter a
little, but he does not fall completely, nor is he overcome; rather, his
faith, which is in need here, finally retains the victory and triumph.
For now that he is in the midst of the danger he had been afraid of, he
nevertheless keeps his faith.

**[\*) Vopiscus in Aurelio de quodam Scurra.]{.underline}**

**[\
790 u M, iu-143. interpretation of Genesis 12:11-13. W. r. usi-u\".
791]{.underline}**

but gets what he wants from God with his prayer.

197 And Abraham shows afterwards, in the 20th chapter, when he is
attacked and tempted with this distress for the second time by the king
Abimelech, what cause he has for such his counsel and consideration,
when he says v. 11: \"I thought, perhaps there is no fear of God in
these places, and they will strangle me for the sake of my wife. Here he
truly indicates that his conscience is not in a minor struggle, being
struck with such a hard arrow in the midst of his misery that he must
think: Behold, thou art alone, thou art a stranger, and whither thou
goest thou bringest a strange and new religion. Are you alone holy? Are
you the only one whom God cares for? and are so many other countries and
people rejected by God?

198\) Just as we also have to hear such things in our time, that our
adversaries reproach us with full mouths for the glorious name of the
church and ask us: \"Are those who were before us and followed the
religion of the Pope all condemned? And Abraham was able to protect
himself in this struggle and to endure, because he knew that he had the
promise and the word; but the Gentiles had no word of God, therefore God
did not take care of them. But the hearts are too weak and do not easily
accept this opinion.

Therefore we can say that in so many hardships and dangers Abraham\'s
faith was somewhat withdrawn; and although it was a sin, it was not a
voluntary sin, but one committed out of human weakness; as the teachers,
who are a little more lenient and do not rave like the Jews, judge this
work almost in the same way.

200 But another thought occurs to me, that I must consider that Abraham
not only had not sinned, nor had his faith sunk, but that he had taken
this counsel and counsel out of a very strong faith, and out of the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. But how so?

One say. Answer: Abraham is full of faith; therefore, although he sees
many dangers before him, he looks only to the promise and knows that it
has been made to him and his seed, and that it has been placed on his
body.

Therefore, although he believes that God will keep His promise, even if
he is strangled in Egypt, he knows and understands that God should not
be tempted. Therefore, he seeks and thinks of all means to defend his
life. As if he wanted to say: I am not afraid of death, nor do I flee
from it, if the Lord wants me to die here: but the promise should not be
neglected through carelessness. If I am able to keep it while I am
alive, all right: but if I am to lose my life among this godless people,
God, who has given me the promise of blessing, will be able to raise me
up easily, even though I am already dead; yet I should not neglect or
despise the ways and means of keeping my life. Therefore, my dear Sarah,
do not say that I am your husband, but say that I am your brother, so
you can help me to preserve my life; but you should not doubt, you will
find that God will help you, so that no harm will come to you; so I will
also, as much as is in me, help you with my prayer to the true God, who
has promised us that he will be merciful to us. 2c.

This understanding and opinion pleases me better, for it agrees with
Scripture, and we have an example of the same below, where Abraham is to
sacrifice his son Isaac. For there Abraham also holds to hope; as the
epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 11, 19. testifies of him, that God can bring
even the dead back to life. Because the Scriptures present Abraham to us
in more than one place as a father of the faithful and a perfect example
of faith, I prefer to follow this understanding, so that his great faith
is also shown here, rather than that he either sinned or became weak in
faith and overcame due to temptation.

**[792 L. Ill, 143-14\". Interpretation of Genesis 12:II-13. w. 1,
1194-1197. 793]{.underline}**

203\. For although this is human, a special example is held up to us
here, from which we can conclude and say that no saint has held up so
well both in life and in death as Abraham: For it is of equal importance
to him whether he dies or lives; for he clings to God, the Promiser, and
yet will not venture his life there so fearfully, but puts into danger
his household, his goods, and finally also his wife, that he may save
his life, not indeed for his own sake, but for the sake of the promise
that was upon his body; for it was said to him, \"In thee shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed.\" This word arouses in him this care to
preserve his life, that he would rather risk everything else he has than
his life.

204 Therefore it is not a bad or small thing that Abraham puts his wife
in danger, as it can be seen; for he does this not simply so that he may
keep his temporal life, but that he may honor and praise God with it,
that he may remain true to his promise, of which the holy man had so
often praised and preached to his servants and so often comforted them
with it in various troubles. If this text is acted upon in this way, it
can offend no one, for what is done to honor God and his word, to adorn
and to glorify it, is right and well done, and is also justly praised.

Therefore, let us understand this text in such a way that the Holy
Spirit has also set before us a very excellent example of faith, which
should admonish us, so that we also learn to firmly rely on God\'s
promises and to insist on them. For even if the whole world were against
you, even if all things were contrary, even if you should finally die
yourself, you will still receive what God has promised you in baptism,
in the Word, in the night meal, in absolution, if only faith is based on
the promise and relies on it. For God cannot lie. Therefore, the faith
that stands on the word cannot lie or be lacking, but rather the sky
must fall and must be made of stones.

Bread, yes, God would also have to raise up children for Abraham from
the stones.

But someone might say that Abraham has given rise to many troubles. Not
everyone understood this advice of his; rather, everyone saw to it that
his wife would be put in certain danger; which is not in accordance with
St. Paul\'s rule, where he teaches in Eph. 5, 28 that we should love our
wives as our own bodies 2c.

Answer: It is not Abraham\'s business, for he does right and does not
sin, just as we teach God\'s word with particular faithfulness and
diligence, but many are offended by it. But what is that to us? If they
are annoyances, we do not give them, but people make them for
themselves; why then should we be conscience-stricken about them? So
Abraham did what he was able, and that the promise might remain sure, he
did not allow his wife\'s danger to be disputed. This is a good faith,
and those who consider it right will be improved and comforted by this
example; but if some are offended by it, it is none of Abraham\'s
business.

Now Sarah\'s faith is also excellent and to be praised that she obeys
such advice of her husband and does not turn to her danger, since she
could have said: I will not do it, for why should I put my honor in
danger? Thou pleadest this in vain; for because I am barren, thou wilt
cast me off, and thereby seek cause to take another 2c. But you hear
nothing of this from her, but she is obedient to her husband; thus both
of them surrender and submit to the mercy of God. Who would not admire
and praise such a husband and wife? Who would not wish that he could
follow their excellent faith and obedience?

Therefore these are excellent examples and noteworthy histories, which
we pass by sleepily and lazily, as if they were of no use; but whoever
examines them diligently and unwinds them, will hit the nail on the head
and find in them a wholesome teaching that should illuminate devout
Christians in their whole life and all their works. For how much

**[794 \". m, Interpretation Of Genesis 12:11-13. w. r, nN-nos.
795]{.underline}**

Are there those who, when they read these words that Abraham says to his
wife about his attack, think that they can learn something from it? But
whoever reads and studies the Scriptures with diligence will not
consider anything so small that it will not at least serve to improve
our life and conduct, because the Holy Spirit has described it.

210 So the Holy Spirit shows us a domestic lesson, among others, when he
tells us that Abraham spoke so kindly to his Sarah. For first he asks
her; then he tells her how beautiful she is. All this is spoken kindly
and sweetly, and you hear here nothing tyrannical and impetuous; as it
should be among husbands and wives who get along well with each other:
\"For a man shall not be a lion in his house,\" as Solomon says, Sir.
4:35.But although the husband has power and dominion over his wife, yet,
as Plutarch finely teaches, it should not be such a regiment as one is
wont to exercise over serfs, but as the soul has a regiment over the
body, which is united with it in natural friendship and servitude, and
participates when it goes well, also participates when it goes to harm.

211 But now we must also take the third question before us, namely,
whether Abraham is also to be excused for having such suspicions of the
Egyptians, who are not yet known to him. For since every suspicious man
is a slanderer in his heart, Abraham here with these thoughts slandereth
the king of the Egyptians with all his people; for he thinketh them to
be tyrants, fornicators, and easily slayers. For if he did not fear such
things, he would not undertake this counsel.

Now slander is a great sin, of which it is said in the well-known
proverb: It is better to live among wild animals than among suspicious
people. Paul includes suspicion among the major sins in 1 Timothy 6:4,
for it is the source of slander, discord, strife, and so on. Therefore
Christ teaches us that we should not judge or condemn anyone. For every
one that is suspicious shreds

judge others and condemn others.

The philosophers have also severely attacked and punished suspicion as a
poisonous and harmful thing in all kinds of friendship. As Cicero
masterfully disputes and severely punishes the well-known saying of Bias
in Lélius, who thus said: \"Be a friend so that you can also be an
enemy. And Cicero is right in saying that there can be no lasting
friendship where there is room for suspicion. Now suspicion is to
conclude that one will hate for a time the one one loves now. And is it
not unlike this that Aristotle calls truth the mother of love. For where
one does not believe the other and prove loyalty, neither the domestic
regime nor the police can endure. For how much displeasure causes
suspicion among spouses, even for the sake of small causes! But much
greater misfortune follows when such a plague penetrates into the common
being.

214\. and yet Abraham teaches us by his example to have suspicion; yes,
that is even more, the holy scripture says and advises us to be
suspicious, because it says so plainly and clearly that all men are
liars, Psalm 116, 11. \"A man\'s enemies,\" says the prophet Micah Cap.
7, 6, \"are his own household. Therefore, \"trust no friend,\" Sir. 6,
7. \"Do not caste yourselves upon princes,\" Ps. 146, 3. \"Keep the door
of thy mouth from her that sleepeth in thine arms,\" 2c., Mic. 7, 5. And
Christ Matt. 10, 34. says, \"I am not come to send peace, but the
sword.\"

These are clear sayings of the Scriptures, and yet, if one should follow
them, consider what kind of life we would have if we were to live in
such distrust, suspicion and evil thoughts among one another, husband
with wife, subjects with the authorities, the servants with the Lord 2c.
And where will Christ\'s commandment Matth. 7, 1. 3. remain: \"Do not
judge. Do not look at the mote in your brother\'s eye\"? Finally, what
kind of church will there be that holds repentance against sinners, and
teaches us the

**[796m . i4s-iso. Interpretation of I Genesis 12, 11-13. \" i.
uss-isos. 797]{.underline}**

sinners, that we should not completely despair? That is why the common
rule of the lawyers does not apply in the church: Whoever has committed
an offense once, it is to be assumed that he will always do evil;
because Christ also wants that one should forgive a brother his mistake
seventy times seven times. How then shall we compare and unite such
sayings, which are utterly contrary to one another?

216 As far as the saying of Bias is concerned, which Cicero attacks so
much, I am completely of this opinion that I consider it as if Cicero
never understood what Bias wanted and meant by it. For Bias\'
proposition is not absolute, but conditional, that is, it is not the
opinion that one who loves a friend should certainly conclude with
himself that he will become hostile to him again; but that it is quite
possible that he may afterwards hate again the one whom he loves now. As
Augustine also says that it often happens in life that someone loves
someone whom he hated before. But let us leave this philosophical
question to the philosophers to investigate, and let us consider this
theological matter, namely, what Abraham did, and what the Scriptures
forbid that one should not do. Now it forbids judging, that is, that we
should not be suspicious, and yet tells us that we should trust no one:
let us therefore see how these things may be reconciled.

217 The whole point is to make a distinction between these two sayings
that the Scriptures hold up to us. The first, Match. 5:44, commands that
we love not only our friends but also our enemies. The other tells us
not to put our trust in men, for we may be deceived by them. But as
reason does not see the full cause of the foregoing saying (for it
thinks it a just and fair thing to bear enmity against those by whom we
are offended), so much less does it see the causes why we ought to
distrust all men alike. For it sees and contemplates every man\'s life,
and judges from his manners and conduct that one of them is

But the pious, she says, are to be loved, and the wicked are to be
hated.

218 This is the judgment of reason, and it cannot go any higher than
this; then it holds that one should not only love the pious, but also
trust them. This is the reason why people rely on and trust people,
which the Scriptures completely forbid and reject, because it is not
only dangerous but also ungodly. It is dangerous because it is false and
deceptive; but it is ungodly because such trust is not due to the
creature, but to the Creator.

219 For this reason the Holy Scripture first of all tells us that we
should love all people and do good to everyone, not only to the pious,
whom we consider to be worthy of love because of their life and conduct,
but also to the wicked. For this is what God does, he pours out his
goods without distinction on the evil and the good; as Christ also holds
this example up to us in Matth. 5, 45.

220 Then it also teaches us another judgment of men than that which can
be obtained from life and conduct alone, for it is uncertain and
deceptive because of hypocrisy. For how often does friendship fail? How
often do we find that those whom we thought to be pious deal in false
and evil deeds? In the histories and books of the heathen we find that
from time immemorial, I do not know how many couples have been true
friends; which alone is sufficient and clear proof that our judgment of
people\'s lives and conduct is wrong.

For this reason, the Scriptures call us to look not only to conduct, but
to the word and fear of God. Now in whom we find these things, they are
undoubtedly pious; and yet it may happen that they also fall. For we
know how weak our nature is and how powerful and mighty our enemy is,
who always uses it to lead us away from the Word and to deprive us of
the fear of God. Therefore, even here, confidence cannot be certain, as
if they would always remain who they were before.

**[798 s. m, iao-uw. Interpretation of Genesis 12:II-13. W. i, 1202-isw.
799]{.underline}**

would have been. How much less are those to be trusted who are without
fear of God!

So philosophy does not see where such misery comes from, that nature is
completely corrupted. For this reason, even if for a time it pretends to
love you with gestures and service, it is not a lasting love, but soon
loses itself and turns back.

In order that we may return to our purpose, Abraham goes to the
Egyptians, to whom he is not hostile, and yet does not dare to trust
them. The reason is that he sees that nature is not only evil in itself
and indulges in lusts, but also sees that in Egypt there is no word of
God and no right religion: why should he not be afraid of danger here?

Therefore he surrenders and commands himself and his life to God and yet
does not despise the means by which he hopes to preserve and protect his
life. Thus he walks the right military road: he is no one\'s enemy, and
yet trusts no one; if someone does him a favor, he counts it as profit
and accepts it, but in such a way that if the favor ceases, or if some
other accident occurs, he does not become indignant or begin to be
hostile to it.

Philosophy knows nothing of such friendships, for it does not
sufficiently recognize the nature of man, and thinks that one can find
such pious people who cannot become bad and forget their duty; about
this, when it seeks friendship, it often gets into irreconcilable
enmity, which is not to be advised.

But those who have learned the Scriptures see what is in man; for this
reason they put their complete trust in God, not in man; they love all
men, do good to all, even to their enemies, for they know that God wills
it so. And then such is a constant friendship and constant love, which
does not spring from our judgment, but from the Holy Spirit, who stirs
up the hearts and drives them to follow the Word.

227 But just as distrust is necessary, because everything that is human
is inconclusive and uncertain, so is love,

As Paul says in 1 Cor. 13:4, 7, she is not suspicious, but takes good
for evil; for she believes that both these things can happen, namely,
that those who are considered righteous fall, and those who are wicked
can improve.

\(228\) Therefore, he who does not put his trust in a man is not
therefore suspicious, nor does he judge, as the Scriptures say, or
condemn his neighbor. For suspicion or such judging is done without hope
of correction: but love does not cease to hope for correction, even when
it sees that something is not to be praised: therefore it is willing to
forgive, and forgives not seven times, but seventy times seven. For she
knows that both these things are true, namely, that every man, as much
as there is in him, is a liar; wherefore she puts her trust in no man:
and that God is good, who pardons sin, and delights in the sinner\'s
conversion; whereunto he hath ordained his word, with whom is the Holy
Ghost. This is where the hope comes from, that it does not completely
doubt the correction of the wicked.

229\. Therefore, one should get out of the way and reject the
philosophical judgment which teaches that one should learn from the
lives and customs of men who are pious and who are evil, and keep this
common judgment of the Holy Spirit Ps. 116:11: \"All men are liars. Item
Ps. 14:2, 3: \"The Lord looks down from heaven upon the children of men,
to see if any are wise and ask after God. But they are all gone astray,
and are all unfit; there is none that doeth good, not one.\" For this is
our nature, which we bring with us from our mother\'s womb and retain
until the Holy Spirit changes and corrects it. Therefore, if a man is
human, that is, if he is infirm, you should not trust him, whether you
see anything in him that is evil, as far as his outward conduct is
concerned; and yet you should not be hostile to him; so whether you
consider him evil, you should not abandon him for that reason, or
despair of his improvement and conversion.

But we say nothing here about a special profession and office in which,
as it seems, love is acted against.

**[800 L in. IVS-IS1. Interpretation of Genesis 12, II-13. W. 1,
1208-1208. 801]{.underline}**

Just as the rod and punishment with which a householder chastises his
children or servants does not seem to be love; and that the authorities
punish and kill the wicked with the sword seems to be anger: but they
are commanded to do this, and would sin in it if they wanted to direct
and judge their profession according to this common rule, that one
should love the pious and the wicked at the same time; to which they
should also be subject and obedient outside their profession.

231 Thus shall we answer the saying of the prophet Micah, when he saith,
Cap. 7:5, Keep the door of thy mouth from her that sleepeth in thine
arms. For this is not what the prophet wants, that husbands and wives
should have suspicion between each other and give room to it, which
never leaves without discord and unwillingness; but he wants the husband
to love his wife, as St. Paul beautifully and powerfully emphasizes this
commandment in the epistle to the Ephesians Cap. 5, 25.

And among the noblest virtues of a woman is that her husband\'s heart
trusts in her, Proverbs 31:11, that is, that the man loves her kindly
and warmly, does not think ill of her, but surely believes that he will
be loved by her in turn and that she will be rightly disposed toward him
and his food.

233 For this reason Augustine also very finely describes three kinds of
goods and benefits of the marriage state, namely, faith, fruits or
children, and the mystery or sacrament. For where there is no faith and
one may trust the other, hearts will never grow together, nor will one
bear true love for the other. Now there is nothing more beautiful in the
world than love and unity among spouses. As Sirach also says Cap. 25, 1.
2.: \"There are three beautiful things that please both God and man:
when brothers are one, and neighbors love one another, and husband and
wife are well pleased with one another.

Thus the prophet does not want there to be suspicion, hatred and enmity
between spouses, but the highest love and friendship, which cannot be
where one does not believe or trust the other. And yet he also wants

that the same trust has a measure, for it can happen that it is mistaken
and deceptive. For a woman is a human being, and even if she fears God
and pays attention to the word, she can still fall, because she has
Satan, who is always lurking and creeping after her, as an enemy, and
nature is weak in itself, and your hope can be lacking in her.

If you have considered this beforehand, you will forgive her all the
more willingly, and you will grieve all the less if something happens
that is different from what you would have done, and love will remain
and unity will not be violated. For nothing happens that you would not
have done, and love is very willing and ready to lend. To be able to do
this is a strange gift, but know that because you are a Christian, you
should be found so.

We know how the world is wont to do. The unity of brothers, as the poet
says, is rare: so we see that there is often unwillingness and
displeasure among neighbors over a very small thing, over a pigeon\'s
droppings, as they say in German; that is why suspicion, hatred and
enmity reign there.

237 But a Christian, though he trusts no man, yet is he not an enemy to
any; and though he believes that no man is so firm and sure that he
cannot be brought down either by his own lusts or by the devil, yet he
has good hope in everyone, even in the wicked; and so he keeps his love
toward friends pure, sincere, and sure; but in God alone he puts all his
trust.

We do not learn this from the pagan philosophy, which considers it good
and right that one should hate one\'s enemies, and that one who has once
been evil should always be considered evil. Therefore it flees people,
is hostile to them, and often breaks up very great friendships. But the
holy scripture teaches us differently. Trust abolishes it, but love
enjoins it. So Abraham feared that he might encounter danger from the
Egyptians; but he was not hostile to them for that reason, had good hope
from them, and thought that they would show him kindness.

**[802 L. m, IS4-IS6. Interpretation of Genesis 12:11-15. w. 1,
1208-1212. 803]{.underline}**

would prove as much as they could. If, however, something unpleasant has
happened, it has not been unpleasant and has not moved him to hatred.
That therefore the holy scripture acts much better than any Cicero or
Aristotle in the doctrine of good morals or of every man\'s dignity.

**Sixth part.**

**How Abraham\'s wife is taken from him and the Egyptians are punished
because of it.**

**I.**

**V.14. 15. Now when Abram came into Egypt, the Egyptians saw the woman,
that she was almost beautiful. And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, and
praised her before him. Then she was brought into Pharaoh\'s house.**

This is a very wonderful history, if we want to look at it more closely
and more exactly. For Sarah is only ten years younger than Abraham;
Abraham, however, was five and seventy years old when he went out from
Haran into the land of Canaan, and perhaps ten years had passed by
before this journey in Egypt, so that Sarah is older than seventy years
and is now an old woman. Therefore, it is strange that not only is her
beauty praised, but the king also loves her and has her brought into his
house.

Here the Jews invent old Vettelian fables, like Sarah of Abraham was
locked in a box and was found by the tax collectors and brought to the
king. But we leave such clumsy things to the Jews, who are worth nothing
better. It is not enough that Sarah pleased the Egyptians, because the
Egyptians are black and she was white as a Morgenlander. For she is
praised more for her age than for her beauty; as age is praised, though
the form is not to be praised.

241\. dam is such an excellent beauty at your old wife Sarah either a
miracle, by which God made the king in Egypt

(For Abraham taught and preached everywhere; as Isaiah says of him, that
he preached of righteousness wherever he went): or is it, as I rather
believe, that our age is so degenerate, that at that time a woman of
sixty years of age was like her who is now of thirty years in stature,
strength, and power.

For in those days people lived longer and nature was much stronger than
it is now in this old age of the world. For just as wickedness has
always increased, so the gifts for God to adorn the pious have
decreased. But Sarah also had help from her nature, so that her beauty
and form remained unchanged; for she was barren, so that she was not
consumed by pain and anguish, so that childbearing and childbearing
would be slowed down and the form, strength and power of the body would
be greatly weakened.

Other histories of this time also indicate that nature has lost thirty
years at the least in these three thousand years. For if a woman of
fifty years should still bear children in our country, it would be a
miraculous sign; and Moses says in his prayer, Ps. 90, 10: \"Our life
lasts seventy years, and when it comes to the end, it is eighty years,
and when it has been delicious, it has been labor and toil. But if we
want to look at our time, we find that when we have completed forty
years, both the strength of the mind and the strength of the body always
decrease and become weaker. So much after the fall nature has lost its
kind, and wise people have noticed that other creatures also become
weaker and weaker; as Virgil says of the seed.

244 But what shall we say here of Abraham, whom a new and violent
misfortune befalls, that he must see his dear wife, his chaste and holy
matron, who had ruled the whole house, carried off to the king\'s court?
It is certain that he will not be able to cope with this without great
heartache.

**[804 m. n\"-i58, interpretation of Genesis 12:14-16. W. 1. 1212-121\".
805]{.underline}**

Nevertheless, he has raised himself up again in faith and comforted
himself that God will not withdraw from him completely, but will take
care of him and keep and preserve his wife even among unbelieving
people. In this faith he rests and with this hope he comforts himself in
his sorrow and heartache, and earnestly asks God from the heathen not to
let him lack this hope.

Just as the previous hardship and danger exercised his faith in his
strange and long journey, so it is also exercised here; so that he is
held up to the church as a perfect example of faith, as a brave man of
war who did not stand his ground in one battle, but in many and various
dangers.

246 The Jews write that Sarah was not brought before the king soon in
the royal way, but was held up for a while; as we read of Ahasuerus, the
king of Persia, Esth. 2, 2. ff., that the harlots, whom he desired, were
not let to him soon, but had to be anointed with myrrh oil for a whole
six months and then again for six months with other specimens, and were
only then brought to the king\'s bed. If the kings in Egypt also had
such use, then these pagans were moderate people, and did not fall so
blindly and senselessly into fornication, as it happens with us.

247\. But that I believe that it also happened with Sarah, causes me not
only the example of the kings from Persia, but also that Genesis v. 17.
writes that a plague came over Pharaoh and his house because of Sarah,
Abraham\'s wife; therefore there must have been a period of time in
between, in which Sarah was not required to the king\'s bed.

The kings of the Greeks and Romans were very inclined to fornication, so
that there was better discipline and greater respectability among the
Egyptians than among other pagans. For although they had many wives, it
seems that they lived more chastely than those who had the right to take
a wife,

as also below Cap. 26, 11. Abimelech, the king of Palestine, forbade
with corporal punishment that no one should weaken Rebecca. All this
shows that these peoples, even though they used to take wives, had a
special respectability.

The Jews also fable that while Sarah was in the king\'s court, Abraham
taught the Egyptians astronomy; and Josephus in particular makes much
mention of the fact that the Jews far surpassed all other nations in
skill in mathematics and politics. But Josephus would have done much
better to praise his ancestors not for such gifts, which are natural,
but for other greater gifts and virtues that are proper to the Holy
Spirit, namely, that Abraham taught the Egyptians about God\'s will,
about right worship and true invocation, which are far more excellent
and greater gifts than knowing the course and nature of the heavens, the
quality and significance of the stars.

Although I also believe that such arts were revealed to the fathers by
God, both the Chaldeans and Egyptians boast in the histories of the
pagans that they diligently practiced such arts. Therefore, whether
Abraham instructed the Egyptians in such arts, or whether he himself,
Abraham, learned from the Egyptians, like Moses, of whom Stephen Ap. 7,
22. testifies that he was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
it is all the same.

It is certain that this noble man, although he did not neglect the study
of nature, in which God\'s work is considered useful, nevertheless took
the greatest care to plant God\'s knowledge, right worship, faith and
the fear of God among the Gentiles. For this is the highest work of
love, for which all saints are caused and moved, even by the confession
of their faith.

**V.16. And he did good to Abram for their sake. And he had sheep, and
oxen, and asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and asses, and
camels.**

252 This is a very necessary piece; for it does not only belong to the
praise and honor of the people.

**[806 n. m. U\"-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 12:16.W. I. ISIS-1218.
807]{.underline}**

God, who does not abandon His own, but also praises Abraham\'s faith.
For here you see that God takes care of His faithful and sustains them
even in the deepest hardships and dangers. For Abraham is not favored
and befriended by the king only for the sake of his sister Sarai (for
the king considered her to be Abraham\'s sister), but he is also held in
honor by the Egyptians, who, as will follow, did not like to deal with
shepherds.

It is also shown here that at that time the Egyptians were a
particularly friendly people, since they showed so much service and good
deeds to this stranger. For although the king does so much good to
Abraham for Sarah\'s sake, it is evident that the kinship into which the
king hoped to enter with Abraham through Sarah is highly valued by him.
But because no kingdom is so well ordered that something tyrannical
could not happen to it at times, Abraham was also somewhat afraid and
worried about the king.

Therefore this is the most important lesson, that we learn that God is
the protection and shield of those who hope in Him and does not abandon
His own, even if He allows them to be tempted; as this very history
finely acts and masterfully emphasizes David Ps. 105:12 ff. and says:
\"When they were few and lowly, and strangers within. And they went from
nation to nation, from kingdom to kingdom. He let no man harm them, and
punished kings for their sakes. Do not touch my anointed ones, and do
not harm my prophets\" 2c. Behold, how subtly the prophet handles all
circumstances, so that he may show us that God will surely be gracious
to those who hope in him and will do them good.

Thus this text is a fountain, from which flowed the glorious sermons of
the prophets, so that they kindly admonish that one should hold fast to
hope and trust in the goodness and mercy of God; also comfort that God
will finally redeem, help and bless, as: Psalm 2, 12: \"Blessed are
those who trust in Him\"; item, Ps. 34, 5. 7: \"When I sought the Lord,

he answered me, and delivered me out of all my fear. When this wretch
cried out, the Lord heard and saved him from all his troubles\"; item
Ps. 50:15: \"Call upon me in trouble, and I will save you, and you shall
praise me\"; item Ps. 34:20: \"The righteous must suffer many things,
but the Lord will save him from them all.\" But who could remember all
such sayings from the Psalter alone? What shall I say of the other
prophets?

\(256\) Therefore, it can be seen that they well understood that these
things were not written by the Holy Spirit for Abraham\'s sake, but so
that we might also be taught and instructed in the faith by such
examples and not despair in adversity, because God thereby indicates
that he wants to be a faithful protector and savior of all who believe
in him and hope in his grace and mercy. He does indeed allow His own to
be tempted, as this temptation was indeed great and almost unbearable;
but He does not abandon them in their temptation. He does not cancel the
help, but comes to us in his time and helps, so that he does not spare
even great, mighty and rich kings.

257 We see that very learned people, after they saw that the pious were
in a bad way and the wicked were well off, took such hard offense and
anger at such inequality or, as it seems, inequity, that they concluded
and said that it was not divine providence and that God did not take
care of people, did not ask anything about them, but that everything
happened unawares and without warning.

\(256\) And it is not possible for reason to overcome this vexation,
which even at times, as we have seen, has struck the pious on the head
and moved them; as Psalm 73:2, 3 says: \"I would have stumbled with my
feet, my footsteps would have almost slipped. For I was displeased with
the glorifiers, when I saw that the wicked fared so well.\" For reason
sees only that the pious \'fare ill and the wicked well, but does not
see that God helps the righteous out of misfortune and evil and pours
out His wrath on the wicked.

**[808 L. m, 1S0-1L2. Interpretation of Genesis 12:1b. 17. W. L,
1218-1221. 809]{.underline}**

The Holy Spirit not only tells us to see how the pious fare for a time,
but also to see what follows them afterward, and on what condition, that
I may say, a person is in trouble, of which Ps. 34:20 says: \"The
righteous must suffer much, but the Lord helps him out of all of it.
Therefore, the saints do not abandon God\'s commandment as soon as they
feel that they are afflicted, but conclude with faith and take it for
granted that God will also help them out of their misfortunes and
hardships.

These are revelations of the Holy Spirit that philosophy does not see.
Therefore, it gets angry, denies Providence, and thus judges as if God
has nothing to do with the world, does not take care of the people, but
lets everything go as it wants. And Cicero himself takes issue with this
in the book De finibus and De natura deorum, since he does not dare to
say that God is either unjust or does not take care of the world, but
nevertheless does not see the reason why things are so unequal in this
life, that the wicked enjoy happiness and honor, but the pious have to
lie down and fall, even if they undertake the most honest things and
plans.

But what is the cause of such blindness? None other than that reason
sees only the present misfortune; with this it can be caught and taken
in. It is completely ignorant of the promise of the future. But the Holy
Spirit tells us to ignore the present and to look only to the future.
\"Wait,\" he says, Ps. 27:14, \"for the Lord, be of good courage, and do
not despair, and wait for the Lord.\" Therefore, such texts belong to
teach and strengthen faith and hope; and this main feature will be
repeated in this history of Abraham.

**B. 17. But the LORD afflicted Pharaoh with great plagues, and his
house, because of Sarai Abram\'s wife.**

Now only here Abraham\'s temptations gain a happy end. For the pious and
God-fearing husband and wife are not only relieved of their danger and
fear.

but also the king with his whole house comes into misfortune and is
afflicted. This consolation is impressed upon us by the Holy Spirit
throughout the Scriptures, and is confirmed by the outcome and
experience: and yet we are blind and deaf to it in our temptations, and
do not accept it, nor believe it to be true.

For only consider how we are wont to do. Is it not true that when we are
in trouble, we think it as if there were no end to our misfortunes, and
that we must lie down? Again, when we see that the wicked are doing
well, we take it for granted that their happiness will last forever, as
if there were no God to either take care of those who are in need or to
punish those who abuse their success. Thus, in both cases, sorrow
overcomes us; and this happens to us because of original sin, which
makes us very inclined and nimble to despair, but in turn makes us slow
to faith and hope.

Therefore, Abraham\'s example should be diligently observed and
followed. Since he is in the greatest danger, he believes that it is
impossible for God to abandon those who believe in him. Therefore, he
did not give up hope, but the greater the danger, the more he believed
that God would deliver him and Sarah sooner, which is what happened.

This will also happen to us if we do not let our faith be taken away. I
have experienced this myself in many very great hardships and dangers;
but it is usually the case that our flesh takes us captive; as Paul also
complains of himself Rom. 7:23: \"I see another law in my members. The
spirit is willing, accepts God\'s word, takes comfort in danger, and
desires joy and rejoicing in the cross, but is overcome by the flesh,
which in its own way looks only at the present and is moved by it. But
the other, which is not present and of which the word teaches, it
regards as nothing, because it does not see it. That is why it is on
both sides, namely, when things go well and badly, in happiness and in
misfortune. When it is well

**[810 \". m, 1S2-I-4. interpretation of I Genesis 12:17. w. 1.
1221-1224. 811]{.underline}**

If it goes badly, it has no measure, for it does not see the misfortune
that follows. If it goes badly, it is not to be consoled, because it
sees the help and salvation, which the word promises, nowhere.

266 And yet, in the pious, there remains in the heart the sighing,
which, although it is very offensive to man, resists the unbelief,
despair and impatience that is in the flesh, so that we do not blaspheme
God. The Lord looks at the same and forgives us the other.

Such a great danger for the sake of his dear wife will also have gone to
Abraham\'s heart, and no doubt he felt that in his flesh also weakness
was stirring, so inclined to despair, that he will have thought so: What
if your wife were taken from you and never came back to you, and you had
to do without her forever? And such thoughts will undoubtedly be
followed by hot tears and deep sighing, so that I have no doubt he will
not have slept many nights. And yet the Holy Spirit draws him back,
because he has to deal with such thoughts of the flesh (for he is a
man), to the word that he must remember the promise that was made to
him. And on this promise he restores himself in such weeping and
mourning, and hopes that God will restore his wife to him in due time,
and see to it that she does not suffer dishonor or shame. And as he
hopes, so it happens to him. For this is certainly true: the hope that
relies on God and His word does not come to shame.

Therefore, we should diligently keep this history before our eyes and
become accustomed to holding on to hope and comforting our hearts in the
face of adversity. \"Woe to those,\" says Jesus Sirach Cap. 2, 14, \"who
do not hold fast.\" For what more certain can follow when one has lost
the word than despair? Therefore the Scriptures everywhere admonish us
to wait for the Lord, that is, not to become fainthearted or to give up
hope, but to hold fast to the hope of future help and salvation, lest
this happen to us, which happened to the unbelieving Israelite people in
the wilderness, of which the

78\. Psalm 33 says: \"He caused them to die, so that they did not obtain
the promises because of their unbelief, but were afflicted in many ways
all their lives. And Psalm 107:11 says, \"They had profaned the law of
the Most High,\" that is, they had not wanted to believe, they had not
wanted to hope; therefore they went away one by one. Therefore we are to
memorize this. For if we are Christians, we will have to suffer many
misfortunes and adversities. In our time we see how great tyranny the
bishops and some princes are practicing; therefore we are troubled in
our hearts, and wish that God would hasten to punish the ungodly and
redeem the church. At this, many of them become fainthearted out of
impatience and almost want to give up.

269 But let us also wait for the Lord\'s example, according to
Abraham\'s example, and endure him. For he will surely come and, if we
persevere in patience, he will overthrow the tyrants. But he will
preserve his church, for this is his way, that he, as Isaiah Cap. 54, 7.
8. says, tries his own and leaves them for a little while, but then
accepts them again in great goodness and mercy. Just as the church and
the pious are to endure and be comforted by this hope, so those who are
well and afflict the church should be afraid of punishment. For though
the Lord forgives, yet he will not pause forever. And there has never
been such a mighty king and monarch who has not finally been punished
and collapsed because of his ungodly nature. But when, how and in which
place this will happen, that is what pious Christians should command
God, as Abraham does here.

**II.**

\(270\) But here it is asked, \'What plague was this, that the LORD
smote Pharaoh and his house? For the text does not indicate this, nor
how and by what means the cause of his plague was revealed to Pharaoh.
For it is certain of Abraham that he did not show it; for in this he
deceived the king, saying that Sarai was his sister, and that he was his
wife.

**[812 L. m. 164-1\". Interpretation of I Moses 12, 17. W. 1. 1221-1226.
813]{.underline}**

not his wife. And for this reason the king is considered innocent. For
he did not take another\'s wife, but took one who was free, whom he also
did not want to abuse as a whore, but to keep as his wife.

But I am hostile to the Jews because when they speak of such uncertain
and doubtful things, they put forward vain and very foolish things; as
they say here that the plague was the disease which the physicians call
\"sperm flow\".

272 Since Rebekah was then taken by the Philistine kings, the text says
Gen 20:18 that such a punishment followed that all women\'s bodies were
closed so that they could neither conceive nor give birth. Such a thing,
I think, also happened here. For because the king takes a foreign wife,
he is also afflicted with a female punishment, namely, that a woman
cannot be a woman, that is, that she cannot give birth, but must let the
fruit go untimely and take other hardships of childbirth upon herself.
For this is how it commonly happens that when one sins, he is punished,
as it is written in the Book of Wisdom, Cap. 11, 17.

And here again the Egyptians are praised for having had and understood
God\'s knowledge that this plague was not accidental or a common and
ordinary misfortune, but a punishment sent by God for the sake of
certain sins. For such is not a small plague, but I believe that among
all the distresses of death there can be no sadder picture and more
gruesome spectacle than when a mother dies with her child.

274 Because this happened several times after Sarah was taken, the king,
prompted by the Holy Spirit who stirred his heart, pondered the cause of
this plague. And because the same plague had come to the king\'s court
at the same time as Sarah, so that either the women of the court were in
great danger when they gave birth, or they died.

in childbirth, he will have addressed her and asked who she was; will
therefore have understood from her answer that she was not Abraham\'s
sister, but wife; whereupon he again gave her away. This is my opinion
of the punishment or plague, because the text says that Pharaoh and his
house were afflicted with great plagues; for thus the punishment
corresponds to the sin.

The word we have translated \"for the sake of Sarai\" is in Hebrew: al
debar, for the sake of Sarai\'s word. Now it is common among the Hebrews
that they use the word dabar in the broadest sense, as we use the word
\"thing. For it does not only mean a word, but also a cause, business,
trade and work; therefore the evangelists often use this Hebrew way of
speaking; as when they say of Mary Luc. 2, 19. that she kept all the
words in her heart, they do not only speak of the words, but of the
whole trade and work that took place.

The Jews interpret this word differently and say that this word was an
angel who guarded Sarai\'s body, and beat and tormented the Egyptians
according to Sarai\'s command, when she commanded him. But who does not
see that this is a Jewish poem and fable? For they strive for all kinds
of causes, as and where they can, so that they may make their ancestors
glorious and great before the world. But Sarah was much a pious woman,
because she desired to do harm to the people; and I hold that this
plague came to pass, that Sarah and Abraham knew nothing of it. For this
is certain, that they did not set their hope on the Egyptians being
plagued, but all their hope was in the divine promise, believing that
God would preserve them and rule everything so that it would be seen
that he was a God who blessed, as he had said in his promise. Therefore,
let us abandon the lies of the Jews, who do nothing but direct
everything to the glory of their works and their people; rather, we
should praise God\'s power and mercy here and

**[814 L.M, ISS-I\". Interpretation of Genesis 12:17, W. I, ILSS-1SS0.
815]{.underline}**

consider the faith of holy people in the promise.

277\] In addition to this, one should also consider this certain sign
that a very honest and well-ordered government existed among the
Egyptians and that they held serious judgments against the adulterers;
because the king himself, as soon as he hears that Sarah is Abraham\'s
wife, delivers her to him again.

There is a difficult question here: Why Pharaoh was punished so
severely, since it is certain that he committed the sin unknowingly and
had not yet done anything with Sarah? Theologians and jurists answer
that there are two kinds of ignorance: one of the law, which no one
excuses, and the other of the deed, which is excused. But we must speak
here of law in the generally accepted meaning of the word, and not
according to the opinions of each teacher, which are at once innumerable
and commonly contrary to each other; for lawyers also dispute about
subtleties, and are seldom at one in them; but of such a right or law as
is common among the citizens, and which is accepted by usage and custom.
Whoever therefore does not know what is publicly commanded or accepted
by custom is not excused. For he could have inquired of his neighbors;
and therefore the laws are publicly proclaimed, that they may shine as a
light to all in common, and they that do contrary may know what they
have forfeited, and be liable to punishment.

279 But that one does not know what Bartholus or Baldus judges and
concludes about each transaction that has occurred, this is not to be
called ignorance of the law. For law is not the discretion, thoughts or
questions of teachers, but a law or doctrine that is publicly presented
and commanded to everyone.

280 But ignorance of the deed is when I know the right and do not know
the deed. As when a householder keeps a thief at home, but he does not
know that he is a thief; he knows the law, that it is forbidden to
steal, but he does not know the deed.

He does not; therefore he entertains the thief without danger, because
he does not know that he is a thief, and does neither counsel nor help
him. This is a useful distinction, and I am making it so that we do not
allow ourselves to be deceived by some impetuous and inconvenient
wisdom, when what has been wisely and usefully said and invented for the
sake of doctrine is mastered and punished out of a desire to quarrel.

In their schools, however, the theologians distinguish ignorance in
another way, and call the first an insurmountable ignorance, designed to
excuse sins and abuses, so that it cannot be overcome or improved by any
skill or diligence. So Cicero has an insurmountable ignorance of God.
For if you read his books and disputations De natura deorum and De
finibus, etc., you will find that nothing of his is forgotten or omitted
that a man can put forward and present with all his strength and reason,
and yet he does not know what God\'s will is and how he is disposed
toward us. The cause of such ignorance is that one cannot come to God
through reason, but through the Spirit of God, who enlightens the heart
through the Word. Because Cicero could not have this, he had to be stuck
in such ignorance, which cannot be overcome.

But this example is contrary to the common saying of the scholastics. If
a man does what is in himself, God gives him his grace without fail. But
Cicero did what was done to him, and yet he did not obtain God\'s grace;
indeed, with this action he fell into much deeper darkness, so that he
even doubted whether there was a God. For this happens inevitably:
whoever thinks about such great things without God\'s word and relies
solely on the light of reason, must err and fall short the longer.

For this reason, the theologians have had no reason to conceive such
ignorance, since one should not seek and conceive protection and cover
for sins, as is often done in the book of Vincentius, called Summa
Angelica, in which consciences are not to be considered as a \"sin\".

**[816 s. m. iss-LTv. Interpretation of Genesis 12:17. w. i, 1229-1232.
817]{.underline}**

is to be taught. For the master of the same book has brought such
worldly sayings and sayings concerning the household regime into
theology to great annoyance. Since I was still a young theologian and
intended to read such a book so that I could keep my conscience with
good comfort in confession, I was often annoyed by the fact that it
dealt with and pretended to deal with such things concerning God\'s
judgment and church in such a worldly and judicial manner.

284 In worldly affairs, insurmountable ignorance may be considered
something, as when one, out of weakness of body or foolishness, commits
something and sins; but this should not be applied to holy things and
matters of conscience. For we are born in the blindness of original sin.
This is an insurmountable harm, so that it imprisons even those who are
renewed and born again: but for this reason it is nevertheless not to be
excused; as the scholastics have taught that insurmountable ignorance is
to be excused, so that it also counts us absolutely free, that is,
cancels sin altogether. If we were to hold this to be true, it would
also follow that men could be saved without Christ, if they would only
do as much as is in them. All the papal schools and churches are full of
such blindness.

But look at Pharaoh, who is outwardly in insurmountable ignorance; for
he does not know that Sarah is Abraham\'s wife, and hears from Abraham
himself that she is only his sister, and yet God sends upon him very
severe plagues. Do you not see here that this common saying of the
scholastics, that the insurmountable ignorance excuses absolutely, is
wrong? So, since Christ says Matth. 11, 23. 24.: \"If the deeds had
happened in Sodom, which happened with you, they would still be there
today. But I tell you, it will be worse for the land of Sodom at the
last judgment than for you,\" he indicates that there is ignorance among
the Sodomites when they are compared with the Capernaites, and yet he
does not say that they are absolutely excused because of it; but so much
is ignorance.

to excuse them that they should be punished more tolerably for the sake
of this ignorance.

But what need is there of many words? Whoever thinks that insurmountable
ignorance can be excused, turns back the holy Scriptures and lifts up
from the world the sun of righteousness, Mal. 4:2, namely, the Lord
Christ Himself, who was revealed for this reason, that He might abolish
such ignorance, which in truth is nothing other than original sin. And
whoever says that this should be excused knows nothing of Scripture and
theology.

The other kind of ignorance is lazy and gross ignorance, as when one
hears the word cold and sleepy, which he could learn if he wanted to. Of
this it is rightly said that it has no excuse.

The third is affectation, that is, such ignorance as one brings on
himself and makes; as when we diligently take care that we may not know
or learn anything. Of such it is rightly said that it deserves double
punishment. As in our time, those who are in the courts of bishops and
godless lords diligently and deliberately abstain from our books and
will not read them, so that when they are approached and asked by their
lords, they may swear without danger that they know nothing of our
doctrine. Thus they say in Job Cap. 21, 14: \"Get thee away from us; we
will not know thy ways.\" And in the Gospel Luc. 19, 14. \"We do not
want this one to rule over us.\" Such is called affected ignorance, that
is, one who willfully presumes.

If you ask what ignorance there is in the pope and the papists, we say
that they are either in the last class, because they denounce and
condemn many things, which they know to be good and in accordance with
God\'s word; or we want to put them among the persecutors and enemies of
the right pure doctrine; as therefore the pope is called the antichrist.

290\. what do we want to answer then to the superior question of Pharao?
Otherwise nothing, because what the text and the history brings with
itself. That ignorance with

**[818 \". m, 170-172. interpretation of Genesis 12:17-19. W. 1.
1232-123p. 819]{.underline}**

But because God afflicted him, it follows that ignorance does not
excuse. Therefore we are to set both of these things, namely, that
Pharaoh\'s deed was an error and, moreover, an evil and sinful error;
for otherwise no punishment would follow it.

291 But if anyone thinks that Pharaoh was punished, not because he had
done evil, but that he might be kept from the misfortune that would have
followed if the punishment had not intervened, let him see that he does
not favor sin by excusing error. For over such ignorance Pharaoh could
also have become an adulterer. Now adultery is always sin, and ignorance
of right or wrong does not apply here, as it does in the council chamber
and in worldly affairs.

**Seventh Part.**

**How Pharaoh confronts Abraham, gives him back his wife and lets him go
in peace.**

**Then Pharaoh called Abram to him, and said unto him, Why hast thou
done this thing unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy
wife? why saidst thou then that she was thy sister? because I would take
her to me to wife. And now, behold, thou hast thy wife; take her, and
go.**

292 Let us notice here in the first place, as I also said above, the
glorious comfort that God takes care of His saints and does not abandon
them when they are in trouble and danger, if they do not weaken in faith
alone; as St. Peter also comforts 1 Epist. 5:6, 7: \"Humble yourselves
under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in His time; cast
all your care upon Him, for He cares for you.\"

After this, one should also pay attention to the cause that God is
seeking here. For as he promised him above (v. 2. 3.): \"I will make a
great name for you; I will bless you; and you shall be a blessing.

Promise confirmed by deed. For Abraham comes to be respected by the
king, and the king sees that God takes care of him, and he, the king, is
undoubtedly also blessed for Abraham\'s sake, that is, comes to the
knowledge of God. For here the Holy Spirit has only shown the beginning
of the conversation between Pharaoh and Abraham, which without a doubt
will have been a hard and serious conversation. For it can be seen that
the king was moved violently because he was thus deceived by a stranger.
Abraham undoubtedly explained to him the reasons for his counsel and
preached to him about God, about the promise that had been made to him,
about the future seed, and thus satisfied his heart again.

294 And it can be seen as if all these things were a prelude to the
things that happened afterwards. For just as Pharaoh, out of fear of
God, let Abraham go, so that the plagues would no longer come upon him,
so afterwards in Egypt the whole people were left by the godless
Pharaoh, who did not fear God, not out of a kind or friendly opinion,
but out of fear of greater distress and danger.

That these words, \"Why hast thou done this unto me?\" are not mild or
friendly words; for the king insists on the circumstances, shows him
that he is a king, but Abraham is a sojourner and stranger. That he was
therefore betrayed as a king by a sojourner and for this reason came
into such severe distress and sorrow with his own, no doubt made him
very angry. And if God\'s kindness had not intervened, it would have
cost Abraham his neck; for kings and high persons can suffer contempt
very badly. But Pharaoh could easily take such a deception for contempt
and interpret it.

But his anger is quenched by Abraham\'s speech, after he shows him what
causes he has had for this of his counsel; so that the king may know
that he himself has given cause for such a lie with his tyranny. For if
Abraham had been in no danger and had been sure to speak the truth

**[820 D. m, 172-174. interpretation of Genesis 13/ 18. 19. w. 1,
123S-I238. 821]{.underline}**

he would certainly not have lied; but because he intends to save his
life with a white lie, he indicates that he would have faced certain
danger if he had told the truth. For this is a common sin of kings and
princes, that they, when they want to affirm their prestige and power,
commonly fall into tyranny and proceed too harshly, from which much
misfortune arises in the reign.

297 Augustine wrote that a captain of Antioch had a citizen imprisoned
much more than necessity required, and demanded a large sum of money
from him, so that he could be released from prison. Because of this, his
wife is running around with sorrow and worry and wants to get the money,
she comes to a very rich citizen, who promises her such money with this
condition, that she should allow him his will with her, because she was
a very beautiful woman. She therefore goes, as if moved by necessity, to
her imprisoned husband, tells him such a deal, and the man advises her,
and also admonishes her, because he would like to be free, to dare such
a thing with the rich man. The man, having atoned for his lust, let the
woman go and gave her a sack full of sand, not money. When the woman
sees that she has been deceived, she reports the whole affair to the
captain. The captain, when he hears such an unjust thing and considers
it, realizes that he has given cause for such a sin through his lack of
understanding, because he has arrogated his right so earnestly and
sharply, and says, \"This is my sin and oversight, and I am to blame for
it; he then releases the captive man as soon as he is free and gives the
poor woman, who was so miserably deceived by the rich rogue, all of the
rich man\'s goods and chattels.

This is why kings and princes often sin out of the habit of their
tyranny. And these are only secret sins, which come from the habit of
tyranny, and which the authorities do not see, nor pay attention to, but
think that they have such things as rewards of their power; but finally
God reveals that it is not a sin, but a sin.

He punishes it severely, as can be seen here in the case of Pharaoh.

299 So that this text belongs primarily to the effect that we should
conclude from it how all of us, and especially kings and princes and
other lowly authorities, are full of sins. For they either consent to
the sins of their subjects and do not properly conduct their office, or
they abuse their authority and proceed too harshly, so that they may
defend and preserve their prestige and dignity. God can tolerate and
overlook such public sins for a while, but in the end, as I said, He
will expose and punish them.

Pharaoh was completely innocent as far as Abraham was concerned. For the
sin he committed in this case was caused by Abraham\'s denial of his
wife. Nevertheless, he is not innocent before God. Therefore God
punishes him and teaches him, even forces him, that he must fear God and
no longer walk in his affections, but wait for his office, which is to
be terrible for the wicked, but a help and protection for the pious. But
now there is a contradiction, for he rules and reigns in such a way that
the pious Abraham fears the greatest danger and does not consider
himself safe if he confesses the truth.

301 Such is the reputation of almost all the sins of the authorities,
which God uses to punish in many ways. Therefore, one should pray
diligently for them, so that God will not let them err or fall, but that
He will rule their hearts in such a way that they will lead and carry
out their office properly. For if they despise this, the punishment that
God is wont to use to prevent sins from becoming habitual, and to make
virtues out of vices, will not cease. For as Seneca also says, where
vices and sins become habitual and daily practice, there is neither
advice nor help.

302\) This is how Rome was in ancient times, and still is, that nothing
is considered shameful there, except theft and the beggar\'s sack.

So in housekeeping, the fathers of the household also often sin, even
though they are not bad.

**[822 m. I74-I7S. Interpretation of I Genesis 12:18, 19. \". 1.
123S-I241. 823]{.underline}**

nor outlaw such things as sins. Because of this, husbands and wives have
many miseries and troubles, which they do not see the cause of. For
without sin there is no rule, so weak is the nature, mind and spirit of
men. For if David and other godly kings, princes and rulers have so
often stumbled and sinned in common regimental matters and affairs, what
wonder is it that those do wrong who are not governed by the Holy Spirit
and indulge their lusts and desires? At times even the subjects are so
unruly and stiff-necked that they need serious discipline and severe
punishment. This was the case with Matthias, the king of Hungary, and
because he therefore exercised serious and harsh rule over his subjects,
he often fell into tyrannical cruelty, even though he was a learned,
kind and pious prince.

But such examples teach us that the world is such that if God did not
govern the authorities through special kindness, they could not maintain
their rule without great sin. That is why so many severe punishments are
inflicted on the regiments, the country and the people. The holy fathers
also considered other causes of such misery, namely, that God sends
punishments at times not because He finds sin worthy of such punishment
in man, but also so that He may test faith and patience.

For Job did not deserve such punishments and plagues that God inflicted
upon him with his life, but was God-fearing, simple and upright; and yet
was so horribly afflicted by Satan, whom God permitted, precisely
because God tested his faith and constancy. For thus says the Lord to
Satan: \"Thou hast moved me to destroy him without cause\", Job 2:3.

306 And this is a lesson and comfort to us, that we learn how God often
allows the most severe misfortune and punishment to befall even the
innocent, just so that He may test them. That is why weak hearts, when
they feel the punishment, immediately have thoughts of sin and think
that such punishment comes for the sake of sin. But it should be

consider that the pious must suffer and endure much misfortune for the
sole purpose of being proved right.

307\. for thus says God of His people Himself Jeremiah 49:12: \"Behold,
those who were not guilty of drinking the cup must drink; and thou shalt
go unpunished?\" For although Daniel and his companions had to suffer
the prison among the Gentiles, they had not deserved the same with their
sins as the others.

Thus many pious people perished in the peasants\' revolt, not that they
were to blame for the revolt with the others, but that they were found
among the rebels. For when God inflicts common punishments, they never
go away in such a way that the pious do not get caught up in it and are
accepted; but these are punished and those are judged.

For this purpose the pious are often afflicted, not that their sins
deserve it, or that they may be tested and tried, but that they may keep
their humility and not exaggerate their gifts. Thus Paul says of himself
in 2 Cor. 12:7 that he was given a stake in his flesh, so that he would
not exaggerate his great revelations. \"Satan\'s angel,\" he says,
\"beats me with fists, lest I exalt myself.\" As if to say, \"I may
exalt myself in my glorious and great gifts, and desire to be esteemed
above all the apostles, and perhaps despise others; therefore God repels
this sin and presumption with the devil\'s stake, that I may see that I
am nothing, and humble myself.

This is also the reason why the church, which is gifted and endowed by
God with the highest gifts, such as the forgiveness of sins, the Holy
Spirit and eternal life, is subject to many crosses and trials. For if
she felt such gifts without cross and suffering, she would become proud
and exalt herself. So you also see that a pious and godly person is
often burdened with various hardships and misfortunes and always has to
suffer one plague after another; whereas for the godless everything goes
according to their heart\'s desire.

311\. such an unequal and inequitable

**[824 L. m, 176-178. Interpretation of Genesis 12, 18-20. W. 1,
1241-1244. 825]{.underline}**

Change, as reason sees it, often brings the saints to anger; but if you
want to look at the matter rightly, it is your great benefit that you
suffer such things; for if you lived without challenge, you would be
proud and condemned. But because God hangs poverty, contempt, sickness,
a wicked wife, unruly and disobedient children 2c. as a heavy stone
around your neck, you are not arrogant or proud, but keep yourself
humble, and do not so rudely despise those who have lesser gifts than
you do. And so you speak and debate rightly and usefully about the
causes of crosses, misfortunes and hardships. For this not only teaches,
but also comforts.

The fourth cause of such punishments and plagues is that we are improved
and purified by them. And so Mary Magdalene, because she leads a lewd
life, must be possessed with seven evil spirits, Marc. 16, 9, so that
she may be brought to repentance and correction of her life through this
means. Solomon also says, Proverbs 22:15: \"Folly is in the heart of a
boy, but the rod of discipline will drive it far from him\"; and Isaiah
Cap. 28, 19: \"The temptation teaches you to mark the word.\"

The fifth cause is the miraculous way in which God does nothing but
display and prove His glory and high majesty. So, when the disciples
Joh. 9, 1. ff. Christ was born blind and asked whether he or his parents
had sinned, he answered that neither he nor his parents had sinned, but
that he was therefore blind, so that God\'s works might be revealed in
him, that is, so that he might prove by this miracle that he was God\'s
Son and thereby bring many others to faith and knowledge of God.

This story does not rhyme badly with this last cause, for it is certain
that through this plague sent by God, the king comes to the knowledge of
God and the right religion. Although it happens by chance and is not the
most important cause, because the text says about the right cause of
this plague, namely, that God punished him for taking Sarah, his wife,
from Abraham.

In this way the holy fathers, especially Augustine and Bernard, speak of
the punishments and plagues of God, for they see that Job is proven
innocent; Paul is bowed and humbled, but Mary Magdalene is required to
repent and is swept away; but with the blind man it simply happens that
God\'s glory and work are revealed in him.

Although these are many trials, they are all a fatherly punishment and
not a rod of wrath, as we see in Herod and other wicked men who are
punished with horrible and cruel plagues, which are followed by eternal
death and damnation.

317 Against such anger the prophet David prays, when he says Ps. 6:2:
\"O Lord, do not punish me in your anger, and do not chasten me in your
wrath. As if he wanted to say: \"Punish me, I am well content, I also
want to suffer gladly that you chastise me, but do not do it in your
anger and wrath. So Jeremiah Cap. 10, 24. prays for himself and his
people: \"Chastise me, Lord, but with moderation, and not in your anger,
lest you wear me out.\" He therefore holds judgment against the wrath of
God, so that we may be disciplined and corrected, but with moderation,
and so that we may be blessed.

Now one could think of many more reasons why God punishes and chastises
us after we sin without ceasing, and cherishes and keeps the original
sin in us, which is followed by death. But God remits eternal punishment
to those who believe in Him, and changes it into such plagues and
punishments as we have told you, which concern only this temporal life,
and are useful and serve us, because they either prove us, or humble us,
or improve us, or glorify God\'s glory. Therefore, we should bear them
patiently and give thanks to the merciful God that He chastises us with
moderation and not in anger, so that we may persevere in the fear of God
and be saved.

[V.20. **And Pharaoh commanded his men to go over him, and his wife, and
all that he had.**]{.underline}

**[\
826 L m, 178-180. interpretation of Gen. 12, 20. cap. 13, 1. 2. w. 1.
1241-1218. 827]{.underline}**

319\. Such a fast leave and escort, so here Abraham is assigned,
indicates that Pharao was frightened hard about such plague. For he sees
that it could easily happen that Abraham, as a stranger, would be harmed
by his people; and because he finds that he is thus punished by God for
having taken another man\'s wife, he fears that more such plagues would
come to him if Abraham were offended by one of his own. Therefore, he
commands him to leave Egypt with his possessions and goods, and gives
him an escort so that he will not come to harm or danger on the way.
Thus it is seen that God is the protection of those who hope in Him. He
tests the faith and lets go of temptation; however, he does not abandon
his own, but helps in the end and redeems them with honor and at the
same time to the great benefit of other people.

\(320\) It was a grievous trial that Abraham was deprived of his wife.
But see how much benefit has followed this promise. The king will

Abraham, however, is not only not harmed, but is also left there with
great honor and a stately royal escort.

Therefore, his faith, which had previously been somewhat weak in times
of need, was strengthened. He would have been content if he had been
left alone unharmed. Now he comes enriched with his entire entourage and
a public escort. He could hardly have wished for such an honor.

By this, God wants to show and prove that He cares for all and takes
care of those who place their hope firmly in His mercy. Therefore, we
should also learn to be obedient to God, and gladly suffer His counsel
and will over us with certain confidence and hope of a glorious
redemption, which we will surely find at last. For this cause the Holy
Spirit has written for us such a glorious history that we should work
out our salvation in patience and hope, amen.

**The thirteenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**OfAbraham\'s Wealth and Transactions on His Tires.**

I.

**Abram went up from Egypt with his wife and all that he had, and Lot
with him, toward the south.**

1 In the beginning of this chapter is something dark this, so Moses
writes: Abraham went from Egypt to the land of Canaan. Therefore it is
asked: How could Abraham have gone at noon, after the land of Canaan was
situated after midnight? This is easy to answer. Because

Moses does not speak of Abraham having gone such a way to Canaan, but
speaks of his having remained, after his return from Egypt, in the place
that was situated in the south of the land of Canaan; that he thus
gladly moved around the nearby places of the land from which he had
gone. And so this piece also belongs to the example of patience and
constancy, yes, to the example of a very certain and firm faith in the
promise of God that his seed should possess the land of Canaan: about
this the holy man held firm and did not allow himself to tire so much.

V. 2. **Now Abram was very rich in cattle, silver and gold.**

**[828 L. m, 180-182. interpretation of Gen. 13, 2. \". 1, 1248-1251.
829]{.underline}**

2 The Hebrew word cabed, which we have translated rich, does not
actually mean rich, but weighed down and loaded. And Moses tells here
three kinds of goods: cattle, silver and gold. The word mikneh comes
from the word that means to acquire, to buy, to possess. The word mikneh
is commonly used to refer to livestock, as in Cap. 46, 32, Joseph
instructed his father and brothers how they should answer the king if he
asked what their food was, namely, that they were homines mikneh,
\"people who handle livestock,\" and Ex. 12, 38: \"sheep, cattle, and
almost much livestock.\" Jerome has interpreted it: various kinds of
cattle, so that it would be a generic word, which denotes the small
cattle, so one calls herd.

3\) Abraham\'s great faith is praised here again, that he is loaded with
such a large number of servants and drags all kinds of livestock with
him, and yet he can travel so much with them. Undoubtedly, the gold and
silver were a gift from King Pharaoh, so that God, according to His
miraculous counsel, relieved him of such long hardships and wanderings.

\(4\) For the first thing Moses remembers here is that Abraham was very
rich and carried gold and silver with him to comfort himself and the
others who were strangers with him. And so God is wont to do at times,
that even in the midst of misfortune and hardship He showers His own
with temporal goods and blessings. For if there were no comfort in the
midst of adversity, but only struggle and fear, faith would be lost.
Therefore, God allows us to breathe again at times and soothes our
sorrows and miseries with comfort, just as we refresh those who have
become weak and feeble from work or illness with a drink or spice, so
that they do not die.

\(5\) And we should remember this example in our troubles, so that we
can bear our present misfortune patiently and wait for comfort in faith,
since God is faithful and provides that we can also escape and be rid of
temptation. But the true salvation comes

We will be able to do this when we leave our old hut and move out of
this life.

\(6\) But before we come to this perfect redemption, God often comforts
our sorrowful and anxious hearts by giving us physical and temporal
goods as a testimony that God does not forget His own, and that these
are certain rewards for being pious and godly. Just as it was a great
trial for Abraham to have his wife Sarai taken by such a mighty king, it
is also a great consolation that Sarai suffers nothing contrary to her
honor and discipline, and that Pharaoh lets Abraham go with wonderful
gifts and riches.

\(7\) But this text has often been mastered by philosophers and monks,
who have raised many questions as to why the Holy Spirit wrote such a
thing about Abraham, that he was rich or very loaded with cattle, gold
and silver. For both parts hold that such a holy man should not have had
wealth, but should have lived in poverty, especially because he had to
wander about in misery and have all his hope in the mercy of the one
God.

8 But we should know that these things were not written for Abraham\'s
sake, but for our instruction, punishment and comfort, as Paul says in
Romans 15:4 and 2 Timothy 3:16. For the Holy Spirit has seen that in the
hearts of men there are strange and peculiar thoughts about godliness,
which were not brought into the church in our time only by the monks and
Anabaptists, but have been in all ages. Thus the philosophers have meant
to get a great name by despising money or goods and pretending to be
beggars; as the monks also did, who were therefore a much more
pernicious pestilence, by teaching that such beggary was divine service:
so the Anabaptists did not have them either for Christians who have
something of their own.

9 But even worse are the Jews, who abuse these and other such sayings of
Scripture to whitewash their

**[830 L. m, 182-184. interpretation of I Genesis 13, 2. W. 1.
1281-1254. 831]{.underline}**

They are as greedy and usurious as if Abraham had acquired such money
and goods among the pagans. And it is no wonder that they abuse this
holy patriarch, because they expect nothing else from the Messiah but
wealth and power; so that at the same time the monks, Anabaptists and
Jews run and sin here: the monks and Anabaptists by abstaining too much
and rejecting money and goods; but the Jews by taking too much and
usury.

\(10\) And all this shows that the highest ignorance is in the hearts of
men, who not only do not know God, but also do not know the creatures.
The philosopher Crates will put away goods; Spielet goes begging; the
Stoics say that wealth is not good 2c. But what causes have they? None
other than that they saw that money and goods made people worse.
Therefore they thought that they should be advised to condemn wealth and
abstain from it altogether. So when the monks saw that riches and
worries of this world take over many people, they thought they could be
safe from such vice if they left everything, ran into the monasteries
and abstained from all worldly business. And this delusion was
strengthened by the fact that they publicly taught in churches that man
had a right will; therefore they all thought that if they could avoid
such incentives to evil and withdraw from the world, there would be no
danger.

\(11\) But, as I said, this was the highest blindness and most shameful
ignorance, namely, that they transferred the vices that are in man from
man to the creatures, which are good in themselves and are God\'s gifts.
For a distinction must be made between the good and the man who has and
possesses it. The good that is possessed is as it was created by God;
but the man who possesses it is not as God created him, but has become
much different through sin; therefore the defect is not in the good, but
in the man who possesses it. The blind and foolish people did not see
this.

\(12\) They have also taught that this is chastity when one is in
fellowship.

with virgins or women. So they thought they would be wise to deprive
themselves of things so that they could sin, but they were deceived by
this false principle, because they thought that man was good in himself
and that his natural powers were still intact and perfect, but they
found out for themselves that they had never been less chaste than when
they had been all and without women.

I do not consider St. Francis to have been evil at all, but his works
show that he was a simple man or, to tell the truth, a fool. For this
law or rule he gives, that his monks should live according to the
Gospel; but the Gospel sets this for the most perfect rule, if one sells
everything and gives it to the poor. Would he not therefore be worthy to
be counted among the foolish philosophers who have thrown away goods and
riches, rather than to remain among Christians, because he claims this
to be the core of the whole gospel, when the gospel teaches us of much
greater things, namely, that we should recognize our sin and hope for
its forgiveness through the merit of Christ?

14 The good father St. Francis does not see this, but thinks that in the
Gospel a new law is presented as from the Republic of Plato, that one
should sell what one has; and yet we see how the world has put up with
such a foolish teaching and accepted it with great applause. If the
story of St. Francis is true, he begged bread and other necessities of
life and then distributed them among the poor. But look at his
descendants, whether they have not rather cared for themselves and their
kitchen than for others.

\(15\) That John, the twenty-third pope by name, condemned the
Franciscans, he did not do so in the opinion that we do, but in a public
edict proclaimed them heretics and stiff-necked people who said that
Christ and his disciples had nothing of their own;

**[832 \" ui, 184-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 13:2. \". i, 1214-1257.
833]{.underline}**

He also exercised great courage and tyranny against the poor of Lyons,
who pretended to follow the Lord Christ, who had also been poor. For he
had many of them burned.

16 For he saw that the popes not only made themselves hated by others
because of their power and wealth, but would also be considered ungodly
if their lives, which had nothing, were considered holy. It also helped
that those poor people in Lyons publicly attacked and punished the
popes, as if it were not their due that they should have wealth and
goods.

So John XXIII proclaimed wealth and property to be right and condemned
the mendicant orders, but much in a different opinion than we do. He did
not care about religion, but because he was rich and powerful, he did
not want to be considered unholy. Therefore the Franciscan monks,
because the pope dealt so cruelly with those at Lyons, were deterred by
the danger, and no longer punished the popes\' avarice, but, as the
saying goes, muddled among themselves like asses, praised the popes and
were praised by them in turn.

\(18\) Therefore, such examples of Scripture can be useful in preventing
and nullifying such error. For they teach us that there is no fault in
riches and other things, as good and true gifts of God, but in the
people who possess and use them.

19\. and he is not only a good philosopher, but also a good theologian,
who does not reject or reprove the things God has created and given, but
punishes the wrong use of them; as the 62nd Psalm v. 11. says: \"If
riches come to you, do not set your heart on them,\" as if he wanted to
say: riches are good, but take care of your heart, so that it is not
evil.

20 Thus it is not evil to look upon a woman, who is a good creature of
God; but there is sin in the heart, which looks upon a woman, who is not
thine, to desire her. Therefore, the monks who, in order to keep
chastity, do not look at a woman, and who are in

When a man closes the cloisters and has an impure heart, he is most
likely to feel a lewd impulse when he is alone; so that fornication
cannot be prevented by avoiding women, and sin cannot be avoided by
abstaining from things, but rather by dealing with them and using them
properly, as experience shows. For if a young man cannot have a virgin
whom he loves, he often goes mad and unreasonable about it; but if he
can obtain her, he grows weary of her.

\(21\) Wherefore take heed that thou be first pious, and bring to the
use of goods or other things a pure heart; there is no fault in the
goods themselves, or in the things that are used. Those who do not do
this are like that fool who did not stand up straight in the sun and was
very angry because he saw his shadow crooked and bent over. In the same
way, they do not see that the fault is in them. Therefore, if they want
to abstain from using creatures, they are much more tempted to do so
than those who have and use them.

\(22\) Thus the eyes, hands and feet are God\'s gifts: therefore, if you
burn and desire a virgin whom you are looking at, it is not the fault of
the eyes, but the sin of the heart. Would it not therefore be the
greatest folly if you were to gouge out your eyes for this reason, so
that you could no longer look at a virgin? For by this the heart is not
purified, but is ten times more provoked to lust and fornication; as the
poet says: \"What is forbidden and denied to us, we strive for, and what
we cannot have, we desire.

\(23\) Therefore let us leave off such monkish and foolish thoughts, and
when we are called either to the marriage state, or to other things, let
us not think that there is any sin or fault in the use of the things
which are used; but if there be any fault, it is in the heart: then let
us see that the same be right, and all shall be well.

24 Some great philosophers have considered it a praise of wisdom that
they have been inspired by

**[834 L. m, 136-iR. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 2. W. i. 1287-isss.
835]{.underline}**

have withdrawn from worldly offices. But Aristotle judges and says much
better: \"The office discovers and points to the man\"; and, as one
knows, one is used to say: A lonely man is either God or a wild animal.
But if he cannot be God, it follows that a lonely man is a wild animal.
Paul says in 1 Corinthians 7:31 that creatures were created to be
enjoyed and used, and therefore they should not be rejected or fled;
just as the Holy Spirit here testifies about Abraham, that he was very
rich and loaded with cattle, silver and gold.

\(25\) Now if throwing away money and goods and going begging were a
virtue, Abraham would be praised unfairly here. But he remains in the
government and use of the creatures, and makes it his primary concern
that his heart be pure; he also does not exalt his goods, does not
gather them up and cherish them as a miser, but is mild and hospitable,
as the histories written about him below testify. And because he is thus
without vice and change, he uses the creatures with the fear of God, in
faith and holiness.

\(26\) Do thou also, if thou be in matrimony, or in public office, or
whatsoever thou be; so deal thou rightly with such things as wife,
children, marriage, or office, and others, which are good in themselves,
as thou useest the eyes, ears, and tongue, which are members created and
given of God.

In the schools, philosophers and theologians often used this saying:
What is outside of us is none of our business, and from this they
concluded: Money, goods and such things are outside of us, therefore
they do not concern us. Such sophistry has a good appearance, but it is
harmful and ungodly. Therefore you say: What is apart from us belongs to
us most of all; for God has said Gen. 1, 28: \"Rule over the fish of the
sea, over the birds of the air, over the earth, and over all that is in
it.\" Now among such goods and gifts are silver and gold, which you
shall use, but so that your heart may be pure, that is, without avarice,
injustice, violence and other vices.

First, use them for the benefit and need of your household, so that you
will not be worse than a pagan, 1 Tim. 5:8.Then also for the benefit and
service of other people; and beware of it as of a noxious pestilence,
lest you hurl and throw away your goods, as the foolish Crates did, or
think it not good and useful, as Epictetus and the Stoics thought; but
rather hold that such gifts are not only useful, but also honest, and
created by God to be pleasing and comforting to the saints at times in
their sorrow and misfortune, as we hear here from Abraham.

29 But against this they say, \"This applies only to the Old Testament,
for Christ and the apostles taught differently in the New Testament. For
Christ says Matth. 19, 21: \"Sell what you have and give it to the
poor\"; item Matth. 5, 3. 6: \"Blessed are the poor in spirit; blessed
are those who hunger and thirst\" 2c.; and Paul 2 Cor. 6, 10: \"As the
poor who have nothing and yet have everything\". For such proofs and
arguments do the mendicants and voluntary poor bring before them,
wherewith they deceive themselves and others; though they be vain
sophistries, and not thorough proofs. For though Christ might be said to
have been poor, yet he had a bag, which Judas had under his hands: from
which it follows that he had something of his own, and that he had
received of that which was his own.

30 Knowing this about Christ, who is the head and Lord of us all, what
new thing does the wretched Franciscus pretend, that he does not want to
have anything of his own, that he forbids his brothers to touch money,
and yet is content in the meantime to use other things, in whose
abundance money is easily forgotten?

But what is the use of many words? Folly and hypocrisy must be punished.
Therefore, one said not badly: He wonders what kind of people there are
who do not attack money; for such must be enemies either of God or of
the authorities, or of both at the same time; they must be enemies of
God because they despise His creatures; the

**[836 \" m. 1S8-1S1. Interpretation of Genesis 13:2-1. W. I, I2SS-1262.
837]{.underline}**

But the authorities said that they were afraid of the images of the
princes on the coins, while they were not afraid of golden goblets and
silver images, but attacked them. And who would not notice such a gross
error and glittering? And yet they have deceived the whole world with
it.

\(32\) But such examples warn and admonish us to be all the more
diligent in keeping our word. For this is the only way that we will not
be deceived by such color and glitter. For why would we prefer
Franciscus to Abraham? Would we do it because Franciscus has nothing to
do with money, but Abraham, as Moses writes, is loaded with silver and
gold? If gold and silver are evil creatures in themselves, then those
who abstain from them are praised; but if they are good creatures, both
of which we can use for our neighbor\'s needs and for the glory of God,
then he who abstains from them as from evil creatures must be a fool,
even an ingrate against God, because they are not evil, even though they
are subject to vanity and evil. Correct your heart and use such things
with a pure heart.

If God has blessed you with wealth, thank Him for it and see that you
use it properly; but if He has not given it to you, do not be stingy
about it, but be patient and trust God enough to give you your daily
bread, and be careful not to judge or condemn, like the desperately
wicked monks, those whom God has blessed abundantly.

For nowhere did Christ forbid that we should not use his creatures; but
this he commanded, that we should take heed to our hearts and minds, and
rule them aright. For he is the master of the Holy Spirit and also had
something of his own; as the evangelists testify, who say that Judas had
the bag and the money, John 12:6. Paul also worked with his hands, 1
Thessalonians 2:9, so that he might feed on what was his and not on
other people\'s good. Therefore, let the monks with their false piety
and foolish hypocrisy go away.

**II.**

**V. 3 And he went on and on from south to Bethel, to the place where
his tabernacle was first, between Bethel and Ai.**

\(35\) Here, as we see, Moses indicates that Abraham did not stay in one
place, but went about and had many lodgings. Since at least six or seven
patriarchs were still alive at that time, it is plausible that Abraham
visited all of them and stayed with each one for a while. For the Hebrew
text indicates that Abraham kept changing his lodging place and thus
came as far as Bethel. Vajelech lemasaav, that is, he kept moving and
moving and finally came to Bethel. There is no doubt that on this
occasion many of the Canaanites came to the knowledge of God and
accepted the right religion.

**V. 4 To the very place where he had made the altar before. And there
he preached the name of the Lord.**

In the Hebrew text there is a clear difference between these two: \"to
call upon the name of the LORD\" or to preach, and: \"to call upon in
the name of the LORD\". For \"to call upon the name of the LORD\"
actually means to ask something of GOD, to seek with prayer something
from GOD 2c. But \"to call in the name of the LORD\" actually means to
preach, to teach, to read, and whatever else belongs to the ministry of
preaching. Now that Moses says here that Abraham called there in the
name of the Lord, is just as much as if he said that Abraham built a
public chapel or altar in the same place, preached there, and taught the
right religion especially to his servants, and then also to the
Canaanites who were nearby and gathered in this place. For though the
whole race was cursed in general, and separated from the pious, yet some
received the word. Therefore Abraham was a priest and prophet of God who
chose a certain place where he taught, called upon God and sacrificed.

37\. for such is actually part of the office

**[838 L.m, 191-IM. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 4. W. I, ISS2-I2W.
839]{.underline}**

of a priest, which we also administer by God\'s grace, so that God may
have His church among us. For such services must remain from the
beginning to the end of the world, although when it comes to the end of
the world, with such great wickedness and perverse nature of the world,
the very few will keep them.

38 Let this be enough to remind us what it means to \"call upon the
Lord\" and \"to call upon the name of the Lord. Now if anyone would
argue that both are one thing, I will not be great against him, because
the two things, preaching and calling, are bound to each other by
nature. For where the people are not first instructed by God, it is
impossible to pray; indeed, no one will be able to pray properly for
himself unless he first preaches to himself either the faith or some
other saying in Scripture about God\'s goodness, as He not only
commanded to pray but also promised that He would hear; and through such
a preaching, which one does for himself, the heart is moved and awakened
to prayer. All this is done publicly in our churches, where we do not
have silent services, but where the voice of the holy gospel resounds
for and for, so that people may be informed of God\'s will.

39 Prayer or thanksgiving also comes with such sermons. Paul\'s 1 Cor.
14, 13. says that the church should first be taught and admonished,
after which they can give thanks or call on God. And Zechariah Cap. 12,
10. promises that God will pour out the spirit of grace and prayer. Now
the Spirit of grace teaches us how God\'s will is against us, praises
God\'s grace and mercy, and awakens us to faith. This is followed by the
spirit of prayer, for those who know that God is reconciled and gracious
to them call upon Him in their distresses with a certain hope that He
will save and preserve them; so that preaching and prayer are always
together.

40 Now Abraham is praised here because he did not do this in a corner,
but out of fear of the threat of the heathen, or because he did not do
this in a corner.

but in a public place, so that with his and his own example he might
also bring others to the knowledge of God and the right worship. And
this altar may have been under a large oak tree or on a hill, free under
the sky, but covered with an Arab hut without any adornment, as a small
and unsophisticated temple, which nevertheless pleased God for the sake
of pure doctrine and prayer.

In our time, we see deliciously and magnificently built churches adorned
with all kinds of splendor and ornamentation. But, dear God, what kind
of preaching or praying is going on in them? You hear the devil\'s
teachings in them and not Christ\'s, for nothing else is preached in
them but lies, and prayer is blasphemy.

Therefore the German proverb is true: \"Dark churches and light hearts
are common to one another. For such a church did Abraham have, in which
God\'s word and the right services went? In contrast, we see very light
churches in our time, but the hearts in them are dark or rather blind.
So it is not stones and a magnificent building, nor gold and silver that
adorn a church or make it holy, but God\'s Word and pure teaching or
preaching. For where God\'s goodness is praised and revealed to men, and
hearts are uplifted and encouraged to trust in God and call upon Him in
times of need, there is certainly a glorious temple, even if it is a
dark corner, a mere hill or a wild tree; it is also righteously called
God\'s house and heaven\'s gate, even if it is uncovered and stands
under the clouds and open sky. Therefore, one should primarily look at
how one teaches and prays there, not how it is built. For this is what
God wants, that people may turn to Him and that He may be praised and
glorified, which is done by word and prayer alone.

There is no doubt that Abraham also suffered the same fate as those who
preach God\'s word rightly and purely. For the enemy of Christ, Satan,
also lived there, and he attacked Abraham with all kinds of unpleasant
things.

**[840 M. iA-i\". Interpretation of Genesis 13:4-7. W. i. isss-isso.
841]{.underline}**

He has suffered more from the countless trials and plagues that follow
the word than from persecution, enmity, contempt for the word, and other
innumerable plagues and troubles. He truly felt such reward for his
piety; and although nothing is written about it, we know that this is
the way of the Word, that where it is taught, known and preached, there
the prince of the world is angered and hunted down. For these two things
the word commonly accomplishes, that it praises God and judges the
prince of the world and condemns him with the flesh and sin. Therefore,
from this lot of the Word it is easy to measure what Abraham had to
suffer in his episcopal office; but because he was chosen by God to be a
bishop, he had God as his patron against such wrath and persecution of
the devil and the world.

**Second part.**

**Abraham\'s separation and detachment from Lot.**

**(vv. 5, 6, 7) Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds,
and tents. And the land could not bear that they should dwell together:
for their substance was great, and they could not dwell together. And
there was always strife between the shepherds over Abram\'s cattle, and
between the shepherds over Lot\'s cattle. So the Canaanites and the
Perizzites dwelt in the land at that time.**

After the service and the sermon about religion and faith in God, which
should always be the most important part, the other part follows, which
is a very beautiful example of love for one\'s neighbor and patience.
For it was no small tribulation that in the midst of the unknown
peoples, necessity forced Abraham to part with his most faithful
companion and dearest cousin.

45 For a faithful and good friend is the most precious treasure and good
in the whole of life, not only for the sake of common and bodily things.

For this reason, not only because of danger and distress, in which one
friend can comfort and help another, but also for the sake of spiritual
temptations. For although your heart is comforted and strengthened by
the Holy Spirit, it is also a great service and comfort to you if you
have a faithful friend with whom you can talk about religion and hear
his comfort.

\(46\) Who would not consider this a heavy cross and a great misfortune,
that Abraham should divorce his near kinsman friend, with whom he had
been so long in misery among the heathen, and lose such a faithful
companion, who had stood by him in trouble and danger? I, at least,
consider it a lesser harm to lose all his goods than to be deprived of a
faithful friend.

47 For we see that Christ, when he is distressed and afflicted by the
temptation in the garden, seeks comfort from three disciples, Matth. 26,
40. 28, 15, Paul sees that some brothers are coming to meet him, he
gains courage and comfort as soon as he looks at them. For he who is
lonely and has no acquaintance around him is hurt by loneliness, and
even though he can encourage himself against it and fight against it, it
will be very sour and difficult for him to overcome it.

\(48\) But all this is easier where one has a friend or brother with
him, for there the promise has power, which says Matt. 18:20: \"Where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them. Therefore one should flee loneliness and gladly keep company
with known people, especially in spiritual needs.

\(49\) The text gives three reasons why Abraham and Lot had to separate
from each other. The first is that neither of them could feed the land,
because they both had a lot of livestock. Now Abraham wanted to be
helpful to his cousin with his departure and not harmful or a hindrance.

50 The other reason is that at that time the Canaanites and Perizzites
dwelt and ruled in the land, before whom they, as exiles and strangers,
could not have extended their border for their convenience, but had to
be content with the place,

**[842 n m. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 5-s. W. 1, 126S-I27L
843]{.underline}**

which the lords of the same place had allowed them. According to the
promise, Abraham was an heir and lord of the whole land, but he is still
content with the rule of the heathen for the time being, and waits in
patience until God drives them out of the land; he does not need his
right, nor does he arrogate to himself his rule and authority, as
another might have done and stirred up rebellion and war over it: but
over such inequity the holy man has patience and suffers his enemy and
unjust lord over him, but he remains a stranger and in misery. We should
also follow this example.

\(51\) The third cause is that there was dissension and disagreement
among the shepherds, which no doubt both masters, Abraham and Lot,
endeavored to quell and resolve; but it was in vain. For the herdsmen
keep their stiff-necked ways, and when they once take up hatred and
enmity, they cannot be satisfied with them nor forget them. But this was
a sufficient and just cause for such a parting. For where two masters\'
servants bear hatred and enmity toward one another, so that no counsel
can be found for either of them, such displeasure and quarreling tends
to cause ill will among the masters as well, and to embitter one against
the other. For the need to defend and protect one\'s own from foreign
violence befalls the Lord; so that Abraham\'s parting with Lot had great
and necessary causes. The scripture tells this so that no one may think
that friends so close to each other have left and separated from each
other for the sake of small causes. Nothing more distressing could have
happened to Abraham, but still he obeys necessity so that he may avoid
greater inconveniences.

52 Now let us also see the commandment of love and unity. Abraham\'s
sister\'s son was Lot, so Abraham was older and more respected for the
promise. He was also a priest and prophet of the Lord, and lacked
nothing that he could not be of respectable and honest standing.

He was like his cousin, who could not be compared to him in age,
dignity, reputation and office. Is it not true that Christ commands Joh.
13, 15. ff. Matth. 20, 27, that he who is the greatest and most
distinguished considers himself the least and is the servant of others?

\(53\) For Abraham could have insisted on his reputation and right,
saying, I am the eldest, and the promise and inheritance of all this
land is given unto me, and it is not given unto thee. But even though we
are both strangers, for the sake of the promise I can decide which part
I want: therefore you and yours seek another place, and I will remain
here with my own. So Abraham could have rightly said to his cousin,
\"Stay in your place,\" for he has every right to do so. But he refrains
from his right, and sets before our eyes a very useful example of
keeping unity, by not acting according to the saying: The highest right,
the highest wrong. For this is how Moses tells this story.

**Then Abram said to Lot, \"Let there be no strife between me and you,
or between my shepherds and yours, for we are brothers. Is not all the
land open to thee? Separate thyself from me. If thou wilt go to the
left, I will go to the right; or if thou wilt go to the right, I will go
to the left.**

\(54\) What could Abraham have pretended to be more comfortable, more
equal, and more conducive to peace and harmony? First of all, he holds
himself completely equal to Lot, saying, \"Behold, we are brothers; then
he condescends to him in that he gives him the power and discretion to
choose where he wants to go: so that the old father gives way to the
boy, a prophet and priest of God to his disciple, for the sole reason
that love may not be divided and cause for quarreling and strife.

\(55\) Therefore this history is well worthy of our diligence, for it
teaches us how all laws and rights should be acted upon, namely, for
peace, unity, tranquility, or, as we theologians say, for love, to which
end they should all be applied and directed. And whoever does not direct
the laws to this end, or understands them in another way, misses far;

**[844 L. Ill, 1S7-1S9. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 8. 9. W. I,
I272-I27S. 845]{.underline}**

as we see and experience today that they are misused in many ways.

\(56\) For because the world is drowned in ambition and pride, and knows
itself to be very wise, love no longer has a place, but everything is
full of displeasure, dissension, war and strife. For even if one would
do as Abraham did to Lot and let go of his right, peace could not be
preserved if one would also let violence and injustice go over him. The
world is so evil and corrupt that it is not worthy of such a holy
teaching.

However, the pious are to be diligently instructed and reminded that
after they have known God and begun to believe, they should also learn
how to behave toward their brethren and neighbor, namely, that they
should yield from their right according to Abraham\'s example; for the
purpose of all laws is love, peace and unity, to which all worldly
rights and laws, be they what they may, are to be directed and guided,
and are not to be considered equal to God\'s commandments.

\(58\) For the divine promises, item, the sacraments, cannot be relaxed
about; for they are the words and works of God, so that God declares to
us what he will do to us if we accept and believe his promises.
Therefore, it would be a sin to diminish them, to interpret them
differently, to direct them, or to change them, as the pope did when he
stole and tore the chalice from the Sacrament of the Lord\'s Supper.

\(59\) But the goal of all temporal and corporal laws is love: for this
reason one should keep them so that one does not sin against love; as
Abraham says here, \"Let there be no strife,\" but that Abraham and Lot
remain friendly and loving cousins among themselves. So where common
peace is in danger, let love be queen and master, softening the laws and
guiding them to peace.

60 But not just anyone can do this; it requires special people gifted
with great gifts. For, as we see, even the teachers of the laws
disputes.

But the church and the masters themselves do not love and agree with
each other, but insist everywhere on the strictness of the law and on
every title and point; therefore they are not worthy to come to such a
Christian knowledge. In the church, however, we teach pious and
kind-hearted people in such a way that we do not insist on our right
strictly and according to strictness, but that we govern, judge,
alleviate and direct the laws according to what is conducive and
beneficial to the common peace and benefit.

I must give one example: The Carthusians have a rule and law that they
must not eat meat all their lives; now, if one were to fall ill or
otherwise, because of weakness in his health or because of
unaccustomedness, could not always eat fish and tolerate it, and would
thereby endanger his life, the monks would insist on their rule and law
without any mitigation and equity, so that even if they could live and
endure the poor man\'s life with a morsel of meat, they would not do it.
Which then means to press for justice without mitigation and palliation,
forgetting that the purpose of all laws is love. For this reason, Gerson
and others have justly attacked and punished such severity.

\(62\) And this is the vice in all monasteries, that one must keep one
habit in order with eating, drinking, and other things, without any
concern whether one can be healthy, regardless of the fact that not all
are equally strong and skilled, but as far as the body and nature are
concerned. One is very unequal to the other.

When I was young, I saw many Carthusians in Erfurt who should have been
strong and young at the age of half an age, but were exceedingly pale
and walking on the staff; when I wondered about them and asked, \"How
did they come to such premature weakness and old age? But do you not
sleep? I said, and they said they were not allowed to.

64 For this reason, the religion of the monks and the clergy is such
that it does not show equity, relief of the rule, or compassion. For
this reason it is the most unjust and unjust of all beings; for

**[846 \". m. 199-201. interpretation of I Genesis 13:8, 9. \". I,
IS7S-1277. 847]{.underline}**

in which neither the purpose of the laws nor love is considered or
thought of, but the body is also not spared, as Paul says Col. 2, 23.
Therefore Terentius rightly and truly said that the exact, strict and
true law is the highest injustice and violence. For God does not want
anyone to become a murderer in his own body, but wants him to be spared,
even to be governed by it and to abide by it, so that he can fulfill his
profession and serve his neighbor.

\(65\) Therefore, they are foolish rulers and lawmakers who do not see
what the primary use and purpose of the laws should be. For just as
medicine should serve to preserve the health of the body, to restore it
and to help it, and should not proceed too strictly and harshly with its
order and statutes, of which it has many, but should take into account
each body\'s ability and constitution, so that where one\'s body and
nature are too weak, the medicine will be alleviated; otherwise it would
not be a medicine for the body, but a poison; and again, where one\'s
body is strong, stronger and stronger potions and medicines should be
given to it: So in worldly government, one should see and strive
primarily to preserve the common peace. For if a ruler or sovereign
wanted to punish the crimes of his subjects in such a way that he would
give cause for revolt and rebellion, it would be better for him to see
through his fingers and let the sins go, than to punish them. For what
is the law if it is not used properly, if it does not fulfill its
purpose, but everything comes to ruin because of it? But, as I said,
such moderation requires a special prudence.

\(66\) An authority and ruler, they say, is a living law; but
theologians say that the law is the counsel of a wise man. For although
a law is prescribed and given, it requires understanding and reason to
guide and use it in all kinds of dealings, since it is impossible for an
authority who gives a law to see and consider beforehand all the common
and individual dealings that may occur, for they are innumerable.

Whenever a law is thought of for this reason, the theologians believe
that it must include and include the counsel of a pious man who, in the
cases that subsequently arise, can guide and govern the law in such a
way that it is not harmful, but so that the right purpose of the law is
always preserved, namely, that it brings benefit and preserves common
peace. For if a law is against love, it is no law; for love is a
mistress of the law, and as soon as anyone wants to follow it without
moderation, it calls the law to silence, as it teaches to proceed not
with right but with wrong in some cases.

Therefore, in the German proverb, it is said that a young doctor must
have a new churchyard; of a young and untried jurist, that he confuses
everything in strife and war; of a young theologian, that he fills hell
with souls. For all such, because they do not have the experience which
alone makes them wise, they judge and do everything according to their
laws and rules; therefore they run a\" and err to the great harm of many
people, body and good.

69 Therefore learn from this that love and peace master and govern all
virtues and laws; as Aristotle very finely disputes about the
alleviation of laws and equity. Augustine also does not teach like the
foolish Carthusians, but says: \"One should not clothe, feed and govern
everyone in the same way in a whole group, because they cannot all be
equally strong and skilful. This is wise and well said.

70 For Augustine did not create such a monastic life as monastic life is
now, but a society of learned people who pooled their wealth for the
common good and learned with one another; and in this group he did not
maintain an arithmetical relationship, whereby one takes it very
precisely and distributes the wealth evenly, but a geometrical one,
whereby one considers the individual and takes the circumstances into
account.

71 Therefore, this example should be well remembered and kept, so that I
may also learn.

**[848 m. 2V1-S0S. Interpretation of Genesis 13:8-10. \" 1. 1S77-I28I.
849]{.underline}**

Abraham does not consider how old he is and how much prestige, honor and
authority he should have in the sight of Lot, but he only considers that
peace and unity may remain and be preserved.

If he had taken counsel with a young lawyer or superstitious theologian,
for example, he would have held him to it and admonished him not to
relent or give way, but to insist on his right and hold fast; for the
promise of the same land had been made to him, and he should keep it and
defend it, and not burden his descendants with a perpetual servitude.
Such things have a semblance, but because they are useless and unhelpful
for peace and unity, they should be rejected and considered as the most
unreasonable advice, even though they may seem to have been taken out of
the rights themselves.

73\) That Abraham, then, as a holy and godly man, should depart from his
right and consider how to maintain unity; for to this end Paul exhorts
us, Eph. 4:32: \"Be kind to one another, affectionate, forgiving one
another. And Phil. 4, 5: \"Let your kindness be known to all men.\" Now
gentleness actually means yielding and giving way from one\'s right, so
that unity may be preserved, which is necessary in every way in all of
life; for where one drives with the sharpness of the right, there is the
highest disunity.

74\. also know that this is said of external laws and of this temporal
life of ours, but not of the laws and commandments of God, nor of his
promises or sacraments; for you must be the highest law according to
opinion and all words; as it is written Matt. 10:37: \"He who loves
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me. But in all that we
call and command, let love remain as a master in all laws and dealings,
to be looked to and followed above all. In order that Abraham may keep
this love, he lets his cousin Lot leave him with great sorrow and
heartache. For although they were separated from each other in a
physical way, they were

They are closest to each other in one spirit; Abraham held this higher
and dearer than all goods and riches.

**Third part.**

**Of Sodom, the Sodomites and Lot\'s domestic works.**

**I.**

**V. 10 Then Lot lifted up his eyes, and looked upon all the region of
Jordan. For before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, it was full of
water until he came to Zoar, as a husband of the LORD, like Egypt.**

It seems as if this text has nothing special to learn, but only reports
how Lot separated from his cousin Abraham, and what this country was, in
which Sodom and Gomorrah had been. He calls this land a plain, but not
as if there were no other plain along the Jordan (which runs around the
whole land of Canaan), but that this land, in which Lot remained, was a
very fertile land on the other side of the Jordan to Egypt and therefore
far surpassed the other regions. And Moses shows how it was so fertile
by saying that it was full of water because of the Jordan before Sodom
and Gomorrah were destroyed; for after this punishment the same land
took on a different form, which God, out of special counsel, had Moses
indicate here. For he adds that this land, in which the five cities had
been, had such a nature that it might have been called a garden of God,
that is, such a place in which God would dwell and in which He would
delight, and which would have abounded in all kinds of beautiful and
very good plants and fruits.

76\) I also know the Jews\' interpretation of the Garden of God: for
they say that the Garden of God, the Cedars of God, the City of God are
called from their excellence, as Jon. 3, 3. says: \"Nineveh was a great
city of God\", that is, it was an excellent and glorious city; and Psalm
80, 11. says about the Cedars of God, about which the

**[850 L. IN, 2VS-A\". Interpretation of Genesis 13:10, W. 1:1281-1281.
851]{.underline}**

Jews make such an interpretation that in the land of Judah the shrubs
and vines grew so tall and high that they could have been like the great
cedar trees; and Psalm 104:16: \"the trees of the LORD,\" that is, great
trees.

The Jews invented this interpretation out of their great wisdom and
innate hope, as if they alone were called God\'s people and not the
Gentiles. Nineveh, they say, cannot be called the city of God because
God dwelt there, as he dwells with us at Jerusalem; but it has another
meaning, and Nineveh is called a city of God because it was a glorious
and great city. But this gloss and interpretation is void; we know that
GOD is GOD to the Gentiles, even temporally. Therefore, Nineveh is
called a city of God, because God has given it His blessing, increase
and improvement, and provides for it and governs it.

78 These are called God\'s trees, which God created and for which He
waits, giving rain, sun and wind, from which they grow and increase,
even though they are in the possession of the wicked. And it is no small
comfort that God orders, maintains and protects the regiments, and that
they do not, as we commonly think, improve or fall of their own accord.
The pagans neither recognize nor see such a government of God, but let
themselves dream that the regiments are ordered and governed by their
own skill; just as Hannibal believes that he overcomes the Romans with
his great courage and special skill, and Alexander attributes his good
fortune, so that he accomplishes everything, to the great gifts he has
in himself. But this is only a larva, which we see alone, but God\'s
order and government, so that the regiments are either ordered or
destroyed, we do not see.

79\] This is the right understanding, that Nineveh is a city of God,
item, the trees are called trees of God; for they are governed and
maintained by God, so that they increase and become great. For though
they may be served by human maintenance and skill, all this would be in
vain unless God\'s blessing were added to it.

would come. So tell me, who tills and maintains the bushes and forests
in the great deserts, where people rarely come? Thus Christ says Matth.
5, 45: \"Your heavenly Father makes his sun rise on the evil and on the
good.\" There he calls the sun of God the sun, which he created for the
refreshment, life and increase of the creatures.

So here God\'s garden is not called, as the Jews fantasize, a great
garden, but one that is built, made fruitful and blessed not only by
human hands and diligence, but by God. Now it is said that there are
still some traces of such gifts; for in the region of the Dead Sea grow
very beautiful apples, which, however, are full of ugly stench and ashes
when they are opened, no doubt because they are supposed to be monuments
to the sins and wickedness that were practiced in the same places in
ancient times.

81 Therefore these are my thoughts, that in the same place was paradise,
and that after the flood there remained a piece of the former rich
blessing of God; which, however, for the sake of the wickedness of the
people, was also lost in the end. For this land, in which Jerusalem and
the Dead Sea were, was also counted to the tribe of Judah after the
death of Moses; and it rhymes finely with each other, that in the very
same place, where sin, committed at a tree, has corrupted man, again at
the tree of the cross the same sin, committed at the first tree, would
be swept out and paid for, and thus through the Son of God innocence and
eternal life would be restored to man.

82\] So the same region on this side and on the other side of the Jordan
was a very beautiful and pleasant place, and as it were a small remnant
of the former paradise; and even today there is no place in the whole
world where balsam grows, except for two gardens on the Dead Sea in the
region of Engeddi, which is near this region, which Moses here calls a
garden or paradise of God, because God had given this garden and its
fruits special power, form and beauty. Other gardens are also

**[852 L. m, 2W-207. interpretation of Genesis 13:10-13. W. i.
1284-1207. 853]{.underline}**

beautiful, but when compared to the Sodomite land or gardens, they are
found to be the gardens of men and not of God.

For this reason, this history is also worthy of careful consideration,
so that we may learn from it what an abominable thing sin is, by which
we see that this garden of God has become hell itself for the sake of
man\'s sin; for what is the Dead Sea but hell itself? since it is a
terrible pool of pitch, into which is swallowed the most beautiful
flowing water of the Jordan, which in Abraham\'s time made the same land
watery and fertile. Of all this we read nothing in the historiographers;
therefore we prefer it to all Moses, who did not insert this description
of the same land into this text without reason.

Now Moses compares this region also to the land of Egypt, which is also
watered by the waters of the Nile and is praised for its very great
fertility; but without doubt it is no longer such a blessed land at the
present time, but has lost much of such blessings because of the sin of
the inhabitants. For sins not only hinder and hinder the blessing of the
land, but even take it away; as we have learned that in our time the
Thuringian land is almost becoming vain stones and barren.

So the Holy Spirit wanted to introduce this description of the land of
the Sodomites on the occasion of the history that follows, so that he
might remind us of the wrath of God and the curse that follows sin, and
so that we might know the difference, namely, what kind of land it was
before the sin and what it became after it. For this saying is true:
\"If the people is cursed, then the same land is cursed.\" For where God
blesses most, people curse most by abusing the blessing, and not only
become lazy and indolent, but by doing nothing, they gradually become
accustomed to doing evil.

86\) All this is the fault of original sin, which so defiles and
corrupts the hearts of men that they better understand all kinds of
evil.

for God\'s blessing; as Moses also laments and cries Deut. 32:15: \"When
Israel was fat and full, he became horny. He has become fat and fat and
strong, and has let go of God who made him. He despised the rock of his
salvation\"; as this text also indicates that in the best and most
beautiful part of the earth there were the very poorest people.

**(v. 11, 12) Then Lot told him all the region of Jordan, and departed
toward the east. So Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, and Lot in the
cities of the same region, and pitched his tents in Sodom.**

\(87\) So Lot, having the choice of Abraham to dwell in what place he
pleases, takes the best of Jordan; but Abraham occupies the region on
the right hand of the cities of Bethel and Ai, which are some miles
distant from Jordan, where Sodom was.

Now one is not to understand this text in such a way, as if Lot had
taken the same whole country; because Moses speaks only of the choice,
that Lot had chosen such country, that he wanted to see a dwelling and a
permanent place in it; but it was still uncertain, which place should be
granted to him.

\(89\) For it seems credible that this holy man traveled through the
five cities and could not find a place to stay anywhere except in the
near region of the Sodomites. But Abraham remains in the land of Canaan,
because it was promised to him. Now the five cities were separated from
the land of Canaan, and they were to be destroyed, but the land of
Canaan was to remain standing.

**II.**

**V. 13. The people of Sodom were wicked, and sinned greatly against the
Lord.**

\(90\) A fine praise is that of such a noble and blessed land! Moses
called it a paradise of God, and compared it to the land of Egypt; but
who are they that dwell therein? Wicked knaves

**[854 L m. \"7-s\". Interpretation of Genesis 13:13. W. i. E-isso.
855]{.underline}**

and great sinners. So that in God\'s paradise dwell the children of the
devil, and in the best and fattest places of the whole earth dwell the
very worst and most shameful people.

91\. But why this? Because we learn that God has a way of doing and
giving the very best to the worst people. And this is the most grievous
trouble, so that the patience of the saints may be distressed, not to
mention the worldly wise and philosophers. That is why the 73rd Psalm v.
3, 4, 5, 6 says: \"I was displeased with the glorifiers when I saw that
the wicked were doing so well. For they are not in any journey of death,
but stand firm as a palace. They are not in misfortune like other
people, and are not afflicted like other people. Therefore their
defiance must be a delicious thing\" 2c. And v. 14: \"I am afflicted
daily, and my punishment is every morning.\"

Thus, God gave Alexander and the Greeks, who were the very worst people,
dominion over the whole world, and after the Greeks, He gave it to the
Romans, who were right Epicurean people. So we see that the Turks have
great victory and luck. And after the Epicurian Romans are punished,
there are still in Europe some nations, which with all kinds of shameful
vices, pride, envy, tyranny far surpass all other people, and yet live
in the very best and fattest lands, which are like a garden of God. From
this, then, reason is given great annoyance by God, so that it accepts
that God does not ask anything about the world and people.

Now we are to consider that this does not happen by chance or without
the special counsel of God, but it is God\'s will that makes fools of
the world, so that they still debate whether what is a useful and
pleasant good is a righteous good. And if the Stoics freely confess that
it is not a good, whether they consider it to be preferable to evil; but
the Peripatetics, whether they say that it is a righteous good, still
allow themselves to be annoyed by the fact that it falls to and befalls
the very worst. For reason is capable of overcoming this annoyance of
the

She does not want to come to an inequality, but since she knows that
this region is a beautiful and glorious garden of God, she thinks that
not unrighteous Sodomites, but honest and pious people should be placed
there; for she considers it an inequity that the wicked are thus graced
and adorned by God, and rather leans toward this opinion that she does
not consider such goods and gifts to be real goods.

94\. But we are to consider that such gifts are not only to be counted
among those that are and are called goods, but that they are also divine
gifts. For who can deny that the fine, fertile and beautiful lands and
gardens of Spain and Italy are exceedingly excellent and glorious gifts
from God?

But why are they given to the worst of men to use? Answer: The psalm we
quoted a moment ago indicates that this question is beyond our
comprehension, and tells us to look to the end of the wicked and
ungodly, that though they may prosper for a time, they will at last fall
into the eternal wrath of God and condemnation; but the pious and godly
God leads according to His counsel, and at last receives them with
honor, whether they must be here in misfortune and under the cross.

Therefore, we see from this how deeply blind our hearts are, and that
when we think about this strange government of God, we are really, as
the 73rd Psalm v. 22 says, as a fool and a beast. If our reason were by
nature good and right, we would judge better of it; but because it is by
nature corrupt and falsified, we come to such an uncomfortable and
unskillful opinion that we consider things evil that we use evil, and
what is good, lovely and useful in itself, we do not consider good, but
bad.

No, Stoic, you do not have to get into this, but you will judge better
and purer, if you judge not them, the creatures, but your own heart from
the abuse of the creatures. For because it abuses the creatures, which
are good by nature, you cannot judge anything from it.

**[856 L. m, 209-211. interpretation of Genesis 13:13. w. 1, 1290-1293.
857]{.underline}**

The more you are, the less you will decrease, because your heart is evil
and your will is not only not good but also evil and wicked by nature;
otherwise it would be improved by the goods created either for use or
for pleasure, but now you are made worse by them, because you are
corrupt and evil beforehand.

\(98\) We see how many people are made worse by abundance, but this is
not the fault of the divine blessing. For as a lewd woman adorns herself
with gold and pearls, but these are God\'s good gifts, and the harlot\'s
shame is unreasonably imputed to them: so we should judge of all God\'s
goods and creatures, namely, that all are the fault of your lust and
corrupt will and reason.

A woman\'s image is beautiful; that is right and is a gift of God the
Creator: but I have a desire for her; is the beautiful form therefore an
evil thing? Not at all, but thou art evil, who canst not rightly use a
good creature. So that useful and pleasurable goods convince us that our
nature is corrupt, and neither mind nor will is righteous in us; for
otherwise we would use good things and creatures rightly and well.

\(100\) The philosophers boast much about their Crates, that he threw a
great heap of gold into the sea and thereafter fed on begging; but does
he not testify about himself with this deed that he has a wicked and
depraved heart, since he thereby confesses that he cannot use money
properly? And, my dear, what good has he done with it? Apparently he has
rejected the goat and the jaundice from himself, but in the same place
he has put away the greed, which is nothing else than casting out a
devil and letting other seven, which are worse, come in his place.

101 Therefore, let us learn that the Holy Scriptures report that this
region near the Jordan was very beautiful and exceedingly fertile;
therefore, there was also an abundance of all kinds of useful and lovely
goods there, ordained by God for use and not for sins. However, nature,
which is corrupted by original sin, can not tolerate such

The goods that God has created and given are not used properly, so that
the heart of the one who uses them is evil and wicked, and not the
creatures. But if the heart is changed and renewed by the Holy Spirit,
it then uses all kinds of goods, both for need, benefit and pleasure,
given by God, with holiness and thanksgiving. As Paul says in Romans
14:6, 7, 8: \"He that eateth, eateth unto the Lord; he that taketh a
wife, taketh to the Lord: whether we live or die, we are the Lord\'s.\"
For he that believeth hath all things, is master of all things, and can
use all things well and gloriously.

Therefore, it is a great error for philosophers to reject creatures for
the sake of abuse; for it is clear from this that just as reason does
not know God by nature, so it does not know God\'s creatures. Terentius
understood it much better, because he says that money, goods, and all
that we use are like the heart of him who possesses and uses them: to
him who uses them well, they are good; but to him who misuses them, they
are evil: so that there is a difference among men, one is rich, the
other poor. But if he who is poor has a right heart, he is richer than
another who has much good; for he is content with a little, and gives
thanks to God for the highest goods, as for the knowledge of God and the
grace which God has shown in Christ. A rich man, however, as a poet
says, is poor even when he has accumulated money and goods, and finds
lack and poverty in great abundance. But where does this inequality come
from? It does not come from the kind and quality of things we use, but
from the fact that hearts are diverse and unequal; as Paul says in Phil.
4:12, \"I am skilled in all things and in all, both to be full and to
hunger, both to have plenty and to be in want.\" 2c.

Enough of this common doctrine, which this history holds up to us,
namely, that the wicked live in constant abuse of the very best things;
but those who live in righteousness and faith can use even evil things
well, and all that they do is good.

**[858 \". m, rii-21\". Interpretation of Genesis 13:13. \". i,
12W-12\". 859]{.underline}**

III\.

The Holy Spirit is pleased to speak of Lot\'s prayers, fasting,
almsgiving and other works, which have a prestige and appearance and
cause wonder, and only reports the domestic works, which the common man
considers small, as having no particular benefit. For what great thing
is it, they say, that Lot and Abraham should separate from each other,
and that Lot should choose for himself the best place of the region to
dwell in?

\(105\) But a true theologian does not do this; he does not simply look
at the mere works, but looks at the person and the heart. If this is
believing, he concludes that everything he does in faith, even though it
may seem minor (as these natural things are, sleeping, waking, eating
and drinking, so that one, as it seems, cannot practice faith nor
worship), is nevertheless holy and pleasing to God.

For although all the pious and godly have a certain amount of time in
which they pray, contemplate God\'s word and holy things, teach and
instruct their own in religion, even if they refrain from doing so and
either cultivate their house and food or wait for their occupation, they
remain in good standing and have this glory before God, that even these
outward and worldly works, with which even the pagans, it seems,
circumvent, are vain service to God and pleasing obedience to God.

Therefore, in this text the Holy Spirit describes Lot\'s housekeeping in
such a way that it is not to be considered a divine and holy work in
appearance, and yet such domestic works are superior to all the works of
monks and nuns, no matter how great, difficult and apparent they may be.
Lot\'s wife milks the cows, the servants feed the cattle, drive them to
the water 2c.

\(108\) God praises such works and calls them the Scripture of the
righteous works. For it is said here, \"Lot chose for him the region of
the Jordan,\" for he was at liberty to look and choose whichever place
he wished. Here the scripture says

Not that he did any good or evil work in it, but because he walked in
the faith in which he went with Abraham from Ur in Chaldea, it was a
true work of righteousness, though it was a domestic work and childish
to look upon.

109\. but all these things are reported to us, that each one may have
comfort in his profession, and know that one may also do outward works
of the body, that I speak thus, and not always deal with spiritual
works, as the monks taught; for one must also give the body its time to
rest, and care for it with eating, drinking, 2c. But even though such
works have no appearance of holiness, you remain in good standing when
you do them; for we see that God does not reject such unsightly and
small works, but considers them worthy to be written in His book.

\(110\) For what believers do, though it is a free work, is pleasing to
God for the sake of faith. If it is such a work that God has commanded,
you have all the less reason to doubt that God will be pleased with
obedience. What Jesus Sirach says about this is known: \"God created man
from the beginning and gave him the choice. If thou wilt, keep the
commandments, and do that which pleaseth him. He has presented fire and
water to you; reach for whichever you want. Man has before him life and
death, good and evil\" 2c., Sirach 15, 14. ff., and rhymes with St.
Augustine\'s saying, if it is understood correctly, namely, that God
governs the things he has created in such a way that he lets them have
their natural and own course.

\(111\) That man therefore has freedom, but not so that if God commands
something, he may do it or not do it; for as far as God\'s commandment
is concerned, man is not free, but must be obedient to the word of God,
or he will have to bear the judgment of death upon him. In things,
however, his freedom consists, of which God has commanded nothing, but
in outward works. For at the table you are free to eat pears or apples,
to drink beer or wine, to dress in black or white, to eat this or that.

**[860 L. m. 213-21S. Interpretation of Genesis 13:13-15. W. 1.
129S-IA\". 861]{.underline}**

to another friend. In such things man has choice and discretion, and it
is certain that even such free works will become God\'s services and
please God, if you walk in faith and abide in God\'s commandments or in
a good conscience; and such is useful to teach.

**Fourth Part.**

**How God spoke to Abraham and promised him the increase of his seed and
the possession of the land of Canaan.**

**V.14. 15. When Lot had parted from Abram, the LORD said to Abram,
\"Lift up your eyes, and look from the place where you dwell toward the
north, toward the south, toward the east, and toward the west. For all
the land which thou seest I will give thee, and to thy seed for ever.**

\(112\) Moses has already spoken about the departure of Lot from Abraham
to the beautiful garden and the best land, in which the most wicked
people were already dwelling at that time. For this is what God does: He
causes His own to be afflicted in many ways and to live poorly and
miserably, but He makes the wicked fat, plump and full. By what
inequality and, as it can be seen, inequity the pious are severely
afflicted, but whether they should keep this comfort, of which the 73rd
Psalm v. 18 says; and Jeremiah Cap. 12, 3. says that the wicked are
fattened until the time when they must become a sacrifice; and Job says
Cap. 21, 13. 17.: \"They grow old in good days, and are scarcely for a
moment afraid of hell. The lamp of the wicked shall be put out, and
their calamity shall come upon them.\" So if you look at how the wicked
will fare, you can easily overcome this trouble.

**I.**

Now follows the third part, in which it is written that the Lord spoke
to Abraham. Now I have often admonished that in such histories or, as it
is called, the sacred legends, one should refer to this piece of

that is, on God\'s word. And it is true that God at all times performs
miraculous works that appear and catch the eye; but for us, who learn
and teach God\'s Word, the greatest appearance and advantage should be
that God speaks. For this, above all other adornments, adorns the sacred
legends and sets them apart from pagan trades and stories; for this is
why they are called sacred histories, that in them God\'s word shines.
For although the history of the high potentates and rulers, such as
Alexander was, is also wondrous, splendid, and mighty, and is also
adorned with words and beautifully described by learned men, yet, if one
compares them with the holy scripture histories, they are darkness; for
they do not have the right light and are in truth nothing else than a
beautiful painting, so hidden in a dark corner that it cannot be seen,
yes, they are like a body without a head and like flesh without a
spirit.

That Abraham\'s history is the most excellent, because it is full of
God\'s word, so that everything that has happened to him is decorated
and adorned, and in it, God is everywhere present to him with his word,
promising, commanding, comforting and admonishing him, so that it should
be seen that Abraham is God\'s special intimate friend. This is a great
thing and well worth marveling at. For what are the victories and
triumphs of all kings compared to this friendship that Abraham has with
the divine majesty that he has around and with him, that speaks to him,
governs him, loves him and sustains him?

When one looks at the histories of the holy fathers and thinks of this
excellent gift, they will no longer be so insignificant and lowly to
look at, but will surpass all monarchs and rulers, no matter how great
and glorious they are to look at. They may fill the eyes with their
appearance and splendor, but a heart that is well instructed sees the
word of God that the holy patriarchs have heard, that God has been
gracious to them and has governed and preserved them.

**[862 L. m, 21L-217. interpretation of I Moses 13:14, 15. w. I,
IMV-1L08. 863]{.underline}**

and grace holds it more glorious and higher than all the world\'s goods.

Therefore we should reflect ourselves on this holy father Abraham, who
is not dressed in gold and garments, but is adorned, surrounded, crowned
and clothed with the divine light, namely the Word of God. Therefore,
his histories should be held in far higher esteem than all the histories
of the whole world, which, when they are at their best, are only a show
of works, which appear to be lovely, but are without any real fruit and
benefit, and are also generally saddening and full of fear, because they
do not have God\'s word in them (which alone is the true light that
instructs the heart and makes it happy), and God\'s wrath and judgment
are seen in them more than grace and mercy.

Therefore, it would certainly be well with us Christians and we would be
blessed if we could recognize such good deeds. The pagans have countless
books in which the histories are described in all kinds of languages,
but we have the histories of the holy Scriptures, which are sealed with
God\'s word. For therein we hear that God speaks kindly to men; we also
see that God rules the world in a wonderful way and preserves His own in
the midst of danger. And who would not say that if the Jews had known
such gifts and grace, and had kept them as they should, they would not
have been a blessed people? As the 33rd Psalm v. 12 says: \"Blessed is
the people, whose God is the Lord\"; item Ps. 144, 15: \"Blessed is the
people, whom the Lord has chosen for him.

For this reason the Persians, Greeks and Romans may be great and famous
as they wish, but they are still wicked because they do not have this
grace and gift of the Word, for they not only do not have this God, but
also do not know Him; so God does not speak to them, even though He
gives blessings and prosperity to their government for a time.

Therefore David says Ps. 60, 8: \"I am glad and will divide Shechem\",
that is, I will be grateful to my God and rejoice in His gifts, \"for
God speaks\".

in his sanctuary.\" For this is the main thing of which he boasts and
rejoices. As if to say, \"This is our privilege and special right, that
we have the sanctuary in which God speaks. Although other kings are more
powerful than we, they do not have this gift, which we can boast of,
namely, that we can hear God speaking to us through his prophets.

120 Moses also praises and extols this gift to us very highly in Deut.
4:6 ff: \"What a wise and understanding people they are, and a glorious
people. For where is there such a glorious people, to whom gods draw so
near as the Lord our God, as often as we call upon him? And where is
such a glorious people, having such righteous customs and commandments,
as all this law?\" This one understood such a high gift of God.

121 And if we Christians understood this great gift of ours, we would be
very well off; as Christ says Luc. 10:23, 24: \"Blessed are the eyes
that see, which ye see. For many kings have desired to see it, and have
not seen it\" 2c.

\(122\) Yes, that I say more of this, I believe that as we now praise
and glorify Abraham for this gift, so he will praise us much more in the
New Testament, because he saw the day of the Lord, as John 8:56 says,
but he saw it only in spirit and faith. But we see this glory and honor
face to face, because we hear that God speaks to us and promises us
forgiveness of sins in baptism, in the Lord\'s Supper, in the right use
of the keys. Abraham did not have such things, but saw them in the
spirit and believed.

Therefore, our glory is much greater; but because we do not respect it,
nor thank God for such excellent gifts, as we should, we care more about
money and goods, and also seek much more violence and pleasure. That is
why the Turk, the Pope and other countless devils from Italy, Spain and
all corners of the world must come to plague, torture and strangle us
for the sake of this unspeakable and shameful contempt.

124\) Therefore, the Church of the Lord Christ is a disciple who sits at
His feet and is His

**[864 \".m, 217-sis. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 14. 15. W. i,
1303-13\". 865]{.underline}**

The word of God is heard, from which it can judge all things, namely,
how one should wait for one\'s profession, how one should conduct
oneself in worldly offices, and even how one should eat, drink and
sleep; so that we may not have to doubt in any work of this life, but
may live with God\'s word surrounded and decided in all places, always
in vain joy and light.

But, O Lord God! how little we see and recognize such great gifts,
without those who have God\'s spirit rejoicing in them and thanking God
for them; The other carnal people are ungrateful, stingy, proud, from
whom even what they have will be taken away, and such punishments will
come upon them that they will have to listen to Satan in Christ\'s
stead, and for apostles the heretics, who seek their own cleverness and
glory in the Word, without all the other misfortunes that are found
there, where one does not have such joy and heavenly gifts, which God\'s
Word brings with it.

126\. Such lamentation grieves all Christians, that with so much light
and glory of the Word, most of them remain blind and love darkness more
than light; For they see that from it comes all common misery and
misfortune, that the Turk falls in, error and heresies gain the upper
hand, item, that the pope thinks of nothing else than how he would save
and bring his kingdom again into full swing, in which there is nothing
but invocation of the saints, merit of good deeds, selling indulgences
and other foolish works without any measure, so that he has so far kept
the poor souls away from the word and seduced them. For in this such
earnestness, toil and labor have been applied that there have been
people who, armed in whole cuirasses, have gone on foot to St. James, to
the farthest border of Spain; but when they returned, the fools did not
know what they had done, suffered or acquired; which has been a
righteous judgment of God.

Now such a thing, or even an abominable thing, will happen to our world
when we are gone, because they do not respect this grace which Abraham
desired to see; for Abraham had scarcely a drop of this treasure and
riches which we have received.

in all abundance. However, it is common for the Church that the more
abundantly God\'s Word is revealed and preached, the greater the
ingratitude of the people has been; for they misuse it for their own
glory and as a cover for their sins. That is why God lets us come with
strong errors, 2 Thess. 2, 11, as the example of Pabst shows, who
instead of God\'s word taught his decrees, legends of the saints and
other foolish antics; because the world wants to be deceived.

\(128\) Therefore, in all the histories and legends of the saints, we
are to look primarily at the glory of the Word, which shines and shines
like the sun in the midst of heaven in these histories of the Fathers;
and those who do this will be able to break through all the strange and
innumerable monstrous things that are done with works at which reason
alone is astonished; but on this alone they will see whether God speaks
and what He speaks.

We read of St. Hilarion that he ate neither meat nor butter nor milk for
three and seventy years. Such a thing seems to be a great and noble
work, of which reason is almost horrified and astonished; but if you ask
whether he was commanded to do such a thing by God, or whether he
undertook it of his own accord? then this work, which he chose himself,
because God\'s word as the right light is not in it, becomes vile filth,
and is really nothing other than a work of darkness, especially because,
as is customary, some spiritual hope has been found for it.

Perhaps God, because He is merciful, may not have imputed such foolish
devotion to this pious man, so that he afflicted and martyred his body;
but whoever nevertheless wanted to accept such a work as an example to
follow and make a service out of it, his opinion should be completely
rejected and punished, be it Jerome, Hilarion or Anthony; for these have
raised such works so high and have taken upon themselves to do them. For
we must keep the right test and look only to God\'s word, and not simply
leave it at that.

**[866 L.m,sis-Wi. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 14. 15. W.r.isos-isos.
867]{.underline}**

of this monstrous holiness, but ask whether it was commanded by GOD.

For when you see a baptized man walking in the faith of his baptism,
confessing the Word of God, and doing the works of his profession, you
may well say that these are truly holy and miraculous works, though they
are small and do not appear to be so in the eyes of men.

For this reason, one should make an exact and diligent distinction
between the honor of the divine word, which alone is the right light and
highest adornment, and such monstrous and glittering works; for God is
pleased with the works that we undertake at His command. According to
appearance, Saul, 1 Sam. 15, 9, did not do evil by not strangling all
the cattle of the Amalekites, but kept some choice pieces for worship;
but because God had expressly commanded him through the prophet to
strangle them all, God was moved to the highest wrath by this work, and
this apparent work is a pure abomination, because it is done against
God\'s word.

For this reason, the Scriptures call it very abominable to practice
sorcery, idolatry and idolatry, if one does not hear the word of God, or
if one does something without or against the word of God; which is truly
said to be abominable, especially when one sees how common such things
are in the world. Therefore Paul also warns the Colossians Cap. 2, 18.
20. warns that one should beware of those who go about by their own
choice, even if their actions are to be regarded as the humility and
devotion of angels; they are, he says, \"the statutes of men,\" that is,
they do not have the bright light and glory, namely God\'s word,
therefore one should flee and let them go and not take them for worship.

\(134\) But I am making too many words about this text; however, I have
been instructed by my own harm, and have experienced how necessary such
admonition and teaching is. Scripture admonishes us in all places to
humble ourselves and to beware of pride, which is followed by God\'s
wrath; but to think highly of God\'s word and to boast of it is not
pride.

In this life, age, sex, and profession are differentiated in many ways:
One teaches the congregation in the church; another serves the regime;
the third teaches the youth; the mother nurtures and educates the
children; the man strives and cares for how he may honestly nourish
himself and his family: these are all, as the world judges, not splendid
or apparent works. But why would you not be proud of this against Satan
and thank God for such great gifts, when you see this heavenly adornment
and divine glory, namely God\'s word, from which they are done? for they
are not naked works, but are adorned with God\'s word, for they are
commanded and ordered by God; whereas those superstitious works, of
which the world thinks much, are self-chosen, as Paul calls Col. 2, 23,
without God\'s word, also unfruitful works, as Paul also calls them Eph.
5, 11.

But did the pope and the church command them, they say? The pope does
not concern us, nor does the church concern us in this case; indeed,
this is not a church that leads us away from the word, increases
idolatry and offense through chosen works, and helps to ruin and damn
souls, not to God\'s glory. For the church, as I said, is a disciple of
Christ, and even though it teaches, it teaches nothing except what it is
commanded to teach by Christ; for this is precisely what God\'s Spirit
does, as John 16:14 says: \"He will take it from mine.\"

\(137\) Therefore, if we want to practice godliness, let us do not
useless but useful works, that is, let us first of all accept God\'s
word and believe in Christ; then let us go about our business with
simplicity. Let a husband feed his family, let a maid be obedient to her
wife, let a woman cleanse, adorn, and teach her children. For these
works, because they are done in profession and faith in the Son of God,
shine and shine before God, the angels, and the whole church; for they
are clothed with the heavenly light, that is, with the word of God, even
though the church of the pope despises them as small and mean works.

I am imagining this for you, as I said,

**[868 L. m, 221-223. interpretation of I Moses 13:14, 15. w. 1,
1308-1311. 869]{.underline}**

not without cause, but because it is necessary; for a man, by his
nature, is unstable, fickle, and easily persuaded to do this and that;
so our flesh is foolish and foolish, wherefore it is easily seen and
blinded with such monstrous and unusual works.

139\) Now I am not against the saints of God doing such works that
appear, as John not drinking wine, eating locusts, putting on camel
skin, Matth. 3, 4; but he is blind who cannot notice such a great
difference. For he does all these things by command, as we know that he
was a Nazarene and was called by God into the wilderness.

140 We see in this history that Abraham and Lot separate, but this
separation is not commanded by any special word from God, and yet he
allows it to happen; for he still speaks to Abraham as before, and very
kindly, so that it can be seen that he not only did not become
displeased about this change of place, but was also pleased with it. So
then does GOD take pleasure in the works that are done without his word?
Answer: No; for although the saints do not have a special word and
command for all their works at all times, they do not sin against the
word that is generally given to all; but because they do everything they
do in the faith of the Son of God, they do everything right; So Lot was
free to go to whatever place he wished, just as we are free to eat meat
or fish and drink wine or water; only that we take care of our health
and use the creatures with thanksgiving for our needs. For God has not
commanded anything against all this, but the pope has made statutes
against it, namely that one should not eat meat on Friday and Saturday.
But whoever recognizes the pope as his master has no part in Christ.

So God is pleased with the separation of two blood relatives and
confirms it by speaking so kindly to Abraham. However, this kindness
should be

We cannot boast of Abraham alone, for, as said above, we are far above
Abraham in this matter, for what happened to Abraham only a few times
happens to us daily, that God speaks to us, not of bodily gifts and
blessings, but of eternal ones.

But here one would say, \"How did God speak to Abraham? Did he speak to
him from heaven as Christ spoke to Paul at Damascus, Acts 9:4? This is
my opinion, that all this also happened through the patriarch Shem and
the oral ministry; as Paul also says in 1 Thess. 2, 13: \"When you
receive from us the word of divine preaching, you receive it, not as the
word of man, but (as it truly is) as the word of God; who also works in
you who believe\"; so also Christ Luc. 10, 16: \"Whoever hears you hears
me.\"

For this reason we are abundantly showered with this treasure of divine
grace and mercy; for we have no need of this light, that God offers
Himself to us and speaks to us everywhere through the ministry of
preaching. For this we should thank God diligently and rejoice in such
grace and good deeds from the heart; for this testifies and proves that
we are God\'s friends and that He takes care of us in life and death.
For do you think that if Cicero, Plato and other high pagans had known
how to obtain such a treasure, they would have sat still and not rather
run to the end of the world? Because of this, we are in so much greater
danger if we are ungrateful to God for such a great gift; for God\'s
wrath will not cease, and threatens us all ready through the Turks and
popes, who are all next to the devil in hatred and cruelty.

\(144\) Therefore, first of all, pay attention to these words: \"The
Lord said. For to hear the same is the highest honor and the highest
gift and benefit. Now I do not believe that God appeared to Abraham
here, as He did above, but that He spoke to him through Shem or
Melchizedek. And this is a great virtue in Abraham, that he thus showed
himself through

**[870 HH. 2W-W8. Interpretation of Genesis 13:14-1b. W. 1, 1311-1314.
871]{.underline}**

lets the word rule, and accepts for a divine report and word what he
hears from his father Sem.

145 Let it be noted that although the land into which Lot went abutted
closely against the land of Canaan, yet the Lord separates it from the
land of Canaan with this text, and does not include it in the promise he
makes to Abraham; which is because he sees that it must be destroyed and
destroyed from the foundation of the world for sin\'s sake; wherefore
Lot also dwells there only for a time as a sojourner. For it was because
of sin that it was first, as will follow, attacked and afflicted with
war; but afterward, when the people therein continued in impenitent
life, it was destroyed. But after that, as the people continued to live
in it unrepentantly, it was completely devastated and consumed with fire
from heaven.

The promise made to Abraham here speaks primarily of bodily blessings
and benefits, just as the promise in chapter 12 speaks of spiritual
blessings; therefore it is easy and does not require a long explanation,
if one only pays attention to how strange it is that Abraham, through
the promise, is lord of the whole land and yet, in truth, does not own a
foot of it. Those who learn to rely on God\'s word according to his
example will finally find that they have not believed in vain.

**II.**

**V.16. And I will make your seed like the dust of the earth. If a man
can count the dust of the earth, he will also count your seed.**

147 This piece must be noted because afterwards, when the other part of
the first spiritual promise is explained, Moses (Cap. 15, 5.) speaks
differently and calls Abraham to count the stars. Therefore, there he
compares Abraham\'s lineage to the stars and lights in the sky, but here
to the dust of the earth.

148 Now with these parables two generations of Abraham are shown: one
which is physical and here on earth; the other which is heavenly,
spiritual and eternal.

is. Therefore the promise that is written here is entirely physical,
namely of the possession of the land of Canaan and that Israel should
increase greatly according to the flesh; therefore Moses also uses the
simile of the dust of the earth. But afterwards, when he speaks of the
eternal promise of Isaac and of the heavenly Seed, the Lord Christ and
the Church, Abraham is told to count the stars.

From this, no doubt, the prophets have taken that they call God\'s
people the heaven of God, a heavenly host, and the pious teachers stars;
as Daniel Cap. 8, 10. says of King Antiochus that he will cast down the
stars from heaven to earth. Let those who study the Scriptures
diligently remember this.

This text gives us reason and reminds us that we must speak a little
more expansively, first to confirm our faith and then against the
stiff-necked Jews. For here in the text it is clearly stated that
Abraham\'s bodily or fleshly seed shall also have this land in perpetual
possession. Now the Jews have been deprived of this land until a
thousand and five hundred years ago and have not possessed it; so it
must clearly follow that either Moses is lying, or that God has rejected
and abandoned the Jews who were his people, so that they are no longer
his people. Jew, what will you answer to this? You will not dare to say
that Moses is lying, and yet there is the work and the experience that
your people have been deprived of the possession of the land of Canaan.

151 If you say that this happened for the sake of the sin of the Jewish
people, then hear further: Did not God promise this to Abraham before he
had seed and before he sinned? And if you think that this is the
punishment of sins, hear, \"Did not your ancestors sin before they were
taken captive to Babylon? For they slew the prophets, and sacrificed
their sons and daughters unto the devils, and shed the blood of the
pious as water; and though God was angry with them, and they

**[872 L. m. WL-227. interpretation of Genesis 13:16. w. 1:1314-1317.
873]{.underline}**

He did not abandon them completely, but gave them teachers and prophets,
and finally reinstated them in the land of Canaan. Even though they had
already been imprisoned in Babylon and were in misery, they remained
attached to God with their hearts and thus remained in the land of
Canaan, which they knew would be restored to them after seventy years.

Now consider your present situation and condition. You have no promise,
you have nothing certain to wait for; there is also no time determined
for you, how long you shall wander and be in misery. Where then is this
promise? Does it not follow that either God lied or that the Jews are no
longer God\'s people? Now it is impossible that God should lie; so it
follows and remains that the Jews have been cast out and are no longer
God\'s people.

153\. and no Jew will ever be so clever and cunning that he will be able
to raise something against this proof or scornfully despise that they
are cast out of their country without a certain time, and now have to
look at it from the outside into the thousand and five hundred years, in
which they have had neither prophets nor promise, which they
nevertheless had in the Babylonian prison, and knew that they would
again be set up in Jerusalem. So when Jacob is commanded to go to Egypt,
his family remains there for four hundred years, but still keeps the
promise that after four lifetimes they will return to the land of
Canaan, Genesis 15:16.

But now, under the Roman monarchy, the Jews are completely without any
promise, as the prophets also threaten them that they will finally be
completely exterminated. So this text proves conclusively that the Jews
are no longer God\'s people, but have been cast out by God, because they
have despised and denied the Lord Christ, their true Messiah.

155 For this reason Moses said, \"To your seed I will give this land,\"
and this must be understood, that is, until Christ, they should have
accepted him and heard him. For heirs of the same land

They were set until their King and Lord, Christ, came: if they had
accepted and heard him, they would have kept the promised land. But
because they kill him and thereby try to keep the land, John 11, they
perish without any hope of help and salvation.

156 Therefore it should be noted that the word *olam*, eternally, does
not mean an infinite or eternal time, but a long time without a certain
determination of how long it should last. Thus it is written in Ex 21:6,
\"Bore him through his ear with an awl, and he shall be his servant for
ever,\" that is, as long as he lives; and afterwards throughout Moses
this word \"ever\" is repeated in the sense of an uncertain, but yet
determined and finite time; as in Ex 18:23, \"They shall bear that
iniquity for an everlasting right among your descendants,\" that is,
until Christ. So the Jews cannot but confess that they are no longer
God\'s people. For if they were God\'s people, they would have the same
land; but now that they have been cast out of it, no one can believe
that they are Abraham\'s seed.

In our time, there has been found in Moravia a foolish mob of people who
call themselves the Sabbath-keepers, who pretend that one should keep
the Sabbath according to Jewish customs and ways; and perhaps in their
time they will also insist on circumcision in the same opinion. Of such
foolish and harmful spirits, praise God, our churches, where God\'s word
is sounded and preached, know nothing; but the places where impetuous
and tyrannical princes do not want to suffer the gospel are all full of
them.

Unlearned and foolish people allow themselves to be misled and taken
captive by this single word that Moses uses here, and understand it as
if the Jews should keep their ceremonies and worship for eternity, and
say that for this reason the Sabbath, circumcision and other ceremonies
should not have been done away with at all, but should have been kept.

159\. but you hold this text before them: \"To you and your seed I will
give

**[874 in, 227-sso. Interpretation of Genesis 13, 16-18. W. i,
isi7-isso. 875]{.underline}**

give this land forever,\" and at the same time seriously ask the Jews
and their apes, the Sabbath-keepers, where the land is that is granted
to them to possess? For if they have not the land, how can they have the
sacrifices and other services commanded in the law, and press so hard
for them? For all these things are commanded to the seed which had the
promise and possession of the land of Canaan; and now that the land is
lost, the law, the kingdom, the priesthood, the sabbath, circumcision,
2c.

For this reason it is a wonder beyond wonder that there are still people
who allow themselves to be persuaded and seduced into such great error
on such a loose and ridiculous basis. Therefore it has been necessary,
although it does not seem so, to indicate that this word \"eternal\"
does not mean an infinite or eternal time, but a finite time.

V. 17 **Therefore arise and go through the land, to the length and
breadth, for I will give it to you.**

161 Here we see that Abraham, who according to the promise is master of
the land of Canaan, is only a sojourner in it, and has no certain place
where he would like to rest with his people; for he is driven from one
place to another and must wander from time to time. And this is the
cause that the fathers also regarded and considered the physical and
temporal promises with a spiritual mind; as the epistle to the Hebrews
Cap. 11, 9. 10. beautifully says: \"By faith Abraham was a stranger in
the promised land, as in a foreign country, and dwelt in tents with
Isaac and Jacob, the joint-heirs of the same promise. For he waited for
a city that has a foundation, whose builder and maker is GOD.\" So
Abraham overcame his long and arduous wandering and misery with this
faith, and did not mind that Lot had come upon a certain and very good
and comfortable seat.

V. 18 **Abram raised his tents, came and dwelt in the grove of Mamre,
which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.**

Mamre is the name of a man, as can be seen in the following chapter,
where Moses (v. 13) says he was an Amorite. Some explain the word
*elone* by a forest, others by a plain. Be that as it may (for we leave
this to the grammarians), Mamre dwelt, as with us the nobility, in the
country, near the famous city of Hebron, which had a forest or grove
nearby; as cities commonly have forests nearby for the sake of pasture
and convenience of wood. At the same Mamre Abraham found lodging with
all his servants. Moses remembers with special diligence that an altar
to the Lord was built there, that is, that Abraham preached in the same
place and instructed the people in the right way of worship, as is also
said above.

And it is no small comfort that God also gathers and calls some from the
Gentiles and makes them partakers of the blessing of Abraham; for if
Mamre had not been a devout and God-fearing man and had believed with
Abraham in the right God and had heard His word from Abraham, he would
not have sheltered Abraham, nor would Abraham have gone in with him.

That God at that time also had among the Gentiles those who knew him and
served him rightly, whom he miraculously called through the holy
patriarch according to the promise he made in the 12th chapter (v. 3):
\"In you all nations shall be blessed,\" means that the blessing will
remain on you so that wherever you go, others will also enjoy it and
come to the same blessing through your preaching ministry. Just as
Christ sends out his disciples, Matt. 10:12, 13: \"Wherever you enter a
house, greet that house, and if it is worthy of that house, your peace
will come upon it.\"

So Mamre receives Abraham and all his servants as lodgers, and this
blessing comes to him because he hears Abraham\'s sermon, as he teaches
his people about God and the true service of God. Mamre accepts the same
teaching and is converted from

**[876 L. m, S30-23L Interpretation of Gen. 13, 18. cap. 14, 1. 2. w. 1,
1320-1324. 877]{.underline}**

a living root and fruitful tree from a wild and barren branch, becomes a
partaker of Abraham\'s faith and blessing, and so draws near to the holy
patriarch Abraham that he helps him with his two brothers as he goes
against the Gentiles and wars for the service of God.

Therefore, this text should be well remembered against the Jews, that
through the holy Abraham the blessing breaks out and is inherited also
by the Gentiles, who actually do not belong to the promise. For the Jews
are under the delusion that they alone are God\'s people, and that all
other nations have been rejected by God;

although the Scriptures are full of such histories that the Gentiles are
also called to the company of the promise through the holy prophets.

The holy patriarchs were especially diligent in bringing many to the
knowledge of God. Therefore, Abraham not only maintains and cares for
his household, but also sets up an altar; there he teaches about the
true religion, there he calls upon God, there he publicly practices
external worship, and there this Amorite Mamre joins him with his
brothers, and thus becomes a very large church and God\'s collection.

**The fourteenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of the war of the four kings against the king of Sodom, Gomorrah,
Adama, Zeboim and Zoar.**

**V. l. 2. And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar,
and Arioch king of Elassar, and Kedor Laomor king of Elam, and Thideal
king of the Gentiles, that they warred with Vera king of Sodom, and with
Birsa king of Gomorrah, and with Shinarab king of Adamah, and with
Shemeber king of Zeboim, and with the king of Bela, which is called
Zoar.**

Genesis is very rich and extensive in the description of the time and
place of this story, as low and as if there is nothing special to learn
from it, this text seems. However, it has been falsified in many ways by
the negligence and ignorance of those who have copied it. First of all,
it should be noted that Moses uses words in this description that were
common and known in his time, but were uncommon and unknown at the time
when these things happened, because afterward these places were given
such names.

2\. the king Amraphel, the Jews think,

is Nimrod, of whom we have said above; but whether this is correct or
not, I do not know; for we have no proofs which we can actually trust.
Therefore we want to leave the mastery here to the Holy Spirit, who has
written such things, and let us be content with the fact that this
Amraphel was a king in Babylon or Sinear.

Now one knows from the history of the holy scriptures that after the
Flood or separation of the languages the first kingdom was Babel, which
was situated in a very fertile place, and this kingdom was set up by
Nimrod, Ham\'s grandson, who took Africa. The son of Chu held Egypt. But
Nimrod, Ham\'s grandson, was not content with the land he had inherited,
but overran the holy family that dwelt in the east, and by tyranny and
violence took the land of Sinear and built Babylon, as Moses said in the
11th chapter (v. 2). Now Babylon was often destroyed, and the
sovereignty was first transferred to Assyria, and from there, after the
Assyrians were oppressed, again to Babylon; but afterwards it came to
the Persians and Medes 2c.

**[878L . m. 232-W4. interpretation of Genesis 14:1-6. W. 1. 1324-1327.
879]{.underline}**

The other king is Arish, whom St. Jerome makes a king in Pontus; but
Moses says he was a king in Elassar. Here one has to guess what Elassar
is. I consider it to be Assyria, which is situated in the middle of the
night, as Babylon is in the morning. For this causes me that both names,
Elassar and Assyria, are not very dissimilar.

005 The third king is Kedor Laomor, king of Elam, that is, in Persia,
which is a great and wide country toward the south.

The fourth is Thideal, a king of the Gentiles. Here one has to pay
attention to the way of speaking, which is used in the holy scripture,
which calls the nations, to which our sea, called the midlands, borders.
So Paul is called an apostle to the Gentiles, Rom. 11, 13, because he
was sent primarily to the peoples that lie along the Mediterranean Sea
until the sun goes down. So this king had Cilicia and the other
countries that were close to it.

007 These were then monarchs and emperors, and out of common counsel and
nobility did they war against the kings of the five cities, either
because they were provoked to war and enmity by them, as Moses shall say
soon after, that they had apostatized from Kedor Laomor (for because
their land was a very good and rich country, they could not suffer
others above them, and lifted up their courage): or because they hoped
to get a better country.

For as it was in the beginning, so it is still and will remain for ever,
namely, that lords and princes are not satisfied with their own, but
make themselves satisfied with other people\'s goods, if they are better
than theirs; as the German saying goes, \"What is good, everyone grasps
at it. If Milan were not so well situated, there would not be so much
bickering and fighting over it. Which may have been the cause of the
first war reported in Scripture.

9th Zoar, which Moses set last, was one of these five cities, but the
very smallest, whither Lot fled, and the place of the same land is yet
extant. Therefore are

the same cities have not been particularly formidable, although their
land has been very fertile and rich.

**V. 3. These all came together to the valley of Siddim, where the Salt
Sea is now.**

\(10\) I have said above that Moses used the names which were common in
his time; for at that time the salt sea was not yet; and in Scripture
the salt sea is called the Pool or Pit of Asphaltites, or the Dead Sea,
of which I said a little before (chap. 13.); that therefore in Moses\'
time the whole field was a pool of pitch, which at that time, when this
war was waged there, was the valley of Siddim, that is, of the fields,
and was a very beautiful and fertile place, which the Jordan watered
round about like a garden.

V. 4, 5, 6: **For they had been twelve years under King Kedor Laomor,
and in the thirteenth year they had fallen away from him. Therefore came
Kedor Laomor, and the kings that were with him, in the fourteenth year,
and smote the giants of Astharoth Karnaim, and the Susim of Ham, and the
Emim in the field of Kiriathaim, and the Horites out of their mountain
Seir, unto the breadth of Pharan, which meeteth the wilderness.**

This text is like a prickly bush, because we have lost the names, and
yet we have to go through it. Moses tells what the cause of the same
armor was and how it happened. The word rephaim comes from rapha, to
heal: as if to say, rephaim are the healers and fathers of their land;
for so the kings were called in those days.

12\) As the Saxons call their nobles Gutman. For those who are noble
should practice virtue and serve their own, for that is why they are
richer and more honored than the common people, who seek nothing but
their own benefit and therefore pursue their lusts. The nobility,
however, should lead a high courage and spirit, should take care of
public affairs and protect their own, should set an example for them and
demand virtue, and should not feast, as noblemen do nowadays,

**[880 L.m.W\"-ssü. Interpretation of Genesis 14:4-11. W. i, 1327-1330.
881]{.underline}**

They are the ones who dam, rob, and drain and devastate their subjects.
Therefore this is a fine title of the authorities, that they are
rephaim, that is, healers or physicians, who are to heal the ulcers and
diseases of the body, that is, to slay thieves and murderers and to
protect their own from all violence.

\(13\) But as it is now, so it was at that time. Violence makes proud
and tyrannical people; for our flesh is too weak and cannot well bear
honor and violence, therefore this lovely and fine name has fallen into
disrepute; so that afterwards, since the nobility has left its old
virtue and piety, the giants and tyrants have been called rephaim.
Therefore God raised up these four kings to punish the same rephaim, who
had forgotten their office and were no longer physicians or saviors, but
oppressors of freedom and the commonwealth.

14 He called the kingdom Astaroth Karnaim, which afterward was called Og
Bashan, on the other side Jordan, not far from the five cities. Joshua
Cap. 12:4 also reports that some of these rephaim remained, for they
were defeated but not completely destroyed. After that the Ammonites and
Moabites dwelt in the same land. I do not know what Ham means by saying
that there were Snsim, but the context shows that they were neighbors of
the rephaim in Astaroth.

. 15. emim are known and famous from Moses; after that the Edomites
lived in their land. Now it is called the stony Arabia. So it can be
seen that these four kings moved from morning to noon; and these are
also honest names, so that at the same time the authorities were
honored. For susim are called strong ones, whom we call in German theure
Helden, who despise and reject danger, and are ready at all times to lay
down their lives for their fatherland. Emim are called, which one should
hold honor worth and fear.

16 The Horites are also the Edomites, a part of stony Arabia, which the
Edomites drove out. What the desert of Pharan is, is known from Moses;
it joins the tribe of Judah from the south.

**V.7 Then they turned and came to the spring of Mishpat, which is
Kadesh, and smote all the land of the Amalekites, and the Amorites that
dwelt at Hazelon Thamar.**

17 The Born of Mishpat or Judgment is known from the 4th Book of
Genesis. Amalek dwelt between Egypt and the holy land. Hazelon Thamar
also has another name and is called Engeddi, the best place on earth,
which is first of the five cities and still a remnant of paradise.
Therefore it seems that these four kings first conquered the Edomites,
Amalekites, Ishmaelites, Midianites and the nearby lands around them,
and then attacked the five cities when they were abandoned by their
neighbors.

V. 8-11 **Then the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of
Adama, the king of Zeboim, and the king of Bela, which is called Zoar,
went out to fight in the valley of Siddim with Kedor Laomor king of
Elam, and with Tideal king of the Gentiles, and with Amraphel king of
Sinear, and with Arioch king of Elassar, four kings with five. And the
valley of Siddim had many clay pits. But the king of Sodom and Gomorrah
were put to flight there and laid low; and what remained fled to the
mountains. Then they took all the possessions of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
all the food, and departed.**

18 There are many disputes about the clay pits, as we have called them
in German. Some think that they were pits from which clay or lime was
dug; others think that they were wells, as Moses calls them. As it may
have been, however, it was a special gift useful and necessary for
building, as the histories of King Alexander report that he had such
pits dug at Babel. Moses may have remembered these pits because the
fearful warriors, who had tried to save their lives by fleeing, fell
into them and perished.

19 And if we count the time, hardly thirty years have passed since
Noah\'s death.

**[882 L. m, 238-238. interpretation of Genesis 14:8-13. w. I, ISSV-ISW.
883]{.underline}**

The six patriarchs and Sem were still alive at the time when this war
began, and yet such revolts arose under their rule and teaching. Now
this is a terrible example, that the people so soon forgot the Flood and
the confusion of tongues, and took up tyranny and made the world
restless with wars. The holy patriarchs saw this, but with the greatest
heartache, and could not prevent or advise against such misfortune.

\(20\) Therefore, the world is painted here before our eyes, which not
only forgets God\'s word, but also despises it; therefore, such
punishments pass over them justly. And this will also come upon Germany
when I have laid down my head, because even now, while I am still alive,
I have to hear and see many shameful things, which will not go away
without great punishment.

21 This is also the reason why Moses describes this war so diligently,
so that we may see how the kingdom of the devil and the kingdom of
reason are affected. God wants rule and authority, so that the wicked
are punished and the pious are protected; but Satan is so mad and
corrupts people\'s hearts that the authorities fall into tyranny, which
is followed by war and rebellion and the punishment of sin, which the
pious must also pay for, as we will now hear from Lot. But God knows how
to save the righteous in evil time, 2 Petri 2, 9.

V.12. 13. **They also took Lot, Abram\'s brother\'s son, and his goods
with them, because he dwelt in Sodom, and departed. Then one who had
escaped came and told Abram, the foreigner who lived in the grove of
Mamre, the Amorite, who was a brother of Eseol and Aner. These were in
league with Abram.**

22 From this we see why Moses describes the history of this war so
abundantly, namely, that he wants to praise and impress upon us the
great miracle that followed, namely, the glorious victory of Abraham.

23And must I confess that this text is far too rich and complete, for
that I should have all the

The most important and main part of this doctrine is to see how God puts
His own people under the cross and, although He helps and saves them, He
finally does so. But this is the most noble and the main part of this
teaching, that one sees how God puts His own under the cross and,
although He forgives with help and salvation, still finally rescues them
with honor from their troubles and lets them win the victory; but not
otherwise than that they are well afflicted beforehand and wearied with
various quarrels and struggles to the point of despair.

\(24\) Such divine order, so that he governs us, should be considered;
it is also useful and necessary. For in doing so, we learn to be patient
in adversity, to trust in God\'s goodness and to wait for His help; but
when things go well for us, we learn to humble ourselves and give glory
to God. For this he is wont to do both, to lead to hell and out again,
to inflict misfortune and to comfort, to kill and to make alive, 1 Sam.
2, 6.

\(25\) Such a game God plays with His saints from time to time, and in
this life it is not pure nor perfect joy, as it will be in the life to
come; for soon God acts as if He were angry and punishes, and soon He
acts again like a kind father who, after punishing His children, kindly
accepts and comforts them again.

26 We are to learn these things diligently, that we may be skilled in
fortune and in misfortune, as Paul says of himself Phil. 4:11 ff: \"I
have learned to be content with those with whom I am. I can be low and
can be high; I am skilled in all things and in all, both to be full and
to hunger, both to have left and to suffer lack. I can do all things
through Him who makes me mighty, Christ.\"

\(27\) Therefore this history is not written for the sake of the five
kings, but for our sakes, that we may be stedfast and of good cheer in
time of trouble, and humble and thankful out of it. And whoever can
remain on this path, which is truly the right path, is blessed. For if
misfortune befalls him, he has hope and does not become fainthearted;
but if things go well, he does not become proud, nor does he exalt
himself, but keeps his center, as that poet says. For a man\'s heart is
after

**[884 8. m, 238-240. interpretation of Genesis 14:12, 13. W. I,
1333-1336. 885]{.underline}**

the ropes very weak and can tolerate misfortune, which is nevertheless
difficult to believe, better than happiness and welfare.

\(28\) Here we should also note the word ha palith, which means saved
or, as we use to say, the remnant of a battle. For this is actually said
of the saints, whom God sinks so deeply into danger that everyone thinks
it is now over with them, and yet miraculously they are finally saved.
For thus we who confess Christ and take comfort in His death will be
preserved as a remnant when the whole world is condemned.

\(29\) The Jews have invented many lies about the man who escaped, as
they do not respect such texts that teach faith, hope and patience, and
instead follow lies. Now it is not without fruit and benefit that one
may know such lies and monkey work of foolish people; for who would not
see that all this is a punishment of great stubbornness and unbelief?

\(30\) So they lie and pretend that this man or messenger was king Og,
because he was of the family of Rephaim, when history clearly shows that
Og was slain and slain by Moses more than four hundred years after he
came out of Egypt. Such art and prudence are shown to us by the godless
Jews.

How much more useful it would have been if they had refrained from this
discussion of the person (for what is it to us who he was who brought
this message, and what his name was?), and had considered what all the
circumstances show and prove, namely, that it was a godly and holy man
who held the patriarch Abraham in high esteem, and came to him with
certain hope of the salvation that was to come through Abraham to all
nations.

32 For why does he bring such a message to Abraham? Why does he not have
enough of it, that he carries the neck away and finds himself again with
his own? First of all, the defeat of so many brothers grieves him; then
he also has these hopes.

The idea that God would redeem the captives through this Abraham as his
dear and faithful servant, and that he would ward off and control the
pagans\' arrogance and tyranny; this was his will and opinion, which one
can usefully consider: but the name does nothing special for this, you
know or do not know it.

And Abraham is here for the first time called a Hebrew, of which surname
some have disputed after the length. Augustinus (although he recants his
opinion afterwards) and Burgensis are of the opinion that the Hebrews of
Abraham are thus called; but it is wrong. For we have heard above in the
10th chapter that he is praised that he was a father of all the children
of Eber, and thus he takes over from him the name Abraham and is called
a Hebrew as one who kept the faith and confession of the Eber.

34 For when in the confusion of tongues the others all forsook the right
and pure doctrine and the right worship, and fell into divers sects,
Eber kept the right worship alone, and stood against the Babylonian
idolatry, and overcame this abominable trouble, which Nimrod had wrought
with his own; and hence it came to pass, that his whole family, that is,
all the members of the church, except Christ, are called Hebrews. So,
because Abraham also followed Eber, he is called a Hebrew, not only
because of the blood friendship, but also because of the religion he
received from Eber.

\(35\) Therefore, where you find this name \"Hebrews\" in Scripture,
understand it to mean those who follow the pure religion and the true
church. For this is why Abraham is expressly called a Hebrew, that is,
one of the righteous saints who did not fall away from the house of Shem
and the other holy fathers and forsake the true religion.

\(36\) And comes from the word eber ibri, which means one who has passed
over. For the Hebrew language makes no distinction between this side and
the other. Which name the boar may have been given by the

**[886 L. m. 240-242. interpretation of Genesis 14, 1214 . w. I,
1336-1340 . 887]{.underline}**

The Holy Spirit is given by His Father so that He should separate
Himself from the idolaters and not dwell with them.

037 Now when Abraham heareth the tidings, he suffereth not the distress
and peril of the five cities and kings: but he is concerned about his
brother Lot: therefore he goeth to counsel with Mamre and his brethren
Aner and Escol, and exhorteth them that they would help him; and saith
the text, that there was a covenant between them. Therefore, they are to
be praised not only as kind and friendly people because they sheltered
Abraham, but also as holy and God-fearing people; for if they had not
known God rightly, left idolatry, and learned how to serve him rightly,
they would never have entered into a covenant with Abraham.

38 And in the same work especially the faith shines out, that they do
not refuse Abraham\'s help, regardless of the danger, but come to him,
as they certainly believe that God will help them and give them the
victory. But how difficult it was to believe that, everyone who will see
such a glorious victory of the four kings and their power, will well be
able to believe; for what is Abraham with all his help against them?

\(39\) However, these holy Amorites, who were blessed by God through
Abraham, take comfort in the certain hope that God will help them,
because they know that God loves Abraham. For this reason, they fear no
danger and turn to him: for this reason, the Holy Spirit especially
wanted to praise their godliness by showing that they had entered into a
covenant with Abraham and had helped him.

**Second part.**

**From Abraham\'s war and victory against the four kings.**

**V. 14 When Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed
his servants, three hundred and eighteen, born in his house, and pursued
them to Dan.**

\(40\) This is a striking example of brotherly love. For Abraham had
undoubtedly heard of the five kings who had been slain and whose cities
had been plundered: therefore he had not armed himself for their sake,
for he knew that they were, as the Scripture says of them, the very
worst of knaves; therefore he did not contest God\'s righteous judgment,
but as far as they were concerned he let the punishment take its course.

41\) The brother, however, had a different meaning: he had recognized
God, called on God and served him, and the wickedness of those who lived
next to him hurt him; therefore he thought it right that he should come
to his aid and save him; therefore he prepared and armed his household.
For the Hebrew word rik actually means to draw and bare a sword; as it
is written in the 35th Psalm v. 3: \"Draw the spear, and protect me
against my persecutors,\" that is, stand in defense, arm yourself 2c.

\(42\) \"Servants born in his house\" are those whom Abraham had among
himself and in his grant and possession: for so much is the word
chanach. But this word comes from the tense word chanach, which means
\"to dedicate\" or \"to consecrate. Thus in Latin the phrase \"to
dedicate a vineyard, a house, a wife\" is used in the sense of \"to take
possession of\" or, as we say in German, \"to take into trust and
occupy.\" Thus, a house is taken in guarantee when one takes up
residence in it. Therefore, those who are educated and taught in a house
of a householder are called chanichim.

43 From this it may be seen how rich and mighty Abraham was, because he
had so many servants, brought up in his house, and all of them strong.
Among them, no doubt, were many who were married and had many children.
That I consider that Abraham\'s household, if the mothers, children, and
maids were to be counted, were at least a thousand men, all of whom he
had preserved and nourished. For where there are three hundred and
eighteen men of valor, and in the Lord\'s house they are one.

**[888 L. m, 2\^-244. interpretation of Genesis 14, 14. 15. w. 1.
1S40-1S4S. 889]{.underline}**

Born and raised at home, there must be many brothers, sisters, daughters
and mothers. That God played with this holy patriarch in a wonderful
way, that he gave him such a large bunch of servants and yet not one
foot wide.

\(44\) But consider how the people are minded in our time. Nowadays,
when a married couple travels around the country, they can hardly find
lodging for themselves alone. Therefore, these must have been men of
good character and God-fearing, who let this burdensome guest, who had
come so strongly with his servants, into their home and suffered; and no
doubt, in those days, people were more self-respecting and lived more
moderately, not concealing so horribly that which belongs to the
necessities of life, as we do now.

\(45\) Some have compared this number of the household of Abraham to the
Council of Nicaea, in which three hundred and eighteen bishops condemned
Arius with his teaching; but this is not the point here, although the
allusion is quite beautiful.

**V.15. And he divided and fell upon them by night with his servants,
and smote them, and chased them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of
the city of Damascus.**

\(46\) Now this is the marvelous miracle which the Holy Spirit willed
that all the descendants of all time should see; therefore he first
described the four monarchs or kings; item, their glorious and rich
victory in defeating and overcoming the kings Rephaim, Susim, and Emim,
and in capturing and robbing the five cities after their kings were
slain.

For who would not be astonished at this, that Abraham should have dared
so boldly, that he alone, with three hundred and eighteen householders,
who were not accustomed to war, but had learned to wait for cattle, and
were now putting on armor for the first time, should overtake these four
kings, who were already victorious, together with their warrior people,
and be allowed to attack them? Is this not an impossible and incredible
thing?

\(48\) Therefore let us now consider what manner of man Abraham was.
Earlier

he was so fearful that he denied his wife Sarah out of fear of death and
said that she was not his wife; but now he is so courageous and bold and
so strengthened by the Holy Spirit that he is allowed to chase after
four monarchs with a few and defenseless ones and overpower them. Where
will one find such courage in all the histories of the pagans?

Alexander, Hannibal, Scipio have emulated one another and each has
wanted to be more famous and above the other in confrontational deeds:
but I hold Abraham above them all. For he does not run out of blindness
or foolhardiness, but takes on his enemy in faith and thus also wins the
victory. For he has had such thoughts that neither Alexander nor Scipio
could have had. From home he brings these thoughts and hope, which the
Holy Spirit had given him, that he would win and prevail and free his
brother Lot; which is very miraculous in this history, and thus
surpasses all the triumphs and glorious victories of all the Gentiles.

50 If you then consider his other situation, you will find that he is
poor and a stranger in the land of Canaan, for he has no foot broad
enough to be his own: but so fainthearted and fearful is he that in
Egypt he denies for fear of death that Sarah is his wife. And here he is
strengthened by the Holy Spirit in such a way that he may dare to
overtake four kings, and certainly dare to defeat and overcome them; and
there is no doubt that in such faith he would have overcome the strength
of the whole race.

51 Is this not a high virtue and modesty that he, having defeated these
monarchs, goes to rest and refrains from war, when he could have taken
by force the whole land of Canaan, which was promised to him by God? But
he does not do so, but remains a stranger and sojourner and does not
subject anything by force. But he does not overtake these kings because
he desires to gain something through them, but so that he can save his
brother, who was innocently caught up in the trouble and misfortune that
affected everyone.

52\. but here we are to notice that we have been

**[890 m. 244-24\". Interpretation of Genesis 14:15. w. i, 1342-1345.
891]{.underline}**

here is not prescribed an example for us to follow, as Muenzer and the
insolent peasants did, who wanted to imitate Abraham\'s example, when
they did not have Abraham\'s spirit. For Abraham takes the sword and
arms his own, not out of presumption, but out of the command of the Holy
Spirit; otherwise he would have sinned.

\(53\) Therefore we must distinguish between miracles and examples. What
is prescribed for us as an example we should follow; but special works
and miracles we cannot follow without presumption, but do so in vain and
with danger. That therefore in all works this is the chief thing, that
thou mayest be sure that God hath commanded and ordained it. But if thou
art not sure of it, let it be done, or thou shalt come into trouble and
danger.

Therefore, a special work and inspiration of the Holy Spirit is
described here for our consolation, so that we may know how wonderfully
God acts with His saints, and learn to comfort ourselves in temptation,
but when we are without it, to hold on to us and draw in our courage. As
soon as Abraham has freed his brother, he abandons war and armor, does
not exalt himself to victory, nor does he desire, since he could very
easily have done so, to conquer a place in which he would like to dwell
with his own; but, as glorious a victor as he is, he is content with his
condition as it was at the time, and makes no change or alteration in
the misery to which, as he knew, he was called. All this is worth
noting.

\(55\) Samson also did excellent and almost unbelievable deeds; but
Abraham\'s victory is much more glorious, and we praise his excellent
faith that he does not allow himself to be disputed that his own are too
few and too weak, but that the enemies are many, but simply concludes
with himself that he will prevail and have the victory; and he does this
not out of any presumptuous desire and covetousness, but out of a
certain hope of divine help, which the Holy Spirit promises him.

56\. yet Abraham does not despise the ordinary means, takes his cause
wisely.

He advances with good counsel and attacks the sure enemies by night in
their sleep. Because the enemies are awakened by the danger, they are
also frightened by the angel of the Lord and turn to flee, because they
did not know that Abraham had so little and weak help.

57 For we have heard above that Pharaoh was also terrified: therefore
Abraham also understood this outcome in faith, namely, that God would
chase his enemies by an angel. Therefore he did not strike and scatter
his enemies with sword and armor, but by faith. For the grace of God
follows faith: where this is present, the matter is already won, and
only then do counsel and armor lead to victory and happiness.

To this he uses a real warlike advantage, that he attacks the enemies at
night and divides his warband not in one, but in many places. Therefore
the fearful enemies, frightened by this quick danger and invasion,
assume that there is an innumerable multitude and give flight. They may
be frightened by the enemy\'s power, but in truth nothing else chases
them away and overcomes them but the faith of Abraham and his own.

59 Gideon is called to be king by God, is also strengthened by
miraculous signs, and yet is afraid; but Abraham sets out against such
great and mighty enemies without such a calling, without any special
warrior people, without signs and miracles. Was this not an excellent
faith and mighty mighty courage?

\(60\) Dan is on the border of the land of Canaan; but Hobah, says
Moses, is on the left side of the city of Damascus; but what place it
was we know not. So Abraham gave up everything of his advantage and
conquered and won goods without any plundering, moreover without any
danger, in silence and safety of his enemies. .

\(61\) Therefore, let us learn how dear God loves His own and how
wonderfully He governs them, and let us take comfort in such examples
when we are challenged. God does indeed allow His own to be challenged
and tempted in many ways.

**[892 L. III. Lt6-24S. Interpretation of Genesis 14:15, 16. \". I,
ISIS-1348. 893]{.underline}**

They are sought after and often sink into despair: but at last he helps
them all the same and raises them up with glory. Abraham was not allowed
to have such a blessing, but thought he would be content if he could
redeem his brother: but now he gains much more. For thus says Moses:

**V.16. And he brought back all the goods, and Lot his brother with his
goods, and the wives, and the full.**

Thus, through a man who is dear to God. Many are served and helped for
all good. The people of the five cities were the worst of the bad, so
God visited them with war; and yet, for Abraham\'s sake, many were
saved. Therefore, as mentioned above, even the wicked were blessed
through him, just as when God is angry, a whole country often has to pay
for wickedness and bear its punishment.

63 Therefore let us not only consider Abraham a brave and bold hero, but
he was also full of faith and spirit; therefore he not only won happily,
but also used the victory in all modesty and kept himself most humble,
as will be shown hereafter. As I said before, he could have conquered
the whole land of Canaan after this victory: but he did not want to
understand his promises only from the physical blessing, but rather
wanted to be a stranger in the land of Canaan and looked to the
spiritual blessing; as Christ Jn 8:56 says: \"Abraham saw my day and was
glad\"; therefore he is praised and glorified above all other monarchs
of the whole world.

64 The text also reports that women were captured, which Abraham brought
back. For this is how it happens in wars, that the weak women are taken
captive and led away, and the godless warrior people with virgins and
women drive all their wills. And this is almost the saddest thing in
war, that marriages are broken up and women and children are taken away.
But now

GOD that such punishment should pass over sin and be seen, that we
should learn to resist our fleshly lusts and be obedient to His word and
commandments.

\(65\) But here, in the midst of His wrath, He demonstrates His
marvelous kindness for the sake of a righteous man, whom the common
punishment had also seized and taken away. For the Sodomites and their
neighbors were the most wicked people; therefore God visited them with
war and let His wrath pass over them: and yet such wicked and ungrateful
boys receive this glorious grace and benefit through Abraham for the
sake of the pious Lot, and their wives, children and goods are brought
back to them and conquered.

Thus God praises and adorns His own, that He often spares the very worst
and most ungrateful people for the sake of one or two pious ones. And
there is no doubt that the world would fall in a heap in an instant if
there were not some saints who fell to God\'s wrath and reconciled him
with their prayers. That is why the ancient poets read a fine poem,
which is undoubtedly taken from the Fathers\' sermons, namely, that a
strong man, called Atlas, carried the heavens on his back and stopped
them. For on earth there are always some saints who bear and endure
God\'s wrath, and for whose sake God spares the world. So Jerusalem
could not be won or destroyed as long as the apostles were there
teaching; but when the time of the siege drew near, they were commanded
to flee to the mountains and escape into Galilee.

67 Thus Christ says Matth. 22, 7. in the parable of the king who
prepared a supper for his son, that the same king sent out his army and
killed the murderers. And below Cap. 19, 22. the angel says to Lot: \"Go
to Zoar and save yourself there, for I can do nothing until you come
in.\" So both of these things are true, namely, that God spares the
wicked for the sake of the righteous, and when He punishes, He punishes
the wicked.

But the world will neither believe nor understand these things. For
behold the Turk, who has unbelievable luck against us, and excellent

**[894 L. III. 248-2S1. Interpretation of Genesis 14:16, 17, W.I,
IÄ48-IM. 895.]{.underline}**

has victory. Does he not exalt himself in such a way that he wants to
prove with this one piece that he is more pious and righteous than we
are? But where the holy church would not be, God would not only
overthrow the Turk, but would throw the whole earth over the heap and
destroy it.

\(69\) Therefore, just as a great multitude of people were preserved for
Abraham\'s and Lot\'s sake, who, after having suffered loss, were
brought back to their land for possessions and goods, which they could
never have provided for themselves, nor could they have been put off: so
it is still the case today that whatever happiness and blessings the
world has, it has for the sake of the pious and holy who live on earth.

70 Therefore it is right, when one sees that God\'s blessing is still in
the world, to comfort oneself with it, to strengthen oneself, and to
consider it certain that there is still a church on earth, and that the
race and seed of the saints, as small as it is, is not yet gone, for
which God is good to the whole world. For the ungodly do the contrary,
and think that they are a cause of blessing, and ascribe all things to
their wisdom and righteousness; therefore they become secure, indulge in
all kinds of pleasures, drink and eat, and are proud like the Sodomites;
wherefore they are finally punished, but the pious are preserved.

This history also serves to show how the pious are always under the
cross and are exercised and tested in all kinds of calamities, so that
they may be more and more purified, increased and improved daily. For
all things prosper for the elect, even the cross and the punishment. For
thus the flesh is killed, faith is strengthened, and the gifts of the
Holy Spirit are increased.

\(72\) Again, the wicked also become worse through punishment and the
cross; as it is rightly said in the German proverb, that after illness
people seldom become more pious. They may feel remorse and fear, but
very briefly, like Pharaoh the king in Egypt; but afterward they follow
in their former footsteps and become worse. For this is the way of the
wicked. The Sodomites should have been made wise by this punishment and
repented.

But they grow worse and do not stop sinning until they are destroyed and
annihilated.

This is a very perverse way of human nature. When the wicked are in
distress and danger, there is nothing left in them but fear and despair;
they think the whole world is too narrow, and if they could, they push
through iron mountains; but when the distress ceases and the weather is
over, they cast out all fear and become again what they were before. A
fable is told about a shipman who, in water distress and impetuosity,
vowed to St. Nicholas, whom the shipmen consider their patron saint,
that he would have a silver image made in his honor if he helped him
out; but since he was helped, he would not have had a wooden image made
for him.

So it is true, as they say, that people get worse after long and distant
journeys and long illnesses. For those who are not truly dead and
humiliated only present themselves from the outside and with gestures,
as if they were humiliated. As Terentius and Plautus portray the
servants, they are pious and wait for their masters as long as the
masters see them; but when the masters turn their arms, they do again as
is their way.

75 Therefore let us learn that God sends punishment and calamity in
order that we may be humbled, repent, and become godly; but those who
eat again what they have eaten, 2 Peter 2:22, they, like the Sodomites,
will bring upon themselves severe punishment and sorrow.

**V.17. Now when he returned from the battle of Kedor Laomor, and the
king with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet him in the field
called the king\'s valley.**

We see here that the king of Sodom was also humbled for a time. For he
is going out to meet Abraham, whom he may not have previously esteemed.
And do not think that he went out to meet him alone, but he will have
brought his royal splendor with him; and it can be seen that they were
all on their

**[896 III, WI. W2. Interpretation of I Moses 14, 17. 18. W. 1,
13S1-13SS. 897]{.underline}**

They fell on their knees before the holy patriarch and recognized such
victory as God had given him.

If Moses had written with what words and joyful shouting they had
accepted him (for they recognized and praised him for a true father of
the land, who, after he had so happily performed such deeds, was to be a
king), then one would say that the sodomites, who had been the worst of
boys, had now become the most holy people. But how long does this last?
Abraham is then about six and eighty years old; when he comes to a
hundred years, Isaac is born to him, and Sodom already lies in a heap.

\(78\) Therefore they now enjoy the grace and mercy that befell Abraham,
and are made partakers of a strange faith and love, which, as well as
the punishment, should have reminded them, and so much improved them,
that they ceased from sins, and lived godly henceforth. The beginning is
good, for they go to meet Abraham and show their gratitude to him with
special reverence, but after a few years they are assured of peace and
quiet, forget their troubles and return to their former ways. But they
do not recognize Abraham as the one through whom such a blessing would
have been bestowed upon them; but that they dwell in the paradise of God
and on the best place of the earth, they attribute to their skill. They
become sure of this, live in sins, and over such ingratitude they also
fall into other innumerable sins. For not only the saints, but also God
Himself loses all honor with them.

\(79\) Therefore, just as the pious are at their best when God punishes
and afflicts them, so the wicked, after all hardship and punishment,
become more and more angry, and urge God to let the final punishment
pass over them, and they are destroyed. This is how Greece was
devastated and destroyed by the Turks in our time, and this is how it
will be with the Germans, who will not be able to protect their princes
from this, no matter how strong, wise and understanding they want to be.

The grammarians dispute a lot about the \"king\'s valley\". Lyra follows
the Chaldeans and says that it was a flat field or place where the king
trained and accustomed his men of war and horses to war and where he
used to go for walks. But this seems to me to be credible, that a
special place was called this way; as we call the very deep valley near
Saalfeld Königsthal, item Königsberg in Franconia, because of the
excellent wine growing there, item Fürstenfeld.

81That therefore this valley was called the king\'s valley, because it
was very deep and large, to which people ran from all the surrounding
places when women, cattle or other goods were lost; and I have no doubt
that it was such a place out of the land of the king of Sodom, not far
from Jerusalem.

For when Abraham goes home from Damascus with his people to Hebron, he
leaves Sodom on his left hand and perhaps wants to go to Jerusalem to
the high priest Melchizedek, there to thank God and tell him about this
great blessing and glorious victory that God had given him. But
Melchizedek beat him to it, and when the rumor of this victory came to
him, he himself went out to meet Abraham with his own, and met him while
he was still distributing the spoils. There came together a beautiful
church and assembly from all nations. Therefore the priest and king
Melchizedek preached a magnificent sermon in which he first praised
God\'s goodness and blessing, so that he would bless Abraham, because he
wanted everyone to recognize this excellent gift and grace and thank God
for it. Then, as is commonly done in sermons, he prays and blesses
Abraham.

**Third part.**

**Of Melchizedek and his fading away at Abraham\'s victory.**

**V. 18. But Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine. And
he was a priest of GOD, the Most High.**

**\
[898 L.III,W2-M. Interpretation of Genesis 14, 18. UM.
899]{.underline}**

\(83\) It is first discussed who this Melchizedek was, because in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 7:3, it is said that he was without father
and mother, without lineage, without beginning and end, and therefore
was an example of our High Priest Christ, who is an eternal priest. It
is true that Moses, remembering him here, makes it very short and simply
says that he was a king in Salem; but he does not say where he came
from, at what time he began to reign, or who came after him to reign;
which then the epistle to the Hebrews rightly points to the eternal
priesthood of the Lord Christ.

Now the Hebrews all find this opinion, that they conclude that this
Melchizedek was Shem, Noah\'s son. And although it does not matter so
much whether they conclude rightly or not, I like to hold with this
opinion of theirs, since the account of the years and times proves that
Shem not only lived in Abraham\'s time, but also outlived Abraham and
died not long before Jacob went to Egypt.

Therefore consider what kind of a ruler Abraham had, namely one who
still remained from the first world and from the Flood. Therefore Shem
will undoubtedly have held up the same sad example to his followers.

Now it is terrible to think that the world has become so bad in such a
short time. For Shem, who saw the flood, saw not long afterward that the
wicked built a tower at Babylon, and that the languages were confused;
which was the greatest sorrow of all in the church, and nothing more
abominable could have happened in it, considering the errors and
hindrances in preaching that resulted from it; therefore the whole
Orient fell away from the right worship of God, but Abraham and Lot were
saved from idolatry by God. After that, there is an uproar and war
between the kings; Lot is taken away; Sodom and the whole surrounding
area is destroyed with fire from heaven because of sin.

But under this the scripture secretly shows how great wickedness and
abominable contempt of the word had been at that time. But again, how
great piety and virtue had been in Abraham, who broke through all these
aversions in strong faith, accepted and honored the despised Shem, as if
he alone were the servant or priest of the true God.

\(88\) And such examples comfort us when they are properly considered.
For if such things have happened to these same supreme men, that they
have found so few disciples and pious hearers, what wonder is it that in
our day there are so many wicked boys and godless people, and the church
is so small and few?

89\) So I like this common understanding that Melchizedek is Shem. For
at that time there was no higher patriarch, especially in spiritual
matters, whom the church and the people unitedly adorned and honored
with that name, and from the office he held called malchi sedek, that
is, a righteous king.

90 For he held both the office of king and priest; and though he did
nothing unjust or immodest in the temporal government, but presided well
and justly over all things, yet he received the name of righteousness
chiefly for the church office; for he taught of the remission of sins
through the future seed of the woman. Because the world either did not
know this doctrine or regarded it as useless and futile and persecuted
it, Sem alone was called a righteous king, and the people of Salem chose
such a holy and godly old man as their king.

91 Not far from there dwelt the kings of Sodom, Gomorrah, and others,
who far surpassed this Shem in riches, honor, and power, and no doubt
despised him as a poor but righteous king; but yet in his church and
among his own he remains Melchizedek, that is, a righteous king.

92\. but the others are tyrants and idolaters, the founders of troubles
and the kings of unrighteousness; therefore seize them.

**[900 m. 2SS-2Ü7. interpretation of Genesis 14:18. w. 1:13S8-IS61.
901]{.underline}**

God\'s wrath, war and bloodshed; but Shem is a king in Salem, that is, a
king of peace.

For because he planted the true doctrine of the Son of God, preserved
the church, the worship and the government, peace came upon him, not
only of the world, but also of God. This is the reason that he loses his
name and is called Melchizedek by the consent of the fathers and the
pious, and from the place where he dwells, a king of Salem; as Peter 2
Ep. 2, 5 calls the patriarch Noah a preacher of righteousness, because
he teaches how one should be justified and blessed before God.
Therefore, let us consider that Shem was the high priest at the same
time, to whom the Scriptures give a right and very beautiful praise by
attaching to him the name of righteousness.

94 And what is against this our Roman pope, who so insolently calls
himself the head of the church? For his praise and virtue is also shown
in Scripture, but much in a different way. For St. Paul 2 Thess. 2, 3.
4. says that he is a king of sins, an adversary and enemy of
righteousness.

95 Here arises another question of the bread and wine which Melchizedek
brings forth. The papists know that Melchizedek is a model and figure of
Christ; but since it is also said here that he brought forth bread and
wine, they also interpret this as a likeness, and say that it is a
figure and meaning of the mass, in which, according to the example of
Melchizedek, the figure of the bread and wine, but in truth the body and
blood of Christ are truly offered for the blessing of him who offers and
of others. Hence it came about that hymns were made of the history and
sung publicly in the churches with all glory and splendor. And defend
with all seriousness this mind of Lyra, who is a great theologian.

96 But the good man lacks and does not notice that the epistle to the
Hebrews Cap. 7, 1. ff. sees and establishes a different part of this
parable and figure. For in that which is said of bread and wine, there
is no figure nor likeness; but to the likeness is added the figure and
the likeness.

Hear this, that this king has the name of righteousness, and that he is
also a priest, and such a priest that blesseth, not according to the
order of Levi, who is here tened in the body of Abraham, and hath a
father, and a mother, and a friendship; whereas Melchizedek hath neither
father, nor mother, nor lineage.

97\) So that there is a likeness and model in such things, and
especially in that he is an eternal priest and not mortal like the
Levites, but an eternal Son of God, who lives forever, rules his church
forever, and as a priest teaches, makes atonement, prays, has nothing
temporal about him, nor does he belong to sinners; who, though he has
borne our infirmities and sins in his body, yet he dies no more. The
master of the epistle to the Hebrews sees and points to this likeness;
but what concerns bread and wine he leaves as a history and is not
concerned about it at all.

For what purpose should such a sacrifice serve, \"if we let it be a
sacrifice already? How can we compare it to Christ\'s sacrifice, which
is eternal and, having been made once, is valid and powerful forever?
For this priest went once into the sanctuary and finished with a single
sacrifice, which is sanctified. But the sacrifice of the Papists is
nothing else than the Levitical sacrifice, since it happens daily and is
therefore considered in this epistle as an imperfect sacrifice.

\(99\) Therefore we must leave it at this saying in the 110th Psalm, v.
4: \"Thou art a priest for ever. The Levites may have had their
sacrifices and priests, but only temporally, so that one always took
over the order and office after the other had left: our priest, however,
is without end and beginning, and has no one to take his place. For he
is from eternity, has also an eternal priesthood, by which we are
redeemed who live from the beginning of the world to the end.

This is called looking at the epistle to the Hebrews, and not looking at
the bread and wine that Melchizedek brings forth, or at the sacrifice
made by bread and wine, as the papists dream.

[**902 m. 2S7-WS. Interpretation of** Genesis 14:18. **w. 1, 1361-1864.
903**]{.underline}

Lyra is very angry with the Jews that they interpret the word hozi: \"He
brought forth\", as the one who had prepared a table to refresh the
weary and the captives; but the text clearly reports that a booty had
fallen to them from the enemies, from which they could have entertained
themselves sufficiently; he therefore pretends that one must understand
such from a sacrifice. But I consider it that Melchizedek thus brought
forth bread and wine, that he prepared a glorious meal, as one is wont
to do with newly arriving guests and friends, and thereby thanked God
for Abraham\'s victory.

For as far as we can understand from Moses, it was customary to come
together in happiness and joy, eating and drinking and remembering God;
the Levites had their share, but the rest was eaten up in joy before the
Lord by those who had given it.

Thus, Melchizedek preaches first and gives thanks to God; then, as a
testimony of general joy, he arranges a feast, so that he wishes Abraham
happiness for his victory and gives the whole community cause to thank
God for it. This is the most simple opinion of this text and agrees with
Scripture; for where it speaks of daily and simple food, it uses these
words: \"And he carried bread and water before him. Here, however, it
says of wine brought forward, so that it may indicate that Melchizedek
received Abraham with a glorious meal; just as we take better care of
ourselves with food and drink on holidays than when we wait for our
work.

\(104\) Now if there be any who would dispute this opinion, that
Melchizedek offered bread and wine, I will not be against him at all, if
he will leave me only that which is important here, namely, that Christ
did not offer bread and wine in his supper, but gave them to his
disciples. For the text does not say, \"He offered the bread,\" but,
\"He took the bread and gave it to his disciples\"; and no man of
understanding will ever be so insolent as to pretend seriously,

Christ would have commanded the apostles to offer bread and wine.

But the fact that the papists want to pretend and prove this from this
text publicly shows their frailty and great foolishness. As D. Faber at
Vienna dares to prove from Theocritus and Virgil that in the Sacrament
the word facere, to do, means sacrificare, to sacrifice. But it is not
worth such idle talk that it should be refuted. For what does it do to
prove the mass that Melchizedek brings forth bread and wine? And it
would be no wonder that whoever wants to prove the sacrifice of the mass
from it, would also support himself to prove purgatory, St. Peter\'s
papacy and indulgences from it. One might well take an allegory or
secret interpretation from it, that as Melchizedek brings forth bread
and wine, so Christ brings forth the bread of life and the wine of
gladness, that is, the Holy Spirit with his gifts. But such allegories
prove nothing, but it is much better that they be used in special
places. For to twist and distort the language of the Scriptures and to
depart so far from the letter is dangerous.

Therefore, my advice is to follow the simple and thorough understanding
that the nature and character of the words and the circumstances entail,
that after Melchizedek preached and thanked God for such a glorious
victory, he also prepared a glorious meal and joyful life. It is because
of this that the papists, after Melchizedek had preached and thanked God
for such a glorious victory, had also prepared a glorious feast and a
joyful life to move and cause others to thank, live and praise God for
it. Because the papists have abandoned this most simple mind and think
of how they can confirm and base their sacrifice of the Mass, which is
secret and not public, on it, they also impudently falsify the text and
sew a word into it that is not in it. For so they read: \"Melchizedek,
the king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine, for he was a priest of
God the Most High\": that their proof might have a semblance, because
Melchizedek was a priest of God, so he sacrificed by bringing forth wine
and bread.

107\. what great things can they do with it now

**[904 m. 2SS-S61. Interpretation of Genesis 14:18. w. 1, 1354-1367.
905]{.underline}**

What business is it of Christ, who never offered bread and wine, but
gave it to his disciples? What business is it of Christ, who never
offered bread and wine, but distributed them to his disciples? What
business is it of the church, which, according to the example of Christ,
does not offer bread and wine, but distributes them to the faithful?
Yes, what is that to you, priest, do you want to offer bread and wine?
And what great thing will you do with it, if you do it already? But if
you want to offer Christ\'s body and blood under it, as you dream, what
is that to Melchizedek\'s sacrifice? Will you not yet open your eyes and
learn the truth? How can you offer Christ\'s body and blood, because he
himself did it?

\(108\) And such a sacrifice of the Lord Christ is eternal in this mind;
with the same one sacrifice he hath perfected all them that are
sanctified. If then this is a perfect sacrifice, which Christ once made,
what remaineth unto thee? Or will you be able to do anything more toward
such perfection? But if you do something to it, as you think, it follows
that Christ\'s sacrifice is not perfect but imperfect, and therefore
needs your sacrifice. Such abominable abuse and blasphemy, so that the
Lord Christ\'s sacrifice is blasphemed and desecrated, is alone worthy
that we therefore separate ourselves from the priest\'s church. For why
would we also forsake Christ\'s sacrifice and accept the sacrifice of a
man who has no command in God\'s word? Christ says Luc. 22, 19: \"Do
this in remembrance of me,\" that is, take, eat and drink of this bread
and cup and make my death known. He does not say: Sacrifice bread and
wine. How then do they prove their sacrifice?

Thus it is said here of Melchizedek that he carried forth bread and
wine, or, as the Hebrew words read, that he caused bread and wine to be
carried forth as from a larder and to be obtained. Now nothing at all is
said here about the sacrifice of the New Testament; but if Melchizedek
is a figure of Christ, it does not follow as soon as that Christ should
also offer bread and wine; and it is clear from the

In the second epistle to the Hebrews and in the 110th Psalm, it is
abundantly evident why Christ is called a priest after the order of
Melchizedek, not because he offers bread and wine, but because he is an
eternal priest and distributes blessings.

Therefore, this falsification of the Scriptures teaches us how Satan has
always misused God\'s name and the Holy Scriptures for blasphemy and how
the descendants have always gradually departed from the faith of the
fathers. The 110th Psalm, as I said, commemorates the priesthood of
Melchizedek and masterfully emphasizes this in the epistle to the
Hebrews. But what does the pope do? He leaves aside what the Holy Spirit
wanted to be considered first of all, and makes much of the fact that
Melchizedek brought forth bread and wine; on this he bases his
sacrifice, which is the highest dishonor and abomination of God.

So he keeps the name of Christ and his sacraments, but because he has
lost the Holy Spirit, he misuses them only for blasphemy and uses the
name of God uselessly. He makes a human work out of the sacraments, but
to the promise of forgiveness of sins through Christ he attaches our own
worthiness and satisfaction, and thus turns all things into vain abuses.
Therefore, let us thank God that we have been delivered from such a
plague and now have the right knowledge of religion and a righteous
understanding of the Holy Scriptures.

\(112\) What is said about the bread and wine that Melchizedek brought
forth is historical; but that Melchizedek blesses Abraham and Abraham
gives him the tithe, we also know that it is the main thing that the
Holy Spirit wants to be seen as signifying the priesthood of Christ,
which is eternal and only blesses, that he may forgive sin and save from
death all who believe in him. Therefore he has the name of a righteous
king and is a king of Salem, that is, of peace.

But here one should also notice that Moses gives God a new name here;

**[906 2. m, 26I-2S3. Interpretation of Genesis 14, 18. 19. W. 1,
13S7-1SS9. 907]{.underline}**

For he says that Melchizedek was a priest leel eljon, that is, God the
Most High. And use such name also often the Psalms. But it seems that
Moses uses this name here to indicate a difference in the services that
went on at the same time in the Schwang. For the king of Sodom,
Gomorrah, the Rephaim and the Babylonians had their own gods and
services, as the world is always full of various sects; but the holy
fathers and the descendants of the Eber served the God of Elion, that
is, the Most High, who is one and eternal God above all.

Therefore the angels also sing Luc. 2, 14: \"Glory to God in the
highest\"; because Satan with his damned angels flies in the air, but
the true God has a higher seat, to which Satan cannot come. So the holy
fathers wanted to exclude and reject the variety of gods and worship by
this name, and honored only the one who is the highest. Thus Paul says
in 1 Cor. 8:5, 6: \"There are many gods,\" that is, the world has
various worship services; \"but we have only One God,\" that is, we are
all attached to Him who gave His Son for us and is gathering a church
here on earth through His Holy Spirit. So this is the opinion of this
text: Melchizedek was a priest, prophet and preacher who remained pure
in the knowledge of God, who is the right and highest God. For this
name, God the Most High, is a refutation of all other gods and worship.
For at the same time the world had other priests: but Melchizedek was
the most distinguished priest of God Most High, who at that time held a
glorious banquet out of joy because of the victory that God had given to
Abraham.

V. 19. **And blessed him, saying, Blessed art thou Abram, the most high
God, which possesseth heaven and earth.**

Here again he excludes Abraham\'s worship and faith from all the worship
of the other Gentiles of all. And is confirmed and affirmed here, that
above

In chapter 12, v. 3, Abraham is not only blessed, but others will also
be blessed through him, because through him help and blessing was given
to his enemies who were under the curse and wrath of God and were
punished with severe imprisonment because of their sin.

This is why it is necessary that Abraham be comforted and strengthened
in faith and patience. For after he had given glory to God with a public
confession among the Gentiles, God honored him again before the Gentiles
with such a glorious victory. And here comes a preacher, a holy
patriarch, who did not preach this sermon as simply as Moses tells it
here, but no doubt used all the right masterpieces to make a thing
glorious and mighty. What are (he will have said) your gods, whom you
have served until now? My God alone is the supreme God, who has given
such victory to his faithful servants, and has done this miracle that
you have seen.

For is this not a miracle of God, that this one man with so few
assistants should slay and put to flight so many and such mighty kings,
before whom everyone should have been terrified because of their former
very great victory? Therefore, throw away from you the vile idols and
false gods that have led you into the hands of your enemies and caused
you such misery, and accept this our God, who alone does miracles, Ps.
136:4.

118 And Melchizedek did not preach such a sermon in one hour; and even
if one would have thought that he preached it in one hour, it still went
forth afterwards to the surrounding nations and to many places. And so,
through this miraculous work, the true church in its greatest need has
been very sweetly and gloriously comforted and strengthened. Before,
Abraham was despised and his church was the most despised in the eyes of
the Gentiles, for that is why he had to break away so often and go to
other places; but now, through this glorious victory, everyone is
awakened, they

**[908 L.m. 263-S6S. Interpretation of I Moses 14:19. W. I. 1369-1372.
909]{.underline}**

Everyone runs to the place with a crowd, and everyone wants to see this
stranger, whom God had helped so powerfully from on high.

But this text, that Melchizedek blessed Abraham, is abundantly dealt
with in the epistle to the Hebrews, and we are to take special note of
these words, that he calls him the blessed of the most high God. For
before the world Abraham, as history shows, was rejected and lowly, and
no doubt others cursed him much: but to God Most High he was blessed, as
he was an heir of that blessing which the seed of the woman was to
bring. Such has not been a temporal, but actually an eternal blessing of
God.

But the world praises the temporal, as it is written in the 144th Psalm,
v. 12 ff. that the wicked desire: \"That our sons may grow up in their
youth like plants, and our daughters like hewn-out oriels, like palaces;
and that our chambers may be full, which can give forth one store after
another; that our sheep may bear a thousand and a hundred thousand in
our villages. That our oxen may work much; that there may be no harm, no
loss, nor complaint in our streets. Blessed are the people who prosper
in this way.\" But Melchizedek does not speak of such blessings here,
but of the eternal and spiritual ones, which belong to eternal life; of
which the now mentioned Psalm v. 15. also says: \"Blessed is the people,
whose God is the Lord.\" In this blessing Abraham rests, but the
temporal he commands God.

If he had only been concerned with the temporal blessing, he could have
conquered the land of Canaan as easily as he had been able to defeat
these four kings. But he waited patiently for such a blessing, and
comforted himself with the one who was actually God\'s blessing and had
the promise of spiritual and eternal goods, namely the forgiveness of
sins through the seed given and eternal life.

122 Therefore Abraham is set apart from all the other fathers by this
sermon of Melchizedek and becomes a special marker and lord to his house
or lineage.

The church\'s coat of arms is a sign and testimony that God\'s blessing
is to be enjoyed, that the church is nowhere else but in Abraham\'s
house and with those who hold to Abraham.

If the pope had such a promise, he would be justified in boasting of the
name of the church, for the church is set in Abraham\'s house as a high
and apparent place, so that everyone may see where God wants to have His
dwelling place and from where one should expect His blessing and eternal
life; for this is why Abraham is also called the one blessed by God.
Angels, worldly rulers, preachers and judges are also called gods,
because they hold a divine office: but GOD is called eljon, who sits on
high or is the Most High; for he is one and alone over all. Therefore,
in this sermon Melchizedek presents Abraham before the whole world, that
with him and in his house and lineage alone is the church, the kingdom
of heaven, blessedness, forgiveness of sin and divine blessing.

And this miraculous victory has given cause for this glorious preaching.
Therefore, not only have the prisoners been redeemed according to their
bodies, but also countless souls have been saved from eternal death,
after they have learned to recognize the right God from this public
miracle and such a glorious sermon. Therefore, this victory, if one
wants to think about it diligently, was not without fruit at all, but
glorious and miraculously powerful.

125\. I remember that I also read this history in my youth; but because
I was still an inexperienced theologian and had not yet had a competent
teacher, I read it as a history in Livius without any surprise, did not
see and did not think that Abraham would be presented and praised in
this way, that divine blessing, that is, forgiveness of sins and eternal
life would be found in him; because he alone has the promise of the seed
and is therefore called a blessed one of God.

126\) Further, the name of God, to emphasize it more abundantly, also
includes these words, that He says: \"The heavens and the earth are the
same.

**[910 L. m, SM-2W. Interpretation of Genesis 14:19, 20. w. i,
1372-137.\" 911]{.underline}**

Earth possesses.\" The word kanah means to possess, from which Cain
comes, that is, an acquired possession or inheritance; by this he means
the God who possesses heaven and earth as his possessions and goods. In
this way he excludes all false gods, even the angels, kings and holy
fathers 2c. For to this one God on high he attributes that he is a
father of a house, who has heaven and earth for his dwelling, and like a
father of a house rules all that is in it, as angels, devils, men,
tyrants, servants, saints and unholy ones; for all of these are under
God\'s rule and his household, and must recognize him as their father of
a house and follow his will. Such a God, says Melchizedek, Abraham has,
who alone is the true God; and whoever does not believe this, let him
see this new miracle, that he has slain four very mighty kings with
three hundred and eighteen household members who are in league with him,
then he will have to confess that in this God\'s hand are all tyrants,
yes, all angels and devils.

In this way, the prophet Daniel almost describes God, when he says to
King Belshazzar, Cap. 5, 23: \"You have not honored the God who has your
breath in his hand. The breath, says Daniel, which no one can do without
for a moment, is in God\'s hands and not ours. In the same way
Melchizedek praises the divine majesty, namely that he alone is the
highest God, who has all things in his mighty power and delivers and
hands them over, as he delivered four mighty kings into the hands of a
beggar and a stranger, Abraham. Why then, saith he, do ye deceive
yourselves in that ye worship stones and wood, the works of your hands?
Why do you not turn to the God of Abraham, who has visibly shown himself
to you that he alone has and possesses the heavens and the earth?

Thus he praises God, from whom blessings come, and at the same time
instructs his church and calls the pagans back from their idolatry to
the right knowledge of God. To this sermon, he now gives thanks, as is
customary in sermons, so that he may be able to

priestly office. For he strengthens Abraham in his faith, teaches and
instructs the other people which is the true God, diverts them from
idolatry and thus gives thanks to a gracious and merciful God for His
word and other gifts.

**V. 20 And praise be to God Most High, who has delivered your enemies
into your hand.**

\(129\) What unnecessary quarrels the grammarians make here about the
words, let us leave aside, and remain with this simple and right
understanding, that Melchizedek with these words ascribes the whole
miraculous work to God, as from whom it came, as if he wanted to say:
True, Abraham, you have accomplished great things: but God has done it
through you, and such victory is not to be ascribed to you, but to God,
who owns heaven and earth.

\(130\) Abraham gladly heard that the honor of this work had been taken
from him and attributed to God, to whom it was due and who had done all
these things through him; he was satisfied that he had been blessed by
God Most High and that his house had been made the seat of the true
church: therefore he gave thanks to God and left the honor to Him, and
was satisfied with peace on earth and the good pleasure of men. The
Scripture also points out to us that we should not exaggerate our gifts,
but take care that they are not ours, but God\'s, and so we should
praise and thank God with one accord.

So you see that this is a very short sermon, according to the words; but
whoever takes them apart and draws them out somewhat expansively and
masterfully, will find that it is a very long sermon, in which
everything that can be said about religion is touched upon. For first it
teaches which is the true God, and condemns and refutes idolatry; then
it exhorts to humility and thanksgiving, because all that we have are
God\'s gifts and bounties.

**And unto the same Abram gave tithes of all things.**

**[912 2- III, 288-270. interpretation of Genesis 14, 20-24. w. 1,
137S-137S. 913]{.underline}**

The Jews interpret this text in many ways, because the words read as if
Melchizedek had given the tenth to Abraham. But there is clear evidence
against this in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 7, 2, which not only
clearly states that Abraham tithed, but also concludes that
Melchizedek\'s priesthood was far more glorious than the Levitical
priesthood, as the blessing itself testifies. For he who is less does
not bless him who is more and greater, but he who is greater and greater
blesses him who is less.

133 But that the text further says that he gave tithes of all things, is
not to be understood as if Abraham had tithed his spoils; for soon after
the text clearly says that Abraham did not want to take a thread or a
shoelace for spoils, even since all goods were offered to him by the
king of Sodom. So this word \"of all things\" does not refer to the
booty that Abraham gave back to everyone who had it, but to Abraham\'s
own goods, of which he gave the tenth part to Melchizedek the priest,
not just now, but every year.

For Abraham also humbled himself before this victory and recognized Shem
as a priest of the Most High and gave him tithes, as did Lot and the
other fathers who lived at the same time. For they all honored the
priest Melchizedek as their eldest, who with his priesthood and
preaching office was a figure and shadow of the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, which he was to have on earth.

But the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 7, 1. ff. speaks very wisely and
masterfully of the tenth which Abraham gave, and is thereby a certain
testimony of the Holy Spirit; for no one would have seen this in it,
which the master of the same epistle has seen. First, he takes this from
the 110th Psalm v. 4, that Christ is a priest after the order of
Melchizedek, and concludes powerfully from this that he cannot be a
priest after the order of Levi, nor is he a temporal priest like Aaron,
but an eternal one: for Melchizedek was without a priest.

He is the father and mother, and has had neither the beginning of days
nor the end of life. From this it also follows that the Levitical
priesthood should completely cease and a spiritual priesthood should
come in its place: all this is masterfully conceived and nothing can be
raised against it.

136 Then he also disputes about the tenth. Abraham is the father of
Levi; so if he gives tithes to Melchizedek, no one can deny that
Melchizedek is far above Levi; for who would not confess that his
priesthood is far greater, more worthy, and more excellent than
Aaron\'s? Now Christ is a priest after the order of Melchizedek.
Therefore Aaron ducked and held himself down, and the Levitical service
and the law departed as a shadow departs from the body 2c. Thus he
concludes with a very full and rich spirit that the priesthood of the
Law must necessarily cease, since a priest after the order of
Melchizedek is promised, before whom Abraham, the father of Levi,
humbled himself and gave him tithes while Levi was still in his loins.
But to all this a diligent reader may further consider and contemplate
in the same epistle. We continue.

**Fourth Part.**

**About the generosity of the king of Sodom against Abraham, and how
Abraham behaved against it. Item, from Abraham\'s**

**Praise and virtues.**

**I.**

**V. 21-24 Then said the king of Sodom unto Abram, Give me the people,
and the goods keep thee. But Abram said unto the king of Sodom, I lift
up my hands unto the LORD God most high, which possesseth heaven and
earth, that I will not take of all that is thine, neither a thread, nor
a shoe lace, lest thou say that thou hast made Abram rich. Except that
which the young men have eaten, and the men Aner, Escol, and Mamre,
which went with me, let them take their part.**

**[914 L. m, 270-272, interpretation of Genesis 14, 21-24. W. 1,
1379-1381. 915]{.underline}**

So far we have heard that a glorious sermon was preached in the king\'s
valley, where not only the king of Sodom himself came, but also the king
of Salem, priest of God the Most High, and no doubt other cities and
regions as well; all of whom wished Abraham good fortune for such an
excellent victory and thanked God for such a great and exuberant grace
and gift. Accordingly, we see here that the king of Sodom, as one who
was informed by such a sermon of the king of Salem and converted by such
a wonderful victory of Abraham, now speaks most kindly to Abraham, whom
he had previously despised as a beggar and a stranger who had nothing of
his own in the same land, and not only wishes him luck for such a
glorious victory, but also offers him as booty all goods; and he wants
to be satisfied with this, if he alone can obtain the living people as a
gift.

Now it will not have been small goods; for these four kings had
plundered everything far and wide around them and had taken great booty:
and yet he carries such goods to Abraham with all readiness, and he
desires only the people, that is, the wives, sisters, daughters,
brothers, young men, little children 2c.; for all this is called
nephesh, people. But the word recush, which we have translated
\"goods,\" means everything that one has in stock, household goods,
possessions and goods without people, so that he gives Abraham all kinds
of livestock, clothing, gold and silver and what more goods there were,
that he may hold on to them as one who has fought for and won them, only
that he may leave him the people.

139\) As the king of Sodom is to be praised for showing such generosity
to Abraham, and for considering him a man worthy of such reward, so
Abraham himself, who through danger, labor, toil, and expense had
obtained such victory, is held up as a special example of virtue to the
whole world, and especially to the whole church, for so freely rejecting
all that is offered to him, and for rejecting all that is offered to
him.

In turn, he hands over and grants to anyone to whom it was due before,
so that he will not keep even one thread or lace of all the spoils.

**II.**

From this it can be seen that his heart was without all ambition, lust,
avarice and other vices, which are also often found in great people. For
how like are not our nobles, lords and princes, who rightly and wrongly
snatch what they can hold; if now a prince hardly takes over a village
more to his country, he soon has his title and coat of arms extended and
renewed; therefore they have not a drop of such noble blood, which was
in Abraham. For in everything they undertake, they seek their honor,
glory and benefit. Abraham, on the other hand, simply seeks the benefit
of his neighbor, does not want to become rich from this booty, nor does
he want a thread of it.

And this way of speaking is not known to us, but is very emphatic. The
word chut means a thread. It is a synecdoche, just as the word iron is
used and understood to mean a sword. Thus we read in Joshua Cap. 2, 18,
about the red rope that was tied to the window, and it does not mean a
thread, but something braided, like a rope or cord. Thus it is written
in the Song of Solomon in the 4th Cap. V. 3: \"Your lips are like a rosy
cord.\" In this way it must also be understood in this place that
Abraham\'s opinion is: Not only do I not want the cattle, oxen, asses,
let alone the people or captives: neither do I want the garments alone,
as skirts, coats, shoes 2c.; but also do not desire a string to draw a
skirt or shoe together. And such a way of speaking was undoubtedly mean
at the same time, as when we now say: I would not desire a nail pin. So
also John says of Christ Marc. 1, 7: \"I am not worthy to untie his shoe
laces,\" so that he then shows great humility. In other ministries we
see that the servants of their masters have arms, sides and feet.

**[916 8. m, 272-274. interpretation of Genesis 14, 21-24. W. 1,
1381-1384. 917]{.underline}**

touching them when they do them service and help: \"This,\" says John,
\"I do not submit to, but I am not worthy to untie his shoe laces. Such
a way of speaking is very sweet and emphatic, if one can understand what
was meant at the same time by this people.

But here one might say: Why does Abraham act so proudly and
contemptuously, that he so rudely despises and rejects what this king so
willingly and honestly offers him? Now it was truly fair to demand or
take back what the war had taken away; in addition, such a victory was
not granted to him without great danger, effort and work: why then does
he reject this, which was rightfully due to him as an overcomer and
which was offered to him as a gift by the king?

Answer: All this is a powerful proof that Abraham understood the divine
promises much differently than the Jews still understand them today. For
they are still under the delusion that the promises in the holy
scriptures belong to this miserable and poor life here on earth; but
Abraham forsakes the king\'s reverence and gifts, regardless of the fact
that he had the bodily promise of the land of Canaan in his hands, and
that by divine right he could have possessed all such goods (for he was
an overcomer); For he knows of another, greater and more lasting good
and possession, namely of the seed that is given; in this he rests and
places the other everything in God\'s will, draws nothing to himself,
since such an opportunity is offered to him, but waits until the Lord
himself delivers such and gives it into his hands.

For he sees how the people are minded. The king of Sodom, lest he should
be found ungrateful to him, offers him all his goods, without the
captives, in righteous humility: but what would have followed if Abraham
had accepted such offered gifts? No doubt the same peoples would have
said that Abraham had become rich from their goods; which would have
been nothing else than that the countless and eternal

Promises made to Abraham would have been completely obscured and
suppressed.

145 Therefore he is right to reject all that is offered and promised to
him, and not to take a thread of it, so that everyone may know and
understand that all this that happened to Abraham afterwards happened to
him solely out of God\'s blessing and not out of people\'s favor and
good deeds.

Since he is sure that God will show him favor and that he will have more
land and good things through His blessing than the king of Sodom, or
anyone else he may be, could give to him, he will reject such an offered
gift. Rather,\" he says, \"do not inflict this scorn and shame on me,
that you, the king of Sodom, have made me rich, and if you had not, I
would have nothing; but take your spoils and goods and go away. I will
reserve this for myself, that I alone will boast of my dear God and of
his promises, who owns heaven and earth; you alone are a king over those
of Sodom. Therefore I will cleave unto him that giveth, and blesseth,
and helpeth; but I will leave thee with all that thou hast, as a man
that hath need of his own 2c.

Thus we see that in this holy patriarch all virtues were abundantly
accustomed. For in supreme love, for the sake of his brother Lot, he
serves those who had never been worthy of his benevolence. When he is on
top and wins the victory, he does not think or worry about how to
increase his wealth and power, but has a heart without all ambition,
avarice and other covetousness, and clings only to the promise of
eternal life and to him who possesses heaven and earth.

**III.**

The blind Jews should look at their father Abraham, whom they praise
here, and learn from it what kind of form it has around the kingdom of
the Messiah, on which Abraham alone hangs here and lets the land Canaan
go over it with all its goods and treasures. For the Mes-

**[918 L. m, 274-27\". Interpretation of Genesis 14:21-24. W. I,
1384-1387. 919]{.underline}**

siah was not promised to him to have a kingdom in Sodom or in the land
of Canaan and to be like other worldly princes and kings, but to be God
the Most High, who could give much more than the king of Sodom, who
could have made Abraham rich, but could not have helped him against sin
and death.

Therefore we see from this how badly Abraham\'s descendants have fared
and are very unlike him. For Abraham rests in spiritual and eternal
goods, but defiantly despises temporal goods; but the Jews wait and seek
for nothing but temporal things, but they care so little for spiritual
things that they persecute the preaching of the gospel and are enemies
to it, because it is a doctrine that teaches not of riches and power,
but only of the forgiveness of sins.

150 Thus Abraham is described to us here as full of faith and hope of
eternal life; therefore he uses this temporal victory as a field or
other thing, which belongs only to the exercise of the body, but the
heart has nothing to do with it; for Abraham lets his heart cling to the
divine grace and promise of the future seed according to the teaching in
Psalm 62, v. 11: \"If riches come to you, do not cling to them with your
heart. He may have a wife, servants and maids, but he has all this as if
he did not have it and is a true monk. For he righteously despises all
the pleasures, honors, and goods of the world, and lets his whole heart
be occupied with nothing else, and hopes for nothing else, but the
promise of Christ; for this alone he desires and covets, but all else he
puts far below this excellent gift, and utterly despises it.

For this reason, those who present such histories or legends to the
people do well with their diligence and work and serve the churches more
usefully. For what are all the saints (except the prophets and apostles)
compared to this Abraham, who dealt with the world for a long time, and
at the same time ordered and ruled the household regiment and police,
and yet did all this with a strong mind, so alone in the world?

the divine and eternal good, despised and trampled underfoot? But he
does not ask about other worldly kings, nor what people may say and
judge about it, but wants to keep this glory of God the Most High, who
owns heaven and earth, completely and unadulterated.

But he considers his neighbor in this way, that since he despises and
abandons his right, he is so minded and wants others to be preserved in
their right, and does not want to be so just and perfect for his own
person that he harms others besides: therefore he wants the men Aner,
Escol and Mamre to keep their part completely and unchanged, and thus
does not want to have taken anything from them with his example. Such
fairness is also a wonderful virtue, for there are many who are so
wrongly righteous and pious that they all want to force others to their
example, which is a great injustice and not to be suffered at all.

\(153\) Now as for Abraham\'s household, we have in them fine examples
of piety and obedience. For these men had been Abraham\'s helpers and
companions in this war, and might by right have claimed their spoils,
which they had obtained with great toil and labor. But Abraham gives
them nothing more than food and drink, and yet the pious servants are
not angry about it or grumble, but want to be found equal to their
master and gladly follow his piety and ways.

From such examples one should establish established rights and all good
order; for God had given to the same world a man, abundantly and fully
endowed with all glorious virtues, against whom the high and excellent
men Aeneas, Achilles, Agamemnon 2c. of whom the pagans boast much, are
nothing. For here we see an example of faith toward God, which no one
can imitate; so also his justice and love toward men is great and
perfect.

\(155\) Now here you do not hear of fasting, of special food, of plate
shears, of special clothing, of which one hears much in the pope\'s
lies, but Abraham.

**[920L. m, 276-278. Interpretation of I Moses 14, 21-24. cap. 15, 1. w.
1, 1387-1391. 921]{.underline}**

eats and drinks with his own what time gives: but faith and love he
proves with all diligence.

And God has not lit such light of the world in vain at the same time.
For through this way of Abraham, many of them were undoubtedly brought
from the Gentiles and caused to accept the God of Abraham. But if some
have not been softened or moved by such an excellent example, it has
happened to them that they were given in a wrong way, Rom. 1:28, and God
will finally punish all ingrates,

as the following history will indicate from the sodomites.

157 Therefore we should keep such an excellent example, and diligently
model ourselves after it in all our lives. For the apostles\' and
prophets\' profession was special; so Christ and John the Baptist are
not to be compared with anyone. But all these preached for a short time,
whereas Abraham lived a long time and performed many wonderful deeds.
Therefore he is considered to be the head of all the other saints.

**The fifteenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Abraham\'s challenge and how he is comforted by God in it.**

**After these things it came to pass, that the word of the LORD came
unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and
thy very great reward.**

This is the most important chapter, which should be read with the
greatest attention and diligence. Now, however, I am so burdened and
prevented with the church\'s needs and affairs, as well as with court
matters, that I cannot diligently consider all the matters contained in
this chapter. Therefore, we will only deal with it according to the
grammar.

Now we have heard so far about the glorious victory of Abraham and the
miraculous work of God to reveal Himself to the same world, so that all
men would be enticed and caused to accept the God of Abraham, who alone
is powerful and the Most High.

3\) Then comes the story of trial and consolation, all of which Moses
introduces and connects so closely with this story of Abraham\'s victory
that it seems as if he has taken into account the order and nature of
the story.

little thought, as he is wont to do. Therefore, an inexperienced reader
often thinks that the sermons and descriptions of the prophets follow
one another badly; but those who are experienced in spiritual dealings
know that no order is more certain, better, and meaner than that after
the consolation always follows and arises new danger, misfortune, and
indignation.

4 So here, after Abraham\'s glorious victory, which undoubtedly greatly
strengthened his faith and especially comforted his heart, especially
since the serious sermon of the high priest Shem was added to it, a new
challenge follows; however, it cannot be sufficiently understood from
history what kind of challenge it was. However, it is certain and not
lacking that when God addresses Abraham with these words and commands
him not to be afraid, such words did not fall in vain and without cause,
but that Abraham, who shortly before had been cheerful and in good
spirits as an overcomer and victor, was now overtaken by further danger,
worry and terror.

5 For what would have been the need for this admonition that he should
not fear, and the promise of such a great reward, if he had not come to
the point of either almost despairing of God\'s protection or doubting
the reward?

**[922 D. m, 278-280. . Interpretation of Genesis 15:1. W. I. I3SI-1394.
923]{.underline}**

\(6\) Therefore let us follow the common rule which the 30th Psalm holds
up to us as a common example of all the saints. \"But I said,\" says
David, v. 7 ff, \"when I was well: I will never again lie down. For, O
Lord, by thy lovingkindness thou hast made my mountain strong: but when
thou hidest thy face, I was afraid. I will cry unto thee, O LORD; I will
pray unto the LORD. What profit is there in my blood, if I am dead? Will
the dust also thank thee, and proclaim thy faithfulness?\" 2c.

This is the common way that God practices the saints and deals with
them. Therefore also the 4th Psalm v. 4. says that God leads and governs
His saints miraculously. After Abraham is comforted by his miraculous
victory, he is so free and secure in such great joy of the spirit and
over God\'s gift and good deed that he says in his heart: \"I will never
lie down\"; but soon everything turns around with him that he has to say
like David: \"You have hidden your face and I am terrified.

But why, or how, does God govern such things? Why does He not give His
saints a constant and perfect joy? This I do not know, except that I see
this rule and common example in all the saints, even in the Head, the
Lord Christ Himself, who at times rejoices in spirit and thanks God with
joy in the Holy Spirit, but after that he is saddened again in his
spirit, calls upon God for protection, asks for help, and complains that
he is abandoned in the deepest distresses; as can be seen in Psalm 8, v.
6, and Psalm 22, v. 2 ff.

\(9\) Therefore we should learn well the ways and examples of the
saints, even the trial that he holds with them and over them. Abraham
had shortly before been glad of his glorious victory, for God had made
his name famous among all the nations that lay about; therefore the
danger and sin of vain honor and glory lay very near to him. For this
nature of ours can bear nothing less than its own honor and God\'s good
deeds. Therefore, God turns His face away from him a little and lets him
govern himself; then fear, toil and work follow from the beginning. Thus
says

also Paul 2 Cor. 1, 8. 9.: \"We had to forsake life, and had decided in
ourselves that we would have to die. But this was because we did not put
our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead.\" For God is
hostile to self-reliance. Now this is a sin that is in our nature, and
drives and provokes all saints, and especially the most high, to sin
against the first table.

\(10\) For as far as the other table is concerned, lust is sufficiently
killed in them, so that they are not challenged by theft, nor by
adultery, nor by death, as happens to young people whose flesh is still
strong and fresh: but other much more grievous dangers befall them,
namely, the great and high sins against the first table, such as
trusting in oneself and one\'s ability, boastfulness and conceit of
one\'s own righteousness and wisdom. With such monsters the saints have
to fight without ceasing. And Abraham, Moses, Aaron, David have to do
with it most of all, that they force and overcome presumption and
hopefulness.

11 Therefore it can be seen that Abraham, as the words sufficiently
show, was also in such a challenge. Because God sees that he is in
danger and might become presumptuous, he turns his face away from him
and thus averts his temptation. For this is the common affliction of us
all, that when God gives more glorious gifts, the old Adam puffs himself
up and becomes proud, for he sees that others do not have such gifts.
Therefore, lest this sin deceive the saints and bring them to ruin, God
gives Paul an angel of Satan to smite him with fists, lest he exaggerate
his revelation, 2 Cor. 12:7. Therefore, a fine example is given of a
bishop who, when pressed and forced into the office of preaching, fell
to his knees and called upon God to take such an office from him, or, if
he wanted to be burdened with it, he asked God to first free him from
vain ambition and hopefulness. For if Paul, the supreme apostle, is not
safe from this pestilence, even if he

**[924 D. m. 2M-28S. Interpretation of I Genesis 15:1. \". 1. 18\"-1897.
925]{.underline}**

cannot but be helped from this sin by such a means as to let the devil
afflict him: what have we to fear, who are far below Paulo, and not at
all to be compared with him?

\(12\) For by nature we cannot help but exalt and pride ourselves in the
gifts of God, and despair when they are taken from us. And it is not
necessary here that we bring up old histories that have happened before
us. Look at our times. For what else has Münzer, the Anabaptists, the
Sacramentarians, Zwingli and Oekolampad awakened and set them on their
course than atrocious presumption and ambition? If someone can write
four words of Greek and interpret a psalm, he rises up and puffs himself
up like a leaven through his science, so that he makes himself believe
that he floats in the air far above all men.

I have known this harmful plague at times and have been informed of it
from so many histories of divine Scripture. Therefore, in the beginning
of the Gospel, when God led me into this being, that I call it so, by
miraculous ways against all my will, I asked God with all earnestness to
deliver me from this evil and to protect me from such sin; So he heard
my prayer and kept me free and free from this affliction, although not
so free and free that I did not feel it; but with business, worries,
danger, toil and work he made me suffer in such a way that I could
easily forget all ambition from my heart.

\(14\) And if God does not protect us from it in this way, this enormous
and ugly sin would take us all captive. The youth, and afterward the
male age, feel its plague and temptation, for the flesh is tempted with
fornication, the heart with covetousness, anger and hatred, and such
like stimuli, by which the hearts are contested in many ways: but such
battles are on the other table, and are extinguished in time.

15\. if we let ourselves think that way.

We have now fought against such sins and overcome them, so from now on a
new and much fiercer battle is set against the first table, in which we
must fight against the arrogance, ambition and trust that we have in
ourselves because of our gifts. For this reason, Paul must feel Satan\'s
stake in his flesh, so that he may be overcome by such a plague: \"Lest
I,\" he says in 2 Cor. 12:7, \"should exalt myself to high revelation,
there is given me a stake in the flesh, that is, Satan\'s angel, which
smiteth me with fists.\" But how many are those who, looking at St.
Paul, think and believe that he must suffer such a temptation? And who
would not believe and believe that he had long ago overcome such a
temptation and had trodden it underfoot? And yet he indicates in the
epistle to the Romans that he is in a much greater danger. For he
complains in Cap. 7, 23 that he is taken captive by sin, or the law of
sin.

\(16\) How can one, seeing and experiencing this in such a great
apostle, keep himself free and free from all danger? And so Abraham was
still in the flesh; so what wonder is it that after God had given him
such a glorious and mighty victory, he exaggerated his happiness and
became proud and presumptuous? So that he would not exalt himself too
much, God sent him a strong and severe challenge, so that his courage
would be broken and he would be humbled.

\(17\) Although we cannot know what kind of trial it was, it is
nevertheless plausible that he will have suffered such things as we have
just described from the Psalm. After gaining the victory, he will have
become joyful in spirit and will have sung with a high voice: Te Deum
laudamus! (Lord God, we praise you!), he will have said: \"I will never
lie down\", Ps. 30, 7. But since God hid His face from him, sadness
came, which took over his heart and made him weary, so that he
completely forgot about such a glorious victory, and thought to himself:
\"I will never lie down\", Ps. 30, 7.

**[926 L. m, 282-284. Interpretation of Genesis 15, 1. W. I. ISS7-1400.
927]{.underline}**

as if he had been abandoned and rejected by God.

\(18\) Therefore we should diligently keep such histories in mind, that
we may be able to comfort those who are in sorrow. For affliction is
sent unto us, that we may not exaggerate the gifts which we have.
Although it is difficult to feel such anguish and sadness in the
Gentiles, we should comfort ourselves with it and keep ourselves
upright, and on the other hand, we should regard all harm and trouble as
insignificant, so that we know that the forgiveness of sins remains
unharmed, unchangeable and certain; we should look at this and prefer
this gift to all others, and on the other hand, we should despise all
other gifts, no matter how great and apparent they may be. If we do
this, our hearts will be a little satisfied, and we will be comforted.

\(19\) God gives great gifts to His own, as He gives a glorious victory
to Abraham, but He does not yet pour out His gifts, nor does He give
Himself to him. And though you have greater gifts than perhaps Abraham
or Moses, yet you do not yet have the Lord Himself; for He reserves
Himself for us, and withdraws Himself from us, as it were, that when we
are out of temptation, and all is well and secure about us, we may
nevertheless fear Him, and not say with assurance, \"I will not lie
down.\" For as soon as we sing such a song, it is immediately followed
by, \"You have hidden your face from me, and I have been afflicted.\"
Those who think they are unconquered by battle and temptation are
frightened and terrified when temptation comes upon them.

20\. Now this does not happen because God was of a different mind or
wanted to turn away His grace from us and deny us forgiveness of sins,
but His will that He should make us blessed through His Son, to whose
kingdom He has called us, remains certain, firm and unchangeable. But
this is taken away from us for a time, that we cannot feel such grace.
Those who have therefore tasted and felt such temptation in monasteries
have called it a spirit of blasphemy.

The words of grace are called the lighter and more comfortable
reference. And when I was young, I read such things in their
disputations, but I could not understand them until I began to read the
Scriptures.

21 Now it is no small comfort to know that grace is not abolished at
all, but is certain, constant and unchanging, although the feeling and
experience of it is suspended for a time, and fear and terror penetrate,
so striking and grieving the heart that man becomes impatient and makes
himself believe that he cannot bear God\'s wrath, and thus makes a devil
out of God.

\(22\) Christ felt this temptation in the garden, when nature struggled
and fought with the spirit, and the spirit was willing, but the flesh
was weak, that is, he was frightened, trembled, and was afraid and
grieved; for no one feels righteous grief unless God leaves him; just as
again no one can be grieved where God is. That sadness, then, is a sign
that God has departed from us and left us for a time; as in Song of
Solomon, Cap. 2, 9, the bride complains that her bridegroom is standing
behind the wall and looking through the bars. Where such a thing
happens, it goes as the 107th Psalm v. 27 says: \"They reeled and
staggered like a drunken man, and knew no more the way. Again, however,
when GOD, as in the Book of Wisdom Cap. 3, 7, shines into our hearts
with the radiance of His mercy, they must rejoice, even if, like
Stephen, they are carried away in suffering and death.

Therefore it is very useful to look at such examples and learn from them
that the saints, when they are strong in the Holy Spirit, are stronger
than Satan himself. But when they are again caught and oppressed by
temptation, they become so fearful and fainthearted that they are afraid
even of a rustling leaf. For by this we are reminded of our weakness,
that even though we have great gifts, we do not exalt ourselves, but in
humility

**[928 L.m, SS4-2\". Interpretation of Genesis 15, I. W. 1. 14V0-I402.
929]{.underline}**

and fear God. For those who do not do so, God turns His face away from
them, and then terror and trembling follow.

\(24\) This is what I wanted to say at the beginning of this chapter, in
which we have a clear example of what the fourth Psalm, v. 4, says:
\"Know that God leads His saints wonderfully,\" that is, He allows them
to be trained and tempted in various ways, so that they do not become
apostates or exaggerate their gifts and blow themselves up against
others who do not have them. For those who do these things offend their
neighbor so that he falls.

\(25\) Therefore, those who are appointed to be teachers in the church,
to govern others, should plead against this temptation as against their
highest and most harmful enemy.

For other sins, such as anger, impatience, and drunkenness, are so
shameful by nature that one must be ashamed of them, for those who
commit them know that they are sinning, and therefore they are ashamed
of them: but vain honor and presumption of one\'s own wisdom or piety is
such a sin, which is neither considered nor recognized as a sin, but
people still thank God for it, as in the Gospel Luc. 18, 11. the
Pharisee does, and therefore rejoice as a special gift of the Holy
Spirit. Therefore, it is such a pity and diabolical plague that can
neither be advised nor helped.

\(27\) God protects the holy Abraham from this, that after such a
glorious victory he lets him fall into such a challenge that he has to
comfort him again with a voice from heaven. Although, as I said, we
cannot know what kind of trial it was, the circumstances indicate that
it was a very severe and hard trial, and that Abraham lost heart over
it. Perhaps Abraham, as his words indicate, was anxious for an heir, for
God had promised him the land of Canaan and eternal blessings; but
because Sarah was barren and the hope of an heir was almost taken from
him, he thought, \"How is it that God, who is so gracious, does not give
you a son? Perhaps you have angered him

and he has changed his mind and spirit toward you 2c.

\(28\) Whether this may have been his challenge, I dare not say.
Therefore, I follow the common rule that when God has made his saints
happy, he soon makes them sad again, so that they do not exalt
themselves and become secure; when he has made them alive, he leads them
to hell, so that he may lead them out again. Therefore, if we do not
know exactly what Abraham\'s special challenge was, we are not mistaken
when we say this according to this common rule.

29 For these words, \"Fear not, Abraham,\" are very clear and important,
and indicate that there was great fear and trembling in the holy man,
and the real temptation of unbelief. For why else would he have added
such words: \"I am your shield and your very great reward\"? Therefore
he will have thought: Perhaps God has chosen and chosen another to whom
He will make this promise, and who knows whether He does not mean by
this victory all that He has promised you?

30 For where God removes His hand, the flesh devises a strange dialectic
and rhetoric. After that, God puts three mighty words on such swift
thrusts, in order that Abraham\'s heart may be stirred: \"Fear not, I am
thy shield, and thy very great reward,\" as if to say: Of whom wilt thou
be afraid, if I am thy shield? What do you want to be given to you, if I
am your reward? Do you not have a greater reward than the land of Canaan
or the whole face of the earth? This is a good comfort and also
indicates a great trial and fear that Abraham felt.

The fact that the text says that the Lord spoke to Abraham \"in the
face\", we have not had such a way of speaking in Moses so far. In 12.
Cap. V. 1. it is simply said that the Lord spoke to Abraham; then v. 7.
it says that the Lord appeared to Abraham; so here it is also said that
the Lord spoke to Abraham. But there is a new way, namely \"in the
vision\". Such a sub

**[930 2- m. 286-288. interpretation of Genesis 15, 1. W. l, 14W-14\".
931]{.underline}**

This difference teaches us about three kinds of prophecies or three
kinds of revelations, which is clearly mentioned in the 4th Book of
Moses, Cap. 12, v. 6-8, where God says: \"If anyone among you is a
prophet of the Lord, I will make myself known to him in a vision, or I
will speak to him in a dream. But not so my servant Moses, who is
faithful in all my house. Orally I speak with him, and he beholds the
LORD in his form, not by dark words or likeness.\"

32\. a vision or appearance is when God appears to the spirit of man,
not as in sleep, but in waking, as Abraham, when the Lord spoke such
things to him, truly was not asleep. For he is commanded to go out and
look up to heaven and count the stars. Therefore this spiritual
appearance was not a fanciful imagination, but happened with open and
awake eyes.

Now such visions are images that need interpretation and explanation. As
when the prophet Amos Cap. 7, 1. sees one standing in the vision who
makes locusts in the beginning when the grass went out; these same
locusts mean the king of Babylon, and the one who makes the locusts is
God, who lets such punishment go over the same people. Moses calls this
a vision or appearance.

34 Dreams, which are often mentioned in the Scriptures, are on a lower
level, namely, when in a sleeping person, in whom the senses are at rest
and do not exercise their function, several images occur to the mind. As
Pharaoh 1 Mos. 41, 1. and Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 2, 1. see images in their
sleep that show them how things will be in the future.

35 And Augustine writes a fine history of a doctor, who considered the
article of the resurrection of the dead and immortality of the soul to
be doubtful, that a very beautiful young man came to him in his sleep,
who spoke to him in a friendly manner and asked, whether he also knew
him? When the sleeping man answered that he did not know him, but that
he saw and heard him, the young man said, \"How can you see me when you
are asleep and your eyes are closed?

And how can you hear me, if your ears are not open, but are closed in
sleep? Therefore learn and believe that there are also other, spiritual
eyes, so that those who believe in Christ may see him when their bodily
eyes are closed by death or rather are completely deceived. Such an
image occurred to that doctor in his sleep. And the Scriptures often
testify that God has revealed future things to pious people in this way.

\(36\) But here is the question: How and by what one is to recognize
true dreams? and how one is to know, when visions occur to one, whether
they are from God or from the devil? For the pagans have also seen that
the hearts are deceived in many ways by such fantasies in dreams.
Therefore Cato says: One should not ask about dreams, nor give anything
to them. And Sirach says Cap. 34, 6. 7.: \"Do not think anything of it.
For dreams deceive many people, and are lacking to those who rely on
them.\" And because false faith and pride cause many things to trouble
the hearts of men, Satan often mocks people for this reason. Therefore,
it is not easy to recognize and distinguish such things at all times.
However, the holy scripture shows us such a similarity that the dreams,
so that God reveals something, press and cut into the heart in such a
way that not only the mind, but also the will is moved in an unusual
way. For Nebuchadnezzar\'s heart was so moved by the dream that he
threatened his wise men with death if they did not interpret his dream,
Dan. 2, 5; for his heart could not be satisfied unless the dream and its
meaning were revealed to him anew.

37\) Just as Satan can make both dreams and visions to deceive the
unwary, so the third kind of revelation is quite certain and infallible,
namely, when God speaks orally to Moses, Numbers 12:8, and gives the
Holy Spirit to lower the word into the heart and make it certain.

For Abraham hears the promise of the Blessed Seed and at the same time
receives the revelation of the Holy Spirit,

**[932 L. m. 288-290. interpretation of Genesis 15:1-3. W. 1. 1405-1408.
933]{.underline}**

He does not only understand them, as the Jews do, from the fleshly seed
and bodily blessing, but this new light of the forgiveness of sins and
reconciliation before God goes out from his heart.

Therefore, this way of revelation, by which God speaks orally and
enlightens the hearts with the brilliance of His light, is much more
certain than dreams and visions.

040 But that it is said here, that the LORD spake in a vision, we are to
understand that Abraham heard God speak in a vision, that is, he not
only heard the word, but the same word was shadowed and veiled with the
form or face of him that spake unto him, whatsoever the vision was; for
Moses doth not show it.

(v. 2, 3) **And Abram said, Lord, what wilt thou give me? I go without
children: and my steward hath a son, this Elish of Damascus. And Abram
said again, Thou hast given me no seed: and, behold, the son of my
servant shall be my heir.**

\(41\) As I said, these words indicate to some extent the temptation
with which Abraham struggled, that God had to comfort him from heaven,
that He wanted to protect him and bless him abundantly. And it is no
wonder that he stumbled a little in these thoughts and worries about an
heir, and thought that God was angry with him. But I have said above
that although Moses does not particularly express what such a temptation
was, the holy Scriptures, because they deal with and present such
examples of the saints, show several traces from which one can recognize
and judge the temptations. Therefore, we generally believe that Abraham
began to doubt God\'s protection and blessing.

The reason for his doubts and thoughts is not described clearly and in
detail. But it seems as if Moses secretly showed that Abraham\'s
steward, Eliezer, had risen above him and had completely put off, as if
the whole blessing, to which Abraham had been promised, would be lost.

The name of the man is called, \"the one who was in a barren state of
marriage\".

43 First of all, this is shown by the fact that Abraham laments with
such sadness, sighing and sorrow that he has no heir. For such words as
he utters do not come from laughter or rejoicing, but from great sorrow
and heartache: \"I am going,\" he says, \"without children, and this
Eliezer of Damascus shall be my heir.\" For what else could he hope for
at such an age, besides a barren wife? You have given me, he says, a
glorious victory, you have blessed my house, but you do not give me an
heir, but he who is my servant gets this hope, that everything you have
promised me will be inherited by him after my death and will remain with
him.

44\. over such a thought his heart will undoubtedly have been grieved
and tormented beyond measure. And this opinion is confirmed by the
answer of the Lord, who says to him (v. 4): \"He shall not be your heir,
but he who shall come from your womb. So that actually this was
Abraham\'s temptation, that he was afraid that the promise would come
from his family and seed to his servant. And such a temptation was not
small, especially because the servant overcame such hope. For the flesh
and the world are dreadfully corrupted by the lust of honor, and seek
honor with great diligence. For Cain sought the kingdom and the
priesthood and killed his brother over it, Genesis 4:8, and so did
Ishmael, Genesis 21:9, and Esau, Genesis 27:41, and Sarah was also
enraged over it and threw her mother and her son out into the sea,
Genesis 21:10. In sum, the wicked have always taken the name and title
of the church and adorned themselves with it.

\(45\) So the Papists, Anabaptists, Sacramentans, and those who have
caused all the turmoil, as coiner and others, do not want to be anything
else but the church, even leaving their blood over it, if they are
nothing less than the church. But the true saints, who are the true
church, groan and are grieved when they see that the wicked are so sure
and presumptuous of the blessing and promise of the church.

**[934 - L. m. 2d,\>-2S2. Interpretation of Genesis 15, 2. Z. W. 1.
140S-UU. 935]{.underline}**

As we see and suffer today, that the pope boasts as if he were the head
of the church, when it is certain that he has nothing else in mind but
to make the world full of idolatry.

46 David also felt this challenge when he was driven out of the land,
and Zadok said that he should bring the ark of God back into the city:
\"If I find favor,\" he said in 2 Sam. 15:25, 26, \"before the LORD, he
will bring me back and let me see it and his house. But if he says thus:
I have no desire for thee: behold, here am I, and he will do with me as
it shall please him.\" David had bright and certain promises of an
everlasting kingdom, and yet such a strong temptation seized him that he
doubted whether God would help him back into his kingdom, and left it up
to him.

\(47\) Therefore, just as the wicked take the promises to themselves out
of great security, so the saints humble themselves under the mighty hand
of God, 1 Peter 5:6, and surrender to Him in all fear and reverence.
Therefore, although Abraham was assured of future blessings by God\'s
word, he falls into doubt when he sees his barren marriage state and the
hope and proposals of his servant.

48 And so we see that this is the common course of the church and
secular rulers, that they fight with each other over the promises. The
pope with his own wants to be the church, so the Turk also wants to be
the church, and yet neither of them is. The heretics, too, who cause all
kinds of trouble, destroy the sound doctrine and are enemies of the
cross of Christ, as Paul weeping laments in Phil. 3:18, 19, for whom the
belly is their god, do not believe anything more certain than that they
are the church, and boast of it without end against the true church.

\(49\) That Abraham\'s temptation, therefore, was this, that his servant
rose up against him, and despised him. For although Abraham had a clear
promise of his seed, as the 12th chapter, v. 7, and the 13th chapter, v.
7, and v. 7, v. 7.

V. 15. 16. Nevertheless, some have been found to make a mockery and
laughter out of divine promises, as the heretics are wont to do, and
have brought Abraham to the point that he has begun to doubt them. For
thus they will have said: One must understand the promises not from the
natural seed, but from a foreign seed, which he would have in his house,
because Abraham was now old, but Sarah was barren, and God had not given
him a word or sign that he should take another wife.

\(50\) That the promises were certain, but the devil mixed his dialectic
into it and made a distinction between the natural seed and the foreign
seed that was adopted in the child\'s place. Such dialectic grieves and
saddens the holy patriarch so that he humbles himself and submits to the
will of God, but not without great sorrow and mourning in his heart. For
he believes that he has been abandoned by God and that God has changed
His will against him. Therefore, the Lord comforts him and tells him not
to be afraid: \"I will be your shield,\" he says, \"I will protect you
from evil and shower you with rich blessings, and he who is to be your
heir shall come from your body.

\(51\) All this is according to other examples in Scripture: therefore,
although we do not actually know what Abraham\'s particular temptation
was, we follow the general rule, according to which there are many
examples in Scripture. So Abraham is now in great sadness, and his
thoughts come to the conclusion that he has been abandoned by God. For
he worries that the comforting promises that had been made to him might
come upon his steward, who had perhaps proved himself manly in this
battle and had many children. Such an example shocked the holy man, so
that he thought: \"Why does God not give me children, since He gives so
many to my servant? Perhaps he will be my heir? 2c. In this way, he will
undoubtedly have brought his complaint and the thoughts of his very
sorrowful heart before God.

**[936L . m, SS2-2\". Interpretation of Genesis 15, 4. W. 1, 1414-I4IS.
937]{.underline}**

**Second part.**

**God\'s conversation with Abraham, and His promise, how Abraham
believed it, and thereby became righteous.**

**I.**

**V. 4. And, behold, the LORD said unto him, He shall not be thine heir,
but he that shall come out of thy womb shall be thine heir.**

\(52\) These words are part of Abraham\'s comfort and assurance that he
might actually know the person to whom the blessing would come. This
inheritance, says God, will come from your flesh and blood; therefore do
not understand the promise as others interpret and interpret it; it will
be your natural seed, therefore believe me and not them.

\(53\) But under this text there is also a secret comfort and useful
teaching. The wicked, as I have said, have this ambition, that they take
to themselves the promises, and for this reason they persecute and
afflict the true church. Now there is no other counsel, but to commit
our cause unto the Lord, as Moses did in the hard fight against Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Numbers 16:15: for they were not at all to be kept
from their purpose, but were so sure of it, that they would not, nor
could not, be instructed. Therefore, Moses brought such dealings before
God\'s judgment and asked that God not look upon their sacrifice.
Therefore, God\'s recognition and judgment follows, confirming and
assuring the right church.

\(54\) Thus Muenzer, the Anabaptists and others have set themselves
against us in all seriousness, attacked our reputation and honor
atrociously, and insulted us with all kinds of invective and blasphemy.

55\. But we have kept to this rule, continuing steadily with the word
and submitting and commanding ourselves and our cause to God, but we
have gladly left the glory and triumph to our adversaries. For we knew
that one should not quarrel about this; but this we knew, that GOD had
commanded us by His word, that we should not

and the same should resound loudly and purely. And while we direct our
efforts and our diligence to this, God causes our adversaries to fall
one by one, but the truth remains firm. Just as Abraham is assured by
God\'s word that he should be certain of the promise that his companions
falsified to him, so God is always with His Church when it is in
distress, strengthening and assuring it.

\(56\) But here the grammarians have a dispute about the word Meshek,
which we have rendered \"steward,\" about which I charge those who have
experience of this language; for there is nothing in it whether Eliezer
was Abraham\'s steward or tavern keeper. For we have enough of this,
that here is dealt with the most distinguished person in Abraham\'s
house, who took upon himself the promise that he would have an advantage
both in dignity and in the number of children.

\(57\) As Cain under Adam, Esau under Isaac, Reuben under Jacob, Judas
under Christ, and the apostles, took the privilege and the promises. But
the name Eliezer is as much as Lazarus and means: God\'s help. That is
why this servant easily puffed himself up and let himself think that he
had the name, because he had the most distinguished office in Abraham\'s
house and was from a famous city in Syria; he let himself think that he
was a prince or infante in Spain before the others and far higher than
Abraham himself, who had neither such a splendid name, nor such a famous
fatherland, nor such a rich blessing of marriage.

\(58\) As for the word Meshek, we know that even if we have not done
justice to the grammar, we have nevertheless better met the theological
and right understanding than the rabbis. For all these things are one
color, as the saints are pictured in the Scriptures, namely, that they
must suffer rebellion and sectarianism even among their own household:
for they must live among the wicked, who are by nature rebellious and
arrogant. Therefore, they frighten and afflict the saints who submit to
their God.

**[938 N- m. 294-2\". Interpretation of Genesis 15:4, 5. W. 1:1415-1418.
939]{.underline}**

and to him they commit their cause, who then comes at last and comforts
and strengthens the humble, \"but the hopeful he scatters in their
hearts, and overthrows them,\" Luc. 1:51. So John 1 Epistle 2:19 says,
\"They went out from us, but they were not of us.\"

For the devil leaves the saints and the church no peace, but when one
sect is either destroyed or humiliated, another is soon found; as Paul
says in the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 20, 29, 30: \"I know that after
my departure there will come among you terrible wolves who will not
spare the flock. Even from among yourselves shall arise men speaking
perverse doctrine\" 2c.

\(60\) Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Christ himself also, who had his
Judas, suffered the same; in whose place the pope came, who still today
afflicts the church and plagues and challenges it in many ways.
Therefore, let us entrust our cause to God, so that they will find their
right judge in their time; as happened to Korah, Dothan and Abiram, 4
Mos. 16, 31.

V. 5 **And he commanded him to go out, saying, Look toward heaven, and
number the stars; canst thou number them? And said unto him, So shall
thy seed be.**

\(61\) Now we see here that the temptation that struck and tormented the
holy man Abraham must not have been small, because God addressed and
comforted him with so many words, and also did a sign. For God does not
speak in vain. We might think that it was enough for him that the
promise of a natural son to be born of his womb was made so clear and
bright: but now the Lord also gives him a sign, tells him to go out and
look at the sky and count the stars, and promises him an innumerable
generation.

62\) As I have often said that such histories are excellent because the
Word of God goes forth and resounds in them, so we should read this text
because God has so much to say about it.

The words he speaks to Abraham are worthy of great respect. For he
speaks to him no differently than a friend speaks to a friend he knows
well. And so God is wont to do, it is also his way, that when he has
grieved his own enough, he then turns to the most friendly and pours
himself out to them completely.

63 And that he calls Abraham to count the stars is a sign that such a
vision occurred to Abraham at night, when he may have lain in sighing
and weeping. For this is actually the nature of such high temptations,
that they creep up and assail the hearts when they are alone. That is
why the Scriptures often speak of nocturnal and solitary prayer, which
is the master of temptation.

64 When Abraham was seized and assailed by such sad thoughts, he could
not sleep, so he got up and prayed; but as he prayed and struggled with
himself, God appeared to him and spoke kindly to him, so that he was
raptured while awake in the same vision.

65\) Just as Peter, when he was led out of prison at night, does not
feel that this is really happening to him. 12, 9. ff. is led out of
prison at night, he does not feel at first that this is really happening
to him, but it seems to him that he sees a face or is in a dream; but
soon after, when he comes to himself, he sees that it is really
happening. So Abraham also sees this face here, and yet he feels that
the thing is really happening and that he is not being deceived by a
dream. For the nature of such visions is that they lead people out of
themselves, as Lucas says of Petro, when he came to himself; for before
he had thought that he saw a vision in his sleep; he did not feel that
this was a real event, that he was led out of the bonds and prison by an
angel.

66Therefore this vision came to pass in the night, and yet was not a
dream, but a true thing: for Abraham heard the voice of the LORD, and
went out of his chamber into the open heaven, and looked upon the stars
as they shone and glowed; and thereupon he went to the stars, and saw
them.

[**940 L. HI, 296-298. interpretation** of Genesis 15:5, 6. **W. I,
1418-1420. 941**]{.underline}

Ultimately, the promise of His innumerable seed and generation belongs.

\(67\) Now I have spoken above of the difference between this promise
and the former, wherein it is promised him that his seed shall be as the
sand of the sea. For Moses herewith intimates that this promise applies
to the spiritual and heavenly seed, since he speaks above only of the
physical seed; therefore also here it is added:

**II.**

**V. 6 Abram believed the Lord, and He counted this to him for
righteousness.**

\(68\) This text has never been more abundantly, clearly, and powerfully
expounded by any man than by St. Paul in the epistle to the Romans, from
the third to the twelfth chapter. But he treats it in such a way that he
shows that this promise of the seed or generation must not be understood
only from the temporal or physical seed, but from the spiritual and
eternal inheritance. For Moses does not take a likeness of earthly or
temporal things, but of heavenly. Therefore the promise is also
heavenly, and not of children of the flesh, but of the spirit or, as
Paul calls them Rom. 9, 8, \"children of the promise\". This can be
clearly understood from Paul.

69\) The fact that Moses adds, \"Abraham believed God,\" is the first
text in Scripture that we have had so far about faith. For the other
texts, which Moses narrated above, demand faith alone, but do not praise
or extol it, such as the one about the seed of the woman; item the
command to Noah that he should prepare the box, and the threat of the
flood; the command to Abraham that he should go out of his land 2c. Such
promises and threats are all God\'s word, requiring faith, but not
praising Him, as this text here does; therefore it is also one of the
most distinguished texts of all Scripture.

\(70\) And Paul not only interpreted it most diligently, but also
commands it with great diligence to the church, that he finally says
Rom. 4, 23, Cap. 15, 4,

Let these things be written not only for the sake of Abraham, who died
afterwards, but for our sake, that we may be taught and taught by them.
That is to say, to act apostolically on the Scriptures and to conclude
from them such a doctrine that all the gates of hell must be astonished
at and hostile to, namely, that all who believe the word of God are
righteous.

So that I do not obscure the best teacher and interpreter of Scripture
with my interpretations and disputes, I will briefly state my opinion.
Read Paul and read him most attentively, and you will find that from
this text he establishes and builds up the most noble article of our
faith, which the world and the devil cannot stand, namely, that faith
alone makes one righteous and saved, Rom. 3:28. But faith is nothing
else than to agree with the promises of God and to conclude that they
are true. And for this reason the master of the epistle to the Hebrews,
Cap. 11, 1. ff., very masterfully includes everything that the saints
have done under faith and says that they have done everything by faith;
for \"without faith it is impossible to please God\", Hebr. 11, 6. and
when God promises something, He wants us to believe it, that is, to
believe that it is true and certain, and not to doubt that it will come
to pass as the promise says.

\(72\) Therefore, if anyone would ask, \"Was Abraham righteous before
this time?\" I would answer, \"Yes, he was righteous, because he
believed in God. But the Holy Spirit has clearly testified to this here,
that because the promise is of a spiritual seed, you certainly conclude
that all those who accept this seed or believe in Christ are righteous.

\(73\) Abraham, when he left his fatherland by God\'s command and
ventured into misery, had a good faith, but we are not all commanded to
do so. Therefore this is not said: \"Abram believed the Lord, and he
counted it to him for righteousness.

**[942 \"W. 2SS-3M. Interpretation of Genesis 15:6, W. 1:14SV-I4W.
943]{.underline}**

the heavenly seed, so that this doctrine may be made certain in the
church at all times, namely, that all who believe this promise with
Abraham are truly righteous. For the Holy Spirit wanted to put this
saying clearly and distinctly into this text, as it actually belongs to
it, that righteousness is nothing else than believing God\'s promises.

74 But here arises a great dispute about the law and faith, namely,
whether the law makes righteous and whether faith abolishes the law? 2c.
Here St. Paul very wisely emphasizes the circumstances of the time,
namely, that Moses says in this chapter about righteousness, so that
Abraham was justified before the law and before all the works of the
law, and before Moses, the lawgiver, was born; therefore righteousness
is not only not from the law, but is before the law, and that the law or
the work of the law does nothing to it.

How, then, is the law useless and incapable of justice? Yes, trust. And
does faith alone, without works, make one blessed? Yes, trust. Or, if
you do not want to believe it, deny Moses, who says that Abraham was
righteous before the law and before the works of the law, not because he
sacrificed his son, who was not yet born, nor because he did this or
that work, but because he believed God, who promised him.

\(76\) There is no mention here of any preparation for grace, of any
faith that receives its essence and value through love, nor of any
previous skill; but it is said that Abraham was then in the midst of
sins, doubts, fears, and the greatest sorrow and unrest of his heart.
How then did he attain righteousness? Answer: Only in this way, that God
speaks and Abraham believes his speech. But the Holy Spirit, who is to
be believed as a certain and credible witness, comes to this, and
therefore says that this same faith or this faith is righteousness, or
is imputed by God and considered by Him to be righteousness.

77 But because the words which the Lord has spoken

to Abraham, point primarily to the spiritual seed, namely to Christ, St.
Paul unravels the same mystery, reveals it, and says clearly and freely
that righteousness comes through faith in Christ. Therefore, let us be
content with this understanding and rest in this opinion, and let
neither the devil\'s nor the pope\'s wrath and anger tear us away from
it.

78 For the fact that the devil is a believer in this doctrine is shown
by the fact that he does not today alone, through the larvae of the
pope, challenge it so horribly and insolently blasphemes and condemns
it; but here also the rabbis show their foolishness and enmity which
they have against Christ. For this is how they read this text: Abraham
believed in God and thought of Him in righteousness; that is, he
believed in God and thought that He would be righteous and give him a
seed because He would be righteous; that is, he looked to the merit and
holiness of the holy father Abraham. The rabbis and enemies of Christ
are worthy of such thoughts. For in this way the whole text and opinion
is reversed, the promise and grace excluded and human righteousness
affirmed; while Paul argues vehemently against such reasoning from this
very text, as being false and ungodly.

79\) Regarding the word chaechab, which we have translated \"to
reckon,\" I do not question whether it means to reckon or to remember,
for it comes to the same thing. For if the Divine Majesty thinks of me
that I am righteous, that my sins are forgiven, that I am free from
eternal death, and I accept and grasp such thoughts of God from myself
with thanksgiving in faith, then I am truly righteous not from my works,
but from faith, so that I grasp and grasp God\'s thoughts.

80\. for God\'s thoughts are truth, which no one deceives nor lacks;
therefore, if I grasp them with my conscience and steady thoughts, not
with an uncertain and doubting delusion, then I am righteous. For faith
is a steadfast and certain thought or trust full of God,

**[944 L m.Interpretation of Genesis 15:6. i. U2s-i \"a.
945]{.underline}**

that he is gracious through Christ, and that he has thoughts of us for
Christ\'s sake, how we may have peace, not how he may be angry with us
and punish us. For these two, God\'s thoughts or promise, and faith, so
that I may take hold of God\'s promise, belong together.

For this reason, St. Paul renders the word chashab by the word \"keep,\"
so that it also stands for thinking, as with the word \"to reckon\" or
\"to measure\"; for if you believe God, who promises you, God considers
or reckons you righteous.

\(82\) And neither the law, nor circumcision, nor sacrifices are thought
of here, that God would consider them righteousness, but only His
reckoning does this, and only the thought of us, how He would be
gracious to us. For righteousness is given to Abraham, not because he
does works, but because he believes; it is also given to faith, not as
our work, but for the sake of the thought of God, which faith grasps.

Therefore it is very fine that Paul insists on the word \"impute\". \"To
him,\" he says in Romans 4:4, 5, \"who works, the reward is not by
grace, but by duty. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him
that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.\"
And shortly before in chapter 3, v. 20, he says that by the work of the
law no one can be righteous. Now we know what works of the law are,
namely the highest and most beautiful virtues. Should they do nothing
for righteousness? Nothing at all, says Paul, but only the mercy of God
applies, and all our works are rejected.

For though God demands our works and virtues, and will not have us
indulge the lusts of the flesh, but earnestly commands that we not only
compel and restrain them, but utterly kill them, yet they can profit us
nothing in judgment, nor help us; for they are stained and defiled with
sinful lust. Therefore, if God does not turn his eyes away from our sins

If the Lord, in the name of the Lord, has judged us of our righteousness
and virtues, and has counted us righteous because of the faith that
holds on to his Son, it is done for us. For we are saved and made
blessed by grace and mercy alone, or by the same reckoning. This is the
foundation of our doctrine, that we are justified before God only by the
mercy of God, who accepts us as just.

And St. Paul drew his disputations from this text as from a well, so
that in the epistles to the Romans and Galatians he gives and ascribes
righteousness to faith and not to works or the law. But behold how
careless, blind and heedless the teachers before us have been; for Lyra
also falsified this text with his interpretation.

86 For he says that faith, which receives its essence through love, is
that which justifies the heart. Therefore, he considers this to be a
mere and ineffective faith, which is not prepared with love, and rejects
it. But what else is this said, but that God does not regard faith and
looks only to love and works? But how does this agree with Moses and St.
Paul? For if faith receives its essence and value only through love,
then it follows that works are primarily what God looks at; but if it is
works, then it is we ourselves. So that love or works must be the living
colors, but faith would be a mute number, an ineffective, void and
unlovable thing.

\(87\) And nowhere do such clumsy thoughts come but from great and
profound blindness and ignorance of the Scriptures, by which the law and
the promise, faith and works, are thrown into one another and mixed
together, when they ought to be very widely distinguished and separated
from one another. For the promise is the main and most important thing
in this doctrine, to which faith is added, or, to put it more clearly,
which faith grasps. Such grasping, however, when it is without doubt and
certain, is called faith, and makes righteous, not as a work that is
ours, but as God\'s work; for the promise

**[946 L. m. 302-304. interpretation of Genesis 15:6. L. 1, 1426-142S.
947]{.underline}**

is a gift, gift or thought of God, by which God offers us something; and
is not our work in doing and giving anything to God, but taken from Him
by His grace and mercy alone.

\(88\) Whoever believes God who promises and believes him to be true and
such a God who will keep what he has promised is righteous or is counted
righteous and counted as righteous.

89\. Then there is also the law, for God not only makes promises, but
also commands. Now part of the law is that you set your will to it, and
obey God who commands you.

90\. Would not someone say that it is a very wrong thing to conclude
that the promise and the law are one thing? But if they are distinct
from each other, and if faith alone takes hold of the promise, and works
serve the law, how is it not a great nonsense to pretend that faith is
in itself a mere and imperfect thing, and to say that faith does not
make one righteous in any other way than that it receives its essence
and value through love? Why does one not leave both faith and works,
each in its place, by its dignities, as far as it extends?

91\. Faith, indeed, is nothing else, nor is it able to do anything more,
than to fall in with the promise, or to believe in it; but if such
falling in with, or believing, is considered righteousness, why do you,
foolish sophist, pretend that love, hope, and other virtues are
considered righteousness by God?

\(92\) I know well that these are excellent gifts of God and commanded
by God, and are also awakened and preserved in our hearts by the Holy
Spirit; I also know that faith is not without such gifts. But here is
our question: what is the peculiar nature of each (of faith and works)?
You hold in your hand different kinds of seeds. But I do not ask with
which other kinds the seed and the seed are connected, but which is the
particular kind and power of each.

93\. Now say here clearly and plainly,

what faith does and works in itself alone, and not with what virtues or
works it is surrounded and adorned. Now faith takes hold of the promise
for itself alone, believes God\'s promise and, since God offers and
gives it something, it reaches out for it and accepts it. Such is the
work of faith alone. But love, hope, patience, and other works deal with
other things and have their own special place, measure, and goal in
which they keep themselves, for they do not take hold of the promise but
do the commands; they hear God as he is called and commands, but do not
hear what he promises, which faith does.

So here we have a clear and certain testimony of Scripture that
righteousness is imputed to faith, that is, that Abraham, because he
believed God, was esteemed and counted righteous by God: Scripture does
not say this about works. So that one should judge such things from the
Scriptures as from the right reason, and not from the foolish and clumsy
thoughts of the sophists, who thus think: Behold, it is not enough that
you believe, you must also do good works. As if we were teaching that
God alone makes promises and does not also interpret the law and command
us what we should and should not do.

95\. But when God makes promises, he himself deals with us and gives and
offers us something; but when he says and commands through the law, he
demands something of us and wants us to do something. Therefore, this
distinction should be kept, that faith, which acts with God and His
promise, and grasps and accepts it, alone makes one righteous and
blessed; but love, which acts with God and His command and commandment,
is obedient to God and carries out His command.

As the promise and the law must be distinguished, so faith and love, and
the end of faith and the end of love, must be distinguished from one
another. And this harmful gloss on faith, which only receives its
essence through love, should not be allowed at all, but should be
rejected and discarded, as it gives and attributes everything to love,
but takes everything away from faith.

**[948 L m, Mt-R\". Interpretation of Genesis 15:6. W. I. I42S-1431.
949]{.underline}**

\(97\) And only respect and look to the holy Scriptures, which
sufficiently testify and prove that no one can do enough for the law.
For the law requires you to love God with all your heart, and your
neighbor as yourself. But tell me, who does this? For even the love of
the saints is imperfect, and is often disturbed and hindered by fear,
unbelief, and unhappiness. Where then is the faith that sustains the
being through love? For if God will not consider you righteous rather
than having loved Him with all your heart and kept the law, you will
never be righteous.

Therefore learn that you do not ascribe and attribute righteousness to
your love, not to your works or merits; for these are always defiled,
imperfect and stained, for which reason they require that one confess
his unworthiness and humble himself and ask for mercy, but only to the
grace and mercy of God, only to the promise of Christ, which faith
accepts and so protects and defends itself from God\'s judgment against
its conscience. Such is the right, pure and true doctrine. But again,
that sophistical doctrine of faith, which has already received its
essence through love, and of faith, which has not yet so received it, is
of the devil, which obliterates the doctrine of faith and confuses us in
Turkish and Jewish errors; therefore we should flee and reject it as the
devil and hell itself.

We know well that faith is never alone, but brings with it love and
other manifold gifts. For whoever believes in God and is certain that He
will grant us good things, since He has given us His Son and with His
Son the hope of eternal life, how would he not love God with all his
heart? how would he not fear and honor Him? how would he not make an
effort to show a grateful heart for such great gifts and benefits? how
would he not prove to God patience and obedience in adversity? 2c.

\(100\) Thus faith carries with it a multitude of very glorious and
beautiful virtues and is never alone; therefore one should

But do not mix one thing with another, and appropriate what is of faith
alone to other virtues or works. Faith is like a mother, from which
springs and is born the growth of such beautiful virtues: therefore, if
faith is not there first, you will seek these virtues in vain. For where
faith has not taken hold of the promises of Christ, neither love nor any
other virtue will be found there, although the glib and hypocritical
boast much of it and pretend for a time to imaginary piety.

\(101\) Therefore, the promise is to be distinguished from the law. The
promise requires faith, but the law requires works; the promise is
certain and firm, and will surely come to pass, for God does it; but the
law does not come to pass, for we who do it are men, that is, poor,
frail, and wretched sinners.

\(102\) That therefore our righteousness consists not in law and works,
because we cannot fully satisfy the law, but in the promise, which is
sure, certain, and immutable: therefore, when faith takes hold of it, it
certainly comes to pass, and is fulfilled; and therefore it certainly
and truly follows that faith alone takes hold of the promise, and alone
makes righteous.

\(103\) But the law and works do not make one righteous; and yet the law
should be taught, and works taught and done, that we may know and
understand our misery and infirmity, and the more eagerly receive grace.

This theology, as the blasphemers, the papists, cry out against us, has
not grown up with us, or been born of us, invented or contrived, but is
taught by St. Paul, who refers to the testimony of Moses, who says that
Abraham believed God, and that this was counted to him for
righteousness, that is, Abraham was counted righteous because God had
mercy on him, since he believed the promise. Now every promise includes
Christ in itself; for if it were without this mediator, God would do
nothing with us. So that there is no other difference between Abraham\'s
faith and ours.

**[950 D- m. 30K-.W8. Interpretation of Genesis 15:6, 7. \". i, lE-uss.
951]{.underline}**

For Abraham believed in Christ, who was yet to come; but we believe in
Christ, who is now already come and revealed, and are all justified by
the same faith.

**Third part.**

**But as Abraham demands a sign of the promise of the land of Canaan,
which God also gives him.**

V. 7 **And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thee out of
Chaldiia from Ur, to give thee this land to possess.**

The Latin Church has a few who have written about Moses; Lyra is the
most distinguished, and later came from the other, as Hugo. And Lyra
points out a rule about this text, which is very necessary for the
understanding of the holy scriptures, namely, that many sayings in the
scriptures are to be understood in two ways: once according to the
letter of earthly and corporeal goods; at the other time of spiritual
and eternal; and among these he also places this text.

\(106\) And in the theological schools this is a very well-known rule,
that the Scriptures are to be understood in four ways: first, according
to history or the letter; secondly, according to example and the
doctrine of good morals; thirdly, according to the heavenly
understanding; fourthly, according to allegory or secret interpretation.
And though I am content that every man should be right in his own mind
and understanding, yet let our diligence be chiefly directed to this, if
we would rightly act the holy Scriptures, that we may have a simple,
righteous, and certain historical understanding.

For I consider the interpretation of Scripture in more ways and
understandings not only dangerous and useless for teaching, but it also
diminishes and weakens the name and reputation of Scripture, which
should remain on one certain understanding and opinion for and for.

108 Although I do not want to be against Lyra\'s opinion here, I do not
want to follow him after he has written this text.

as if it were a promise from the land of Canaan, but not primarily; for
it speaks primarily of a spiritual promise and eternal life. He also
says that this saying in the 89th Psalm, v. 27, 28: \"He shall be my
son, and I will be his father\" (2 Sam. 7, 14.), is to some extent,
though not primarily, to be understood of Solomon, David\'s son, but
primarily it is to be understood of Christ.

With this, Lyra thinks, he wants to help those who study the holy
scriptures, so that they can help themselves out of dark sayings. But I
hold the contradiction, and thus conclude and say that following this
rule in the church is not without danger and useless. For in the
Scriptures one should everywhere strive and see that one may have a
certain and simple understanding of history; if anyone changes this or
departs from it, let him know that he has departed from the Scriptures
and is following an uncertain and doubtful understanding.

**I.**

110 As far as this text is concerned, it is certain that Moses speaks of
the physical and spiritual possession at the same time, but not, as Lyra
thinks, with the same words, but with different words, so that he points
to the spiritual possession with different words and to the physical
possession also with different words. As he also does in the 12th
chapter v. 2. 3. There God speaks of the possession of the land of
Canaan, but finally he adds this little piece: \"In your seed all
generations on earth shall be blessed\", which are real and clear words
of a spiritual promise of Christ. And it would be a gross and harmful
error if Lyra, according to his canon or rule, wanted to draw such words
to another understanding and turn them around, in the second meaning
also interpreting the bodily blessing over the bodily Israel.

111 Therefore, this is the primary, unique and special understanding
that the Lord speaks of the bodily promise of the land of Canaan, and a
twofold understanding of history or of the letter cannot be allowed or
admitted.

**[952 L. m, 308-310. interpretation of Genesis 15:7, 8. w. 1,
1430-14.\" 953]{.underline}**

\(112\) But if anyone were to ponder on an allegory and make hell, sin
and death out of Ur in Chaldea, and eternal life out of the land of
Canaan, he would, as no one should doubt, be following a strange mind,
which would not be in these words at all. Although the allegory is not
so ineffectual and inconvenient for teaching, such an understanding and
interpretation is still weak and nothing can be proven with it; for if
this were true, one could think up many such interpretations in sayings
of the Scriptures, as one can form and press many different shapes into
a wax.

\(113\) But let us make this our concern, that we may have a certain and
true understanding of the Scriptures, which cannot be other than of the
letter, text, or history. As Moses spoke before of the spiritual promise
and true righteousness, so now he speaks of the promise of the land of
Canaan; and there is no need of allegory here to say that Ur signifies
sin, but the promised land signifies immortality; for this Moses said
before of Abraham, that it was counted to him for righteousness that he
believed God, that is, that through faith sin was forgiven him and
eternal life was given him.

\(114\) That therefore the letter itself, if it be rightly used,
bringeth and signifieth that Abraham is an heir through Christ of
righteousness and eternal life. And because Abraham therefore is not
alone, but has a promise of seed and generation, but his seed and
generation is of the promise, that is, he that believeth the promise: so
Paul draws the promise from the bodily seed unto the Gentile believers.
For since this is the main thing, that Abraham believed God, and that
this was imputed to him for righteousness, that is, that he was
justified by faith, and became an heir of the everlasting kingdom, he
concludes this common sense, that a Cedar believing the promise, like
Abraham, is an heir of the everlasting kingdom, and is justified,
whether he be of the bodily or carnal seed of Abraham or not.

115 And so Paul expresses this opinion from

If he had not drawn on the simple mind of the letter, he would never
have seen them. In the epistle to the Galatians Cap. 3, 9. He says:
\"Those who are of faith are blessed with the believing Abraham\"; item
v. 7.: \"Those who are of faith are Abraham\'s children\"; again v. 10.:
\"Those who deal with the works of the law are under the curse\" 2c.

But where does Paul get such a disputation from? Actually from this
text, before which we all would have passed by as before a useless and
despised text, if he had not undertaken to explain it in the apostolic
spirit. Therefore, we all owe all honor to St. Paul as the highest
teacher and master of the Holy Scriptures, and we also follow him in all
fairness and do not want to be led away from his teaching and opinion by
the lying sophists at any price. I wanted to say this for the sake of
those who are still inexperienced in the Scriptures, because when they
come to such sayings and interpretations of the Fathers, they think they
have found a pearl, when they are not without danger and lead us away
from the right understanding of the Scriptures, that is, distract us
from the letter and historical understanding, which alone we should keep
and insist on.

**II.**

**And Abram said, O LORD, how shall I know that I possess it?**

The Holy Scriptures have this way of attaching signs to the promises.
Thus in the baptism and supper of the Lord there is not only the word of
promise, but also a sign or work or ceremony. Therefore, since Abraham
has become better acquainted with God and has been comforted by Him, he
takes heart and desires a sign, which otherwise would have been a
temptation from God and a sin, yes, not only a temptation, but also a
doubt. Therefore, it seems that the Virgin Mary does much better by
believing the promise and not desiring a sign, but the angel himself
gives her a sign from Elizabeth.

**[954 \". 111, 310-814. Interpretation of Genesis 15, 8. W. 1,
1439-1441. 955]{.underline}**

\(118\) But be it as it may, one must not speak of such things from the
judgment and discretion of reason, but look at the person: he is a
believer and an heir of eternal righteousness, therefore he pleases God
even in that he desires God to give him a sign of the promise. But if
the person had been without faith, it would have been sinful for him to
desire a sign. So Gideon and David ask for a sign and achieve their
intention; but the godless Achaz, Isa. 7, 11, does not ask for a sign,
even though he is commanded by the Lord, but persists in his unbelief.

\(119\) Thus, in judging, one should look at the person or, to put it
more clearly, at the heart itself; for \"what does not come from faith
is sin,\" Romans 14:23; again, what comes from faith pleases God. David
wars and is fortunate, but another wars unhappily; for David remains in
faith and in his profession, and serves God even by striking his enemies
dead.

Now the calling is not of one kind or form; for it is either by signs,
or by the word of mouth, or by an inward stirring of the spirit. For
example, David and Samson killed lions without anyone\'s command, solely
out of divine prompting and impulse: but whoever does not feel such a
prompting and subjects himself to such things is in certain danger.
Therefore, just as one should not do such individual and special works
of calling as an example to follow, so no one should undertake to follow
this example of Abraham. For thou shalt not therefore demand a sign from
God, as Abraham did, who is described here as being justified by divine
reckoning and full of the Holy Spirit; therefore he does not sin by
asking for a sign from God, but pleases God, and God hears him willingly
and gladly. If the sun of the Holy Spirit does not shine in your heart,
you shall never do this, but abide by God\'s word and commandment, which
you shall consider more certain than all signs.

Now I have often said that if you want to judge the works of the saints,
you need great wisdom and understanding. When the Holy Spirit was angry
with Saul, he took a pair of oxen and cut them into pieces, threatening
that the oxen of those who did not follow him and Samuel to war would do
the same. Such heroic and excellent courage from the Holy Spirit is also
followed by happiness and welfare.

Muenzer also let himself think that he had a just cause, and after he
had awakened the peasants and brought them to arms, he also hoped that
he would prevail and win; but he remained down, and rightly so, for all
this he did out of his own spirit and not out of God\'s, and the
examples of the saints in the Old Testament, on which he nevertheless
relied, could not help him at all; for the examples of the saints are
mostly miracles; therefore no one should presume to follow them.

I am not commanded to walk on the sea as Peter did, but I am commanded
to love my neighbor, to be patient in the cross and in suffering. 2c.
And if I do this, I will not go astray, nor will I be out of danger.

124\. Thus Abraham is described here as being God\'s friend and talking
to God as a friend or brother to another, God also puts up with
everything he does as a friend. If we are favorable to someone, we
tolerate and endure everything for his sake and do not let anything
mislead or hinder us, as Paul says 1 Cor. 13:7: \"Love endures
everything.\" But if we are hostile to someone or someone is opposed to
us, we do not put up with anything he does, nor do we overlook even the
slightest crime. This is also the case here: Abraham goes in his supreme
faith and trust in God, so that he is righteous, and does not desire a
sign for his own sake, because he was not to possess the land, but for
the sake of his descendants, so that their faith would not weaken and
fall in the terrible persecutions and obstacles that they would
encounter.

\(125\) For what fear and trembling was there among them, when they were
brought out of Egypt.

**[956 L. m, 31L-S14. Interpretation of Genesis 15, 8-16. W. 1.
1441-1444.. 957]{.underline}**

and since they were so miserable and horribly afflicted in Egypt itself?
How often did they also grumble out of impatience in the desert? And
what shall one say much? Of such a great multitude of people, only two
came to the land of Canaan. If they had not kept and strengthened these
and such promises in such danger and hardship, how could their faith
have endured? That is why this sign, which Abraham asked for, was
necessary and useful for the church.

**V.9-12. And he said unto him, Bring me a heifer of three years old,
and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a
turtledove, and a young pigeon. And he brought him all these things, and
divided them in the midst of one another, and laid one part over against
another; but the birds he divided not. And the birds fell upon the oxen:
but Abram sent them away. When the sun had set, a deep sleep fell upon
Abram; and, behold, terror and great darkness fell upon him.**

This is the sign that God gives to Abraham, so that his family may learn
from it and be assured that the promise of the land of Canaan is
certain, however lukewarm God keeps it and forgives it. And Moses
described this sacrifice abundantly enough, and no doubt such a way of
sacrificing was inherited from Adam himself to the descendants:
therefore the Gentiles also accepted it and made it customary until it
was confirmed anew by the law. It can be seen, however, that Abraham was
busy all day long with the preparation of such a sacrifice and the
construction of the altar, until at night, when he was tired, sleep
overtook him. But why Moses especially remembers the birds under the sky
and what this whole sign has in itself and means, the text itself
explains.

**V. 13-16 Then said he unto Abram, Know thou that thy seed shall be
strangers in a land that is not his; and there shall they be compelled
to serve, and plagues four hundred years. And I will judge the people
whom they shall serve. After that they shall go forth with great
substance. And thou shalt go to**

**They shall be buried in peace with their fathers, and in a good old
age. And they shall come again after four generations: for the iniquity
of the Amorites is not yet ended.**

This is the interpretation of the sign. The slaughtered animals
represent the people of Israel who were tortured and tormented in
various ways in Egypt. The birds that wanted to eat the flesh of the
slaughtered animals are Pharaoh and the Egyptians. But Abraham, who is a
father of this people, scares and drives away the birds; for the promise
made to Abraham does not let this people be completely oppressed and
destroyed, even though they are severely afflicted.

\(128\) As four kinds of beasts are slain, so Abraham\'s seed shall be
afflicted in Egypt four hundred years. The birds signify the last age in
which Israel escaped from service to freedom and the promised land.
Considering the time, it was hard and difficult to be burdened and
afflicted with such a long service; but it is very comforting that a
certain redemption is finally promised here.

129\. Therefore Abraham undoubtedly impressed and commanded such a sign
on his descendants in constant sermons, so that they would not grow
weary and retreat in their misfortune and misery, but should wait with
constant and firm faith and hope for the promise of the land of Canaan
and their redemption; He also admonished them that just as he had driven
away the birds so that the sacrifice would not be defiled by them, so
they should also rebel against the adversities and overcome them until
God, by his mercy, would put an end to their misfortune and destroy the
enemies of his people.

\(130\) That a temporal seed was not only promised to Abraham before the
time, but also the persecution and distress that was to come before the
promise was announced to the seed long before. Abraham was still alone
and without heirs; but before God his people were already born at that
time, and they were already attacked and eaten by the birds, and they
were already in danger.

**[958 8. Ill, 8I4-E Interpretation of I Genesis 15:13-16. W. I,
IE-I447. 959]{.underline}**

They had already been driven away and sunk into the sea, but the people
were saved and safe. But Abraham sees this only in the word and in the
promise, and believes that it will certainly happen this way.

\(131\) So this text\'s historical opinion is that God wanted to give
Abraham a sign through this sacrifice, from which he could learn how it
should go for him and his seed in the future. As if to say: This people
will be to me in the world as a very acceptable sacrifice: but the birds
of the air or the godless nations will not cease nor desist from
attacking it; but you shall drive them out, that is, my promise that I
made to you will keep it undamaged. But I will judge the nations, and
will bring forth my people with great good. So this sign was necessary,
not because of Abraham, who believed God and was righteous, but for the
sake of his descendants, who were to experience many plagues and
persecutions among the nations, so that they would not become
fainthearted and fall into despair.

Furthermore, this text also belongs to teach us what God\'s nature is.
He is indeed a helper and deliverer from death, but before he helps, he
corrupts, and before he brings to life, he pushes into death. For this
is what he does, that he makes everything out of nothing, Hebr. 11, 3.
Thus, when he wants to raise this people and increase them above the
number of the stars, he first lets the birds fly over them and plague,
press and tear them in various ways.

133 Hence the tyranny, that the people were often burdened and forced to
work and forced without other unspeakable cruelty, which was practiced
by order of the Egyptian tyrant on the young children, 2 Mos. 1, 8. So
the devil thought to devour Moses also, when he had brought him into the
water, 2 Mos. 2, 3, so that this people is rightly compared to a
sacrifice, because they were always killed in the flesh.

134\. and here belongs the terror, that Abraham may be assailed by
night; for when the flesh feels the cross.

it cannot abstain, but must be in pain and lament.

Now here is a question of the number of years, where they should be
reckoned. In the end, it is certain that these years have lasted until
the exit from Egypt; but where they should be counted, one has this, the
other another delusion.

136 And Lyra proves clearly enough from the history of Exodus 6 that the
Jews were not in Egypt four hundred years. For Levi had three sons
before he came down into Egypt; Kohath was born in the land of Canaan,
and lived 133 years, but died in Egypt; his son Amram was born in Egypt,
and lived 137 years, and died therein: and the son of Amram is Moses,
under whom the people came out of Egypt, when he was in his eightieth
year.

137 Therefore this reckoning cannot begin from the entrance of the
children of Israel into Egypt: for there are not more, if thou reckon
the years, while these patriarchs lived, than 286 years. Therefore the
Jews begin to reckon from the year Isaac was born, but there are also
many years missing.

Therefore one must begin from the year when Abraham was called from Ur
in Chaldea; because from that time until the entry into Egypt are just
215 years. Now the time in which they remained in Egypt also makes 215
years. These all together make 430 years as they are counted in Exodus
12:40 and Galatians 3:17.

139 For when Abraham came out of Ur, he was 75 years old; from that year
to his hundredth, wherein Isaac was born to him, are 25 years; and from
Isaac even unto the going down into Egypt, are 190 years. These years,
added together, make 215 years. If you now add the 215 years in which
they remained in Egypt, it becomes 430. I consider this calculation to
be certain and right; because Moses in his 2nd book and Paul in the
epistle to the Galatians put four hundred and thirty years.

140 But that the Scripture only remembers here

**[960 L. m, 318-S1S. Interpretation of I Genesis 15:13-16. W. I.
I447-14SV. 961]{.underline}**

of four hundred years is because it does not count the time so precisely
and actually, but indicates that the people will be in a foreign land
for about four hundred years. For this is how we often do it; we
sometimes count a little exactly, sometimes not so exactly.

But one might say, \"Why do you bring up the account of Abraham\'s
departure from Ur in Chaldea, when the text clearly says that the seed
of Abraham was to be in misery for so many years? Answer: Abraham was
declared at that time to be a father of this people when he was called
out of Ur, and as far as the promise was concerned, he was already a
father, even though he did not yet have any heirs.

142 Thus the epistle to the Hebrews Cap. 7:9 says that Levi was made ten
by Melchizedek while he was still in the loins of Abraham. Because
Abraham alone, who was the father of this people by promise, was made
ten, all his descendants, who were still hidden in his loins, were also
made ten. So, because Abraham is in misery, his whole generation is in
misery; and when his generation is afflicted, he himself is afflicted;
and yet it stood most afflicted and most miserable, now that it had
almost come to the end and the deliverance was at hand. Just as now,
when the day of the Lord and the true deliverance of the church is near,
it is in the worst of all situations, and the distress and persecution
is the most severe; for the Turk and the Pope shed more blood than was
ever shed before these times.

Here we are shown once again how high and valuable the Holy Scriptures
are to be held. For where do you find such histories in all heathen
books? For here it is described how it shall be through four hundred
years, and Abraham sees painted before him the history of his lineage
through such a long time, namely, that it shall be afflicted in Egypt,
but finally be redeemed again with honor. So God calls that which is not
to be, Rom. 4, 17; for with Him neither past nor future time is present,
but all things are present before Him, which shall befall us for a long
time.

\(144\) That this chapter is one of the most important in all the
Scriptures, from which the prophets have taken much through the Holy
Spirit. Just as in the 100th Psalm, v. 3, it says: \"The Lord made us,
and not we ourselves. So also the 139th Psalm, v. 1. is taken from it:
\"Lord, you search me\" 2c. Therefore all prophecies of the tribulations
and persecutions of the righteous are taken away; for this text is
marvelous and mighty, if the Holy Spirit comes and interprets it to us.
\"David says in the reported 139th Psalm, v. 16, \"All the days were
written in your book, which were yet to come, and there was none of
them.\" Do we not have a very clear example of this saying here? The
years are counted, and manifold troubles and afflictions are prophesied;
but of those who are to come to pass, there is none yet. For those of
whom the Lord speaks here have not yet been born. Thus the holy
prophets, enlightened by the Holy Spirit, drew all their sermons from
Moses.

145 Now this is the greatest comfort, that the divine truth is not
deceiving either in the past or in the future. So, even though Abraham
is currently without an heir, he is assured by this promise that he will
possess the land of Canaan and have a family; and as far as his faith is
concerned, he already has it in his possession.

Moreover, this text also serves to confirm our faith against the Jews.
For if God so loved Abraham\'s seed that He determined a certain time
when He would redeem them, how will our Jews answer for this, that they
now wander about in a hard misery without worship and regiment for
longer than fifteen hundred years without a prophet, without the end
being foreseeable, especially since in the prophet Jeremiah there are
very good and mighty prophecies: \"There shall never be a lack of one of
David sitting on the throne of the house of Israel,\" 2c., Jerem. 33,
17.

147\. since in the Babylonian prison all things could be seen as if the
whole people had been rejected and condemned by God.

**[962 L. m. S18-S21. Interpretation of I Genesis 15:13-16. W. 1,
1480-14W. 963]{.underline}**

The believers kept to the prophecies of Jeremiah, who, through the Holy
Spirit, had determined and named the time of the prison, namely that
they would return to the land of Canaan after seventy years. But must
not our Jews confess that since the time Christ was crucified there has
never been one who sat on the throne of David before the face of God?

How then, does God lie? No; but they, the Jews, lie themselves, saying
that Christ has not yet come, and wait for their Messiah so many years
in vain.

Do you think that if their hope were right, and the Messiah were
present, they would not have prophets to tell them of the time when he
should come? Since they have been so long without prophets, and know
neither a certain nor an uncertain time when their imprisonment shall
end, it is certain that their long waiting is in vain, and their faith
futile and useless; but the word of God, which promises that none of the
seed of David shall be absent from David\'s throne until Messiah comes,
is certain and true. Thus it also follows that the Jews are no longer
God\'s people, but are rejected and cast out by God because of their
unbelief, because they did not want to accept the sent Messiah.

Therefore, take note of this proof, which cannot be overturned or mocked
in any way. God keeps His promise, and keeps it so surely that He also
cares for those who are not yet born, as we see here in this text; how
would He not take care of those who are already born, and let them
wander around for such a long time without a prophet, if they were
God\'s people or Abraham\'s seed? Therefore, the outcome and the
experience itself convince them that they are not God\'s people, but
rejected by Him.

For although the Gentile Church is oppressed and afflicted in many ways
in these last times, it still has its testimonies, by which God shows it
that He cares for it. Thus, even though the Turk and the Papacy are the
most violent abominations

that the church in these last times may be grievously challenged and
afflicted, yet in the midst of the lion\'s and dragon\'s fury baptism
remains; the Lord\'s supper remains; the power of the keys remains; the
dear Bible or the Holy Scriptures remain, not out of man\'s ability and
wisdom, otherwise the Turk and the Pope would long ago have dug them up
and destroyed them, but God preserves them by His power; so that if the
Word and the sacraments remain, faith and the church may also remain;
however unwillingly the Pope and the Turk may see and tolerate it.

Because God still speaks to us, he has not yet abandoned his church,
even if he allows it to be challenged and afflicted. The Jews cannot say
anything like this about themselves. For even though they have the holy
scriptures, they also have this punishment, that their table has become
a rope for them, Ps. 69, 23. And compare them to Isaiah Cap. 29:11, 12,
To one who has a book in his hand, but is so unlearned that he cannot
read it, he also calls the Scriptures a closed and sealed book, which
they cannot open; therefore the Jews are in certain error.

For at all times God shows His people through the prophets a certain
time, how long they shall be afflicted and persecuted, and when He will
deliver them; therefore this is neither God\'s way nor His people\'s
way, that they are now . into the fifteen hundred years in misery, out
of their land and without prophets.

Again, we Christians are quite certain that we have nothing else before
us but the Last Day and our redemption. However, God speaks to us,
admonishes and teaches us to be ready all the days and hours, which is a
certain sign and cause that we are God\'s people, the true church, which
God does not abandon at all, so that He also so diligently instructed
Abraham\'s lineage, before it was born, how long it should be in misery.

For with God the future is present as well as the past. Abraham\'s
family lived before God at that time, therefore he speaks to them and
teaches them. Thus even the dead are and live

**[964 s. m, sLi-sss. Interpretation of Genesis 15:13-16. W. i,
nsL-us\". 965]{.underline}**

before God. For as I lived before him before I was, and was born: so
shall I also be before him, and live when I am dead.

This text concludes all these things, namely, that God is a God of the
living, and that those who are not yet alive live before Him, as well as
those who are or have passed away from this life through death. And from
this text the holy prophets have taken many glorious sermons.

157 Which now follows: \"And thou shalt go unto thy fathers,\" is a
beautiful and glorious consolation. For this is how we think of it:
Abraham dies in misery and his family receives the promise of the land
of Canaan a long time after his death: where is this then that is said
to him above (v. 1): \"Fear not, for I am your very great reward\"? What
good is such a thing to a dead man? This is indeed a great thing that I
would wish to happen to me, that he promises him a peaceful old age and
a gentle death: but what does this do to such a great and excellent
promise?

Abraham was enlightened by the Holy Spirit and understood here the
resurrection of the dead and a future eternal life; which sign or
testimony, as he well understood, was this bodily promise of the land of
Canaan. Therefore he thought that God would be his rich reward when he
would now be dead and rest in the dust of the earth.

159 And especially the most beautiful description of death is to be
noted here, which he does not call death, but speaks of it smoothly and
sweetly: \"You shall go to your fathers\" and rest with Noah and other
heroes, item, you shall be buried, that is, you will not be carried
away, like Enoch, but will be buried in the earth and become dust in a
gentle and good old age, when you will already have become tired and
full of this life.

160 He thus indicates that Abraham is to die, and yet promises him that
he will be his reward. But how would we unite these things, if we did
not conclude that after this life there is another, better and eternal
one, to which we can attain by

the Son of God will be raised from the dust of the earth?

The holy fathers had such signs and characteristics of the life to come,
so that they could comfort and sustain themselves in this so poor and
miserable life, and it also serves this purpose that is said above about
imputed righteousness, that is, about the forgiveness of sins by grace
and salvation from eternal death. \"Now these things are not written for
Abraham\'s sake,\" says Paul in Romans 4:23, 24, \"but for our sake,\"
that we should also believe that our reward is laid up for us, even
after we are buried and lie in the ground, such a reward that we will
live with God as long as He Himself lives, that is, for eternity.
Abraham is satisfied with this hope, and even though he does not obtain
the promise of the land of Canaan, he is secure and content in his heart
and despises death, for he knows that he will live with God forever.

162 Therefore you should diligently remember this text, which is like a
full sea, from which the prophets have drawn many glorious sermons of
justification, of redemption from sins, of the resurrection of the dead,
and of eternal life. For, as I have said, these things were not written
to Abraham alone; but they are written for us, that we should believe
with Abraham in the seed of the woman, and with this hope overcome
death, and not be afraid to depart from this life. Our bodies will be
buried in the earth, yes, they will rot in the earth and become ashes
and dust; but in his time the earth will give back such a pledge to him
who promised us that he would be our reward. Such hope is sure and firm.

The last saying of this text, about the iniquity of the Amorites, which
is not yet over, shows God\'s patience. For as the faithful have their
portion appointed in the land of the living, so the wicked have their
portion appointed in hell. Therefore let us tolerate their wickedness
and iniquity for a time, for it will not remain unpunished forever, Ps.
37, 38. Ps. 49, 15.

**[966 \".m,sW-s\". Interpretation of I Genesis 15, 13-21. W. 1,
1455-1457. 967]{.underline}**

So the iniquity of the pope and the Turk is not yet over; for God is
longsuffering and patient, and does not soon punish evildoers: but
therefore they do not escape altogether, but the time is already
determined in which they will be seized and punished according to their
merit and wickedness. Thus says St. Peter 2 Epist. 3:7 that the wicked
will be kept until the day of judgment, that they will be punished; and
Paul Rom. 2:4 teaches us that God delays punishment because He leaves
room for repentance: but the foolish and secure flesh abuses such
long-suffering and patience of God for freedom and impudence to sin, and
because the punishment does not come as soon as it does, it thinks that
it will remain eternally absent.

So the Lord promises the Canaanites that he will spare them for the time
being and give them time and space to repent; but, says he, be patient,
Abraham, with your own, whether some of them may be converted and
repent.

**V.17-21. When the sun had set and darkened, behold, a furnace smoked,
and a flame of fire passed between the pieces. On that day the LORD made
a covenant with Abram, saying, \"To your seed I will give this land from
the waters of Egypt to the great river Phrath; the Kenites, the
Kinishites, the Kadmouites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Giants,
the Amorites, the Cananites, the Gergesites, the Jebusites.**

This way and manner of sacrifice did not begin here, but came from Adam
and the other holy fathers to Abraham. Thus one finds that

There is also evidence in the Gentile Scriptures that sacrifices were
used in covenants, and the story in the prophet Jeremiah about the
servants who were to be set at liberty is also known. When the sacrifice
was slaughtered and divided, those who made a covenant with each other
passed between the pieces, and then they set fire to one part and kept
another part for the meal.

Such a custom has been used even in our time. For when Emperor
Maximilian, Louis, King of France, and Pope Julius established a
covenant with each other, which was called the holy covenant, they
divided the sacrament into three parts and took it with each other at
the same time: but such a holy covenant lasted barely six months.

168\. so that it seems that this way and custom of making covenants
comes from ancient times: and because God made a covenant with Abraham
for the land of Canaan, that it should certainly be granted and given to
his lineage, he also keeps this way and goes through the divided
sacrifice like a flame of fire, and sets it on fire as a sign that he
would like such a sacrifice. And so Abraham is set and confirmed to be
the heir of the outward and temporal life. I must confess, however, that
this chapter would be very well worthy of more extensive and diligent
treatment and elaboration; but my business prevents me and does not
allow me to consider the matter further. However, I have indicated and
sketched, as little as I could, how one should further reflect on such
excellent and high things, which Moses wanted to describe and expound
with this chapter.

**[968 \" iv. s-s. Interpretation of I Genesis 1\", 1. 2. w. i. iM-usi.
960]{.underline}**

**The sixteenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**How Sarah gives Abraham the advice to lie down with Hagar.**

**V. 1. 2. Sarai, Abram\'s wife, bore him nothing. But she had an
Egyptian maid, whose name was Hagar. And she said unto Abram, Behold,
the LORD hath shut me up, that I should not be able to bear. Lie with my
maidservant, that I may build myself out of her.**

When Abraham was concerned that because he did not yet have an heir, his
steward of Damascus would take his place in the possession of the
promise as a proper and rightful heir, although not a natural one, the
Lord promised him clearly that he would have a natural heir born of his
own body.

\(2\) And after he is rid of this temptation, another follows, which
befalls Sarah his wife; so that the life of these two godly husbands has
been full of temptation and constant tribulation. Rude and unwise
people, who are inexperienced in spiritual matters, only see that
Abraham takes the maid as his wife. Because they are full of
fornication, they do not look at the promise that gives rise to such
works, but only at the same filthiness of the flesh, as the Jews also
do.

37 Thus I have often heard in schools, not only from lawyers but also
from theologians, that nothing else is written in Moses but of the
unchastity of the Jews, since he is very diligent in describing the
sexes and the marriage state. But such judgments indicate nothing else
than impure hearts that judge and speak of the holy works according to
their own kind.

4\. these holy spouses do not get into this behavior out of pleasure or
unchastity, but allow themselves to be challenged about

While they are anxious to have a child for the sake of the promise and
are waiting with eagerness and desire for the seed that was promised to
Adam in Paradise, Sarah, who now knows that she is barren and obsolete,
has doubts, consults Abraham, opens her door to him and gives him the
maidservant, so that she may be built from them. For although she has no
doubt about the promise, she still doubts what kind of people God would
choose for such a work.

5 Therefore the fruits of the marriage state are praised to us here,
namely, the increase of the human race, which also the books of the
Gentiles praise highly and gloriously. For though the world cannot
understand such thoughts as Abraham struggles with, yet it praises and
extols the marriage state, and reproves disorderly lust and fornication.
And honest parents are so minded that they would rather their children
enter into an honest married life than fornicate.

\(6\) First of all, reason understands the honor and respectability of
such a proper union of husband and wife; then it is also caused by the
great benefit, for it sees that from this state flow as from a well the
worldly and domestic government, both of which would have to dissolve
and decay if there were no proper and certain state of marriage.

Now Abraham does not only look at the fact that by this means his family
can be multiplied, but also looks at the redemption of the whole world,
of which he knew that it should happen to the world through the promised
seed; he desires the same that it be promoted, by which it can only
happen.

008 He came out of Ur of Chaldea in his seventy-fifth year, but now here
is the tenth year of his affliction, and yet no hope of an heir can be
found or seen. The promise he has

**[970 L.IV.S-7. Interpretation of I Genesis 16, 1. 2. W. 1. 14S1-14\".
971]{.underline}**

But the same is mendacious and, as it seems to him, it remains too long.
These ten years may have been short enough for him, if we consider what
he had accomplished in such a time, namely, so much traveling and
wandering, then the war with the four kings. But if we look at the delay
of the promise, such time was long enough for him. One month after
another, one year after another went by, and still Sarah remained
barren.

\(9\) Therefore it was not lewd thoughts, but an anxious desire for the
seed of Abraham, which grieved his heart: and what do we suppose will
have been the thoughts, sighings, weeping, and consolations of these
holy spouses for these ten years? For the longer the promise was
postponed, the heavier the cross became for him and the more unbearable
such affliction became.

\(10\) That is why Moses wanted to portray a special challenge to Sarah
in this chapter. The doubt of an heir was now removed from Abraham by
the promise, for he knew that he would be born of him. Because he is
certain of the heir from his body, he now doubts because of the mother,
and there is no small reason for such doubts; for Sarah was naturally
barren, and because of her age she was also unable to give birth.

\(11\) Therefore she is described here as a very wise and understanding
woman, faithful to her husband, as an example to other women. For she
had followed her husband into misery, had left all her friends and
relatives; in misery she bore all hardships and troubles with patient
and constant courage; she was obedient to her husband in all things with
humility; but now, because she sees from all circumstances that she has
no heir to hope for from her body, she nevertheless does not abandon
faith, nor does she doubt the promise. For even though she sees that the
promise is being kept, and can have no hope, because she is barren and
obsolete, that she will be a mother, she still gives up the honor of
motherhood with the utmost humility,

and is satisfied when her maid Hagar becomes pregnant by Abraham.

\(12\) So she keeps faith and hope in God\'s mercy, and in utmost
humility is content with this shame and disgrace of being barren, and
willingly hands over such honor and praise to her handmaid. Neither
Job\'s wife, Tobiah\'s wife, nor David\'s wife would have done such a
thing, but they would have doubted the divine promises, would have been
angry and said that they were led and deceived by the devil; they would
also have quarreled with Abraham and quarrelled that he had allowed
himself to be deceived by the devil and had left his fatherland: but if
they had done none of these things, they would at least have doubted
God\'s goodness and mercy and would have considered their barrenness a
sign of divine wrath.

But Sarah knows how to make a beautiful distinction among the gifts of
God. Even though she is already barren, she still believes that she
loves God and therefore willingly leaves the honor of fertility to her
maidservant. Thus she is a woman of beautiful and glorious virtues on
all sides. That is why she is set as an example by St. Peter to the
entire female gender.

In the papacy, such histories were despised because they went against
the celibate life, although more virtues can be felt and found in this
single wife than in the lives of all priests, monks and nuns. For who
can so emphasize and, as it is worthy, praise enough this single piece
that she so willingly hands over the honor of motherhood, and in that
case gladly wants to be an outcast woman, if she alone remains in God\'s
grace and mercy and the promise is fulfilled by another?

15 There is also a special discipline and holiness in Abraham. Although
he could have taken another, and could have justified it by the fact
that it was common and customary at that time to have more than one
wife, he did not do so until his wife was called to him, which is a
special and high example on both sides. Abraham could also have taken a
more beautiful, more sedate, more honest and richer wife.

**[972 s. Interpretation of Genesis 16, I-3. W. i, iis\^-i4b7.
973]{.underline}**

But he is satisfied with his wife\'s counsel, who therefore puts the
maid with him, that she may remain the mother and housewife, and have
the promised seed, if not naturally, yet according to the right.

16 In addition, one should also notice here how reasonable and moral
words she speaks: \"The Lord,\" she says, \"has shut me up so that I
cannot give birth\"; she is not angry, as we are wont to do, and blames
the devil, but recognizes God\'s work with humility, and says: \"The
Lord has not yet wanted to give me heirs. She therefore recognizes and
believes that marriage is such a state, which is instituted and ordered
by God and also governed by Him; therefore she is content with her
barrenness; therefore she is not angry with God, whom she would
undoubtedly have thanked most highly if He had blessed her womb.

17\) And here the Hebrew way of speaking, because it is chaste, is very
sweet: \"Lie down\", or \"go in\" to Hagar; as the Scripture Ps. 51, 2.
also says of David: \"He had gone in to Bathsheba.\"

18 The word \"to be built\" means to be blessed with children, for where
God gives children, the house is built and the household is properly
governed, for there the parents know for whom they will work and what
they will have for heirs to their goods.

\(19\) And again the faith of the holy woman is signified, who therefore
putteth her handmaid to her husband, that she may beget her children,
whose mother she is, though not naturally, yet according to law.

020 And this cause moved Abraham to follow his wife\'s counsel and
persuasion; for since the promise was there, and yet it was naturally
impossible that Sarah should bear, they therefore conclude that an heir
should be sought with another mother, lest the promise should be
hindered. But we should not make an example out of such a work, as if it
could also be done by us, because we should consider the circumstances.
For the promise of the seed has not come to us, as

Abraham; and even if someone has a barren marriage, there is no danger
for him, although his whole family would perish, if God wanted it that
way. Abraham not only had the promise of the seed, but also knew that
Sarah was barren.

\(21\) Such circumstances have no place with you and are not valid;
therefore this special work of these two husbands and wives is not to be
used as an example, especially in the New Testament. For the Old
Testament allows that a man may have more than one wife for the sake of
children, and there is a law in Moses that if one has weakened a maid,
he should keep her for a wife, Deut. 22:29. But such ceremonial laws
have ceased, and Abraham\'s work was much different from that which is
written in Moses.

V. 2. 3. **Abram obeyed the voice of Sarai. Then Sarai, Abram\'s wife,
took Hagar, her Egyptian maid, and gave her to Abram her husband to be
his wife, after they had lived ten years in the land of Canaan.**

Genesis clearly says that Abraham obeys his wife Sarah, and does not say
that he did such a work out of lust, and I will take it entirely for
that that he followed with displeasure. For he loved her dearly, as the
story shows, and yet he accepts her reasons, since she claimed to be
barren and old, and does this for his wife\'s sake and obedience, not in
the opinion of those who took two wives, as in the law.

23 And Moses called Sarah Abraham\'s wife, and him her husband, not
without a cause; that he might shew that Abraham was not an adulterer:
neither was the former marriage of Abraham and Sarah dissolved or
dissolved by this new union of them; but Abraham remained the chaste and
gentle husband of his chaste and modest wife. But that he lies down with
Hagar, is only of the opinion, so that the divine promise is not
prevented.

**[074 \". iv, 9-11. Interpretation of Genesis 16, 4. W. 1. 1167-1471.
975]{.underline}**

**Second part.**

**How Abraham lies down with Hagar; how Hagar falls into hopelessness
about it, and how Sarah behaves about it.**

**V. 4 And he lay with Hagar, and she conceived. And when she saw that
she was with child, she esteemed her wife little against her.**

\(24\) Here is a new challenge. But we will first say that the Jews take
the ten years that Moses mentions here to mean that it is a common rule
and custom for a man to live with his wife for ten years, and if she
remains barren for ten years, it is right and permissible for him to
take another wife so that he does not leave without an heir; but whether
this is true or not, I do not know.

\(25\) But I do not like that they use this history as an example,
which, as I said before, has its own special cause and circumstances.
And what may the Jews approve of or justify polygamy with Abraham\'s
example, if it was thus commanded in the law, Deut. 25:5? For if a
brother departed without children, the other must necessarily take the
deceased\'s wife in marriage, so that he might raise up seed for his
brother.

\(26\) And when we consider such a commandment, we commonly come to such
an opinion as if the Jews had been given much liberty to fornicate,
because having two or more wives was not only permitted to them, but
also commanded.

But I am of a different opinion. For we see how our kind and nature is
wont to do. As soon as we are commanded to do something, we do it with
reluctance, and pursue that which is forbidden to us. Such a thing is
not done without reluctance and harm. For we see that in the female sex
there is much and innumerable weakness: they indulge their affections
and impulses and let them rule them; one is angry and quarrelsome, the
other proud and splendid; the former is unfit for housekeeping; the
latter is industrious and careless in her work.

Child rearing 2c. Therefore it was a hard thing that one brother had to
take another\'s wife; for this law could not be evaded by any pretense:
that therefore by such a law no freedom, nor cause for fornication was
given, but by it unpleasantness, toil, work and worry were increased.

\(28\) And so, through Adam\'s disobedience, nature has become so
stiff-necked, insolent and defiant that it cannot stand any law. Thus,
since the married state is commanded, and everyone is to have his own
wife, to avoid fornication, we learn that the celibate life is highly
praised and extolled by others, and the youth becomes more inclined to
immoral fornication and whoredom. As in Terence, the old man says that
one cannot hurt a fornicator more than if one gives him a wife. And we
have before our eyes innumerable examples, where often husbands and
wives who love each other dearly become hostile to each other for little
cause, run away from each other, and join other men or wives.

\(29\) Human nature is so wild and depraved. It needs the marriage state
as a remedy against fornication, and through the marriage state God
allows one to use a woman, and thereby not only covers sin, which we
cannot abstain from, but also blesses such a union and conjugal life;
and yet the whole world shuns such a proper state, established by God
and pleasing to God, and runs after disorderly fornication and whoredom,
from which many and innumerable damages arise. For this deprives one of
goods and food; the body suffers serious illnesses and ailments from it;
God is irritated by it and causes it to inflict horrible punishments,
and what is greatest and most serious, the police and house government
is disrupted and prevented by it.

\(30\) Why then do we not escape so much and so great harm? Why do we
not rather seek God\'s blessing through the marriage state? Therefore we
do not do it, because our nature, corrupted by sin, is disobedient and
does not want to suffer laws and discipline, nor can it be forced or
tamed.

**[976 L. IV, II-IA. Interpretation of Genesis 16, 4. W. 1, 1471-1473.
977]{.underline}**

\(31\) Original sin is such an unspeakable and harmful plague and
disease. Therefore, the Greeks and the Latins have come up with sayings
and speeches to reject the marriage state and to contradict it because
of the unpleasantness it entails. Nevertheless, those who were more
understanding among the pagans were more respectable and disciplined and
called the marriage state an inseparable union of man and woman.

32\. and such a union must take place with two wills and opinions: and
where a married couple come together, they then stand together with
counsel and action, work together and provide food for themselves and
their children, raise the children in the fear of God, govern their
servants 2c. Where such house discipline is kept, servants are raised up
for the church and capable rulers for the land and the people; thus the
church is planted and built, which alone has the knowledge of God. This
is usefully taught, and the youth should often be admonished to accept
and learn in good time what is taught about Christian discipline and
respectability.

33 And this text belongs to it. For what the Jews pretend about the ten
years, so that they make an example of Abraham\'s special work, is lies
and useless gossip. But Christian and God-fearing hearts can learn
something useful from it, when they see how these two pious married
couples consult with each other in their temptation, and the husband,
Abraham, is satisfied with his wife\'s advice, which she honestly
proposes to him out of fear of God, and thus both remain in hope and
faith in God\'s mercy.

\(34\) It was a hard thing for Abraham, because he loved his wife dearly
and had lived with her for so many years, that he had to join and lie
down with an Egyptian maid; and yet he overcame himself and was obedient
to Sarah, who admonished him so highly. Such was the great humility of
the holy patriarch; but how did it go out and come about?

35\. the holy and pious Sarah does not begrudge the maid her husband and
lets

The maid willingly and gladly gives her the honor of motherhood, but
when she becomes a mother, she begins to despise her wife. This is how
it is in the world. It is a necessary and praiseworthy virtue to be glad
to help and to do good; but this virtue is much greater and more
necessary, that he who does good may not be offended by the ingratitude
of men and bear the ingratitude of the ungrateful. For there is no
remedy here: in the world is either God\'s kingdom or the devil\'s
kingdom: God\'s kingdom is doing good, giving advice, helping, yes, even
being subservient and serving; but the devil\'s kingdom is accepting
love and all kinds of service and help and paying ingratitude for it.

Therefore, this rule, which is observed throughout this life, should be
well remembered, namely, that if you want to be godly and a good
Christian and hope for eternal life, you should do good to all people,
take care of and have mercy on all poor people in such a way that you
help them with your body and all good things, and yet hope for no thanks
in return, but have nothing more certain than that ingratitude and evil
will be repaid to you for your good deeds. Whoever does not want to do
this, let him look for another world, in which there are all grateful
people, and be more wise when he wants to do good to someone, than here
the holy Sarah and the humble Abraham.

\(37\) But we learn that the least of all are those who are so minded.
We all do good deeds for no other reason than for the sake of gratitude,
and if such gratitude is not found as we would have it, it is followed
by lamentation, words of reproach, punishment, anger and displeasure
that cannot be reconciled, as is exemplified by the poets and especially
by those who have written tragedies.

At the time when I was studying in Erfurt, a mayor was hanged on the
gallows by one whom he had previously delivered from the gallows: and in
the 41st Psalm v. 10, as everyone knows, it is written that Christ
laments: \"He who ate my bread tramples me underfoot.

\(39\) Therefore this rule should be kept not only in the church but
also in the police and in the home, namely, to do good to the
ungrateful. For otherwise

**[978 K- n\'\> interpretation of Genesis 16, 4. W. i, 1473-1478.
979]{.underline}**

This lament of Christ is used as a proverb: \"He who eats my bread\",
that is, to whom I give food and drink, clothes and shoes, and whom I
consider the most beloved son and in my bosom, \"he tramples me under
his feet\".

\(40\) Therefore, one should conduct his life in such a way that first
of all he is God\'s servant, that is, he trusts in Him not only in what
concerns this temporal life, but also because He is our God for
eternity, whom, if all other things escape and fall away from us, we
must have and keep forever.

41 Secondly, that we do good not only to our friends but also to our
enemies, Matth. 5, 44. If they thank you, it is good and you have
invested your good deeds even better; but if they trample you underfoot
and show enmity for gratitude, you have not lost your good deeds
altogether, but have followed the example of your Father in heaven,
Matth. 5, 44, who lets his sun rise on the righteous and the wicked.

In this life, there is no other way; no one can say that it happens by
chance, but it has to happen that way, and it is impossible that it
could happen any other way, as Aristotle says.

For what is greater and more glorious than right discipline and
instruction? But if you are a schoolmaster or a disciplinarian, what
shall you do? Thou shalt faithfully instruct, teach, discipline and
admonish the youth whom thou art commanded, in the hope that some will
keep themselves right and let themselves be trained, and some will not.
For he that will do good must take care that he do it in vain, and that
his good deed be evil: for there are always more of them that reject and
despise good counsel than of those that accept it. And let us be content
that the good deed is not altogether lost; and if among ten lepers one
returns and knows the good deed, it is enough, Luc. 17:17. So if among
ten disciples there is one who lets himself be drawn and learns
diligently, it is enough, for then the good deed is not altogether lost.
And call us to Christ, the example

According to his heavenly Father, do good to the grateful and the
ungrateful at the same time.

44 The world does not know this, or even if it knows it, it does not
want to do it, but waits for gratitude, and thinks that one must buy and
redeem good for good, service for service. But if it lacks this hope, it
becomes angry, as did Timon, who was at once hostile to all men and did
good to none.

\(45\) Beware of such unkindness, and so do good to others, not hoping
that the good will be repaid in this life; as God the heavenly Father
does to the ungrateful world. We should follow the same example and not
the world; for this is true, which Christ laments, and it will remain
true: \"He who ate my bread tramples me under his feet,\" Ps. 41:10.

When a man is about to enter into matrimony, he diligently seeks such a
wife as he thinks to be of his mind and manner. But the secret corners
of the heart are inscrutable, and when one has come together, one thing
gradually follows another, as hope, envy, anger\.... Therefore learn
what the world is. For just as God is a God, that is, good and always
does good, so the world is a world, that is, ungrateful and evil.
Therefore, if anyone wants to live under God, let him be helpful and
helpful to everyone, and let him get used to suffering and bearing
ingratitude.

The monks, knowing neither God nor man, have crawled into the deserts
and lived there for themselves, which is not Christian at all; but this
is Christian, that you remain in the world and among men, and whatever
unpleasantness and trouble the devil causes you in the world, suffer it
patiently and do not let your flesh overcome you. For to be able to
overcome the wickedness of the world and of men is not only manly, but
Christian.

The legends or histories of the saints, which we have dealt with in the
papacy, are not described according to the Rule and the Law.

**[980 L.IV, IS-17. Interpretation of Genesis 16, 4. 5. W. 1, 147S-1479.
981]{.underline}**

Type of the holy scripture. For what is wearing a cap, fasting, and such
austere works as may be seen, to be distinguished from such care, toil,
and labor as stewardship entails, and which the saints have borne and
overcome in patience? For Sarah was grieved by this injustice, that a
purchased maid, who had nothing more in this world than food and
clothing, nor for her merit, money, or good, but for the mere favor and
love of her wife, should be required and exalted to such honors, that
she should conceive and bear children by such an exalted patriarch,
should thus puff herself up and exalt herself against her.

\(49\) And yet the Holy Ghost hath described these troubles and
afflictions of the house unto us for our consolation, that we may see
what trials the saints have had in this life. For first of all this was
a common trouble, that the four kings had plundered and despoiled the
whole land of Canaan, and had carried away Lot with all his servants and
all his goods in prison. But this, that Sarah is thus despised by her
maidservant, is a domestic trouble and a temptation.

50 Although this history is to be considered small and useless, the Holy
Spirit has deemed it worthy of being described in detail for the
comfort, example and teaching of all believers, so that they may also
expect such things, bear them with patience and hope for salvation. For
this is the story of Hagar, who is a poor servant, and yet rises above
her wife, from whom she has fullness and abundance, yes, I say, life
itself. Therefore learn that you do good to anchors and yet send
yourself to suffer ingratitude. For we do not get what we want, and what
we provide for ourselves and hope for from others, we lack. For nature
is corrupt, and the hearts of men are very fickle.

There is no one of such a small and weak mind who does not, when it is
well with him, rise up and rebel against whom he can; as the German
proverb says, that there is no more trustworthy animal than a louse in a
grind: the same shameful and small worm makes a nest for himself on a

Head, in it it rules and governs. So the ungrateful Hagar rebels against
her wife. But what does Sarah do?

**V. 5 Then said Sarai unto Abram, Thou doest wrong unto me. I have put
my maidservant with thee; but now that she hath conceived, I must be
inferior to her. Let the LORD be judge between me and thee.**

52 This is a domestic complaint that Sarah does not unreasonably
reproach her husband with. For she had good reason to be angry, after
living with him for so many years and yet remaining without children,
and now being despised by a maidservant who had become a mother out of
her advice and will; just as a louse, when it gets into trouble, makes
itself violent enough.

\(53\) And Abraham may well have given cause for this, who, after he had
been assured of the earth, would undoubtedly have kept the pregnant
maid, sat her down at his table, and no longer kept her as his wife\'s
maid, but as her companion.

\(54\) Abraham did this by natural and divine right; but the maid, as is
the way of servants, abused the kindness and beneficence of the holy
patriarch, thinking that she would be so well kept that she should no
longer recognize her wife as her wife, but should hold her in low esteem
and contempt.

\(55\) For thus she will doubtless (as it is wont to happen among women)
at times have said and reproached her: I am Abraham\'s right wife and
you are not, for you are barren: God has rejected you and has not wanted
to bless your marriage state, but he has chosen me after I became
pregnant. For who would not say that this is a certain sign of divine
grace and blessing?

\(56\) Now Sarah could not bear this, so she blames her husband and
says, \"You do wrong to me; you cause me such displeasure and
unhappiness that you do not keep the maid as a maid should be kept.

57\. but why does the Holy Spirit remember

**[982 8 rv. 17-19. interpretation of Genesis 16:5, 6. w. 1. 1479-1483.
983]{.underline}**

such haders? Did he not have something more important and useful to
describe? He is not really concerned here with child\'s play; nor are
these minor matters dealt with here; rather, in this history the Holy
Spirit depicts the origin of all harm and danger that occur
simultaneously in the domestic regime, in the police and in the church.
For in the police or secular government you will find that the most
distinguished rulers are those who know least of all how to govern a
city or country. Thus, in the church, those who are not in the church
take over and rule; as we heard above about Eliezer, Abraham\'s servant,
that he thought he would be an heir to Abraham\'s blessing; just as
Hagar wants to be a wife.

58 Therefore all these things are a comfort to us, that we should not be
angry when such things happen to us, that either Hagar despises and
oppresses Sarah, or Eliezer Abraham. \"For God\'s counsel,\" that He may
forgive, \"is marvelous,\" Isa. 28:29, and those who trust in His
goodness finally triumph and are rewarded with all honors.

\(59\) It should also be noted that Sarah not only reproaches Abraham
with this complaint, but also calls God to judge him. Therefore, they
must have been very divided among themselves. But this is how it is
among spouses; one cannot avoid all displeasure and unwillingness. As it
is also in the secular government and in the church, although there the
displeasure and quarrels are more violent and dangerous.

\(60\) So that this whole history or example is for us to learn from it
how things are among us in this life. These words, \"Let the Lord be
judge between me and thee,\" are hard enough, but they have taken away
from Sarah the great unrighteousness, iniquity and violence of her maid,
which, as Sarah well knew, was a great sin.

011 For because she was with child, she desired to have right and
authority in the house, and to be an heir of all that Abraham had; and
Sarah could not at all shut her mouth.

She was so exalted by this gift that she was with child and gave birth.
But look at Abraham, the great patriarch, what he does and what he
answers.

**Third part.**

**As Abraham hands over Hagar into Sarah\'s hand and Sarah wants to
humiliate Hagar, \"nv how Hagar behaves here.**

**I.**

**And Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thine handmaid is under thy power;
do with her as thou wilt.**

62\. Such a husband is to be diligently considered, and to be praised
and extolled favorably. He could have said: Dear Sarah, why are you
angry then? You should have been patient and not have caused such
strife; for you see that she is pregnant by God\'s grace and gift, and
has conceived from me the seed that will possess the promise made to me:
therefore be patient with her, and keep the pregnant mother until she
has given birth. When this is done, let us continue to talk and discuss
with each other. This would have been an honest and fair speech, which I
myself, if it had happened to me, would have followed and said: Dear
woman, you are barren, God has taken the fruits of the womb from you and
given them to this one, therefore suffer something 2c.

\(63\) But Abraham does not do this, but prefers his barren old
housemother to the pregnant maid, puts it in her will and pleasure to do
what she wants with the maid, regardless of the fact that she is
pregnant, and would much rather dispose of the mother with the child
than grieve his pious and godly wife.

\(64\) And this little piece also belongs to the description not only of
the danger, trouble and discomfort in marriage and housekeeping, but
also of the temptations. Abraham had previously been challenged on
account of his servant Eliezer, and had never been challenged in this
way.

**[984 L. IV. 1S-21. Interpretation of Genesis 16:6, W. 1:1483-1485.
985]{.underline}**

God alone through His word; now here Sarah is challenged, God comforts
her through her husband.

Thus God is always with the marriage state and the domestic regime as an
overseer and governor, and indicates that He has great pleasure and
favor in such a state. In the domestic regime there is often quarreling
and ill will between the spouses; in the secular regime there are many
disagreements and discord; in the church there are sects and sects: so
that whoever diligently thinks about such things must almost despair of
all happiness and welfare.

But against this, such histories teach and admonish us that we should be
prepared and accustomed to endure and overcome all kinds of adversity
and unpleasantness, and not be among those who want to be unchallenged
in the state of marriage or in the worldly regime. For people who are
inexperienced in this life take such thoughts in vain. For it is
impossible that he who is a husband should not have in his house either
a Hagar or an Eliezer, from whom he must have displeasure and
temptation.

The same is true of the church government, which sects and other
disturbances disrupt. Therefore, let us take good note of this example
and also believe and trust God with the faithful Abraham, and keep unity
as much as we can. For since we have to live here among ungrateful and
wicked people, cause for disunity and discontent will be found and
happen everywhere. This is the one meaning of this text, which serves us
to see from it how one should behave and keep oneself in this life.

\(68\) The allegory or interpretation that Paul uses in the epistle to
the Galatians, Cap. 4, 29, 30, almost corresponds to the other
understanding. 4, 29, 30. For just as Hagar, who was a bought and bonded
servant, exalted herself over the gift of God and wanted to be powerful
over Sarah, so the false church condemns, despises and persecutes the
true church and wants to have the name of being God\'s people alone.

Such dispute and struggle goes over the church for and for. Those, so
the church

But those who are the right church are plagued and oppressed by the
wrong one. For Cain, Ham, Ishmael, Esau, all these subjected and exalted
themselves to the title of the church, and snatched the promises to
themselves, as if they were heirs of the same.

\(70\) And what was the quarrel among the apostles of Christ but a
challenge to the sovereignty and authority of the church? Just as Hagar
puffed herself up for the sake of blessing and exalted herself above her
wife, and still thinks she is doing it justly, so because the false
church surpasses the true church in goods, honor and power, when it has
none and is oppressed, it persecutes and condemns it. Moses finely
indicates this with the words: \"When she saw that she was with child,
she regarded her wife with contempt. For the word \"see\" means to feel
God\'s gift, which is pride and hope.

71 For one to know and feel that he is learned, wise, rich, 2c., is not
evil; for it would be ingratitude to despise such gifts: but to exalt
oneself of such gifts, and to hope with them, is diabolical, and a sin
which grows out of original sin.

Thus Adam and Eve had open eyes after sin, and knew good and evil; but
those whom the Holy Spirit governs know that the more and higher gifts
they have, the more they must undergo labor and diligence to serve
others who do not have such gifts. But we are almost all like Hagar, and
are defiant and proud of our gifts and blessings against others who are
not like us.

73\. Now if Hagar had said, \"I am with child, thank God, because of
this work, but I will not let myself think too much of being a
maidservant, but I will be obedient to my wife as before, and therefore
I will do this all the more diligently, because it was her will, counsel
and command that I should be a mother: she grudges me her husband, so I
will again do to her will and favor what I know and can: if, I say,
Hagar had done this, she would have done right and well. But she does as
the

**[986 IV. 21-23. Interpretation of Genesis 16:6, W. I, IE-14S8.
987]{.underline}**

The woman, who is of a corrupt nature, exalts herself against her wife
for the gifts she has. For she is sure in her mind that she will be the
mother of the promised seed, through which the blessing shall come to
all nations.

Sarah sees such wrongdoing and injustice, but she does not remain silent
about it. For although one should show patience and wait for God\'s
help, one should be completely careful not to justify other people\'s
sins.

\(75\) So deceitful on the neck of the pope is the banishment, hatred,
and enmity of the whole world; but for this reason I do not praise the
pope, that he does right in that he opposes the right doctrine, and
condemns and murders Christ\'s limbs only for the sake of keeping his
kingdom and power.

76 Christ also had to let all authority pass over Him, but He did not
keep silent about it, but punished the servant of the high priest freely
and publicly, saying, \"Why do you strike me? Joh. 18, 23. For patience
and confession should be together. For if there be no confession, the
cause that is to be maintained against the devil and the world is
betrayed and forsaken.

But here we can also see how weak we poor people are. For Sarah is right
to complain about the injustice and violence done to her by the
maidservant; but as a human being, she is also guilty of weakness in her
harsh treatment of her innocent husband and in her appeal to God\'s
judgment against him. For Abraham did not have such a mind as she
thought: he was glad of the blessing that God wanted to give him an heir
and a mother, and dealt kindly with the mother, even though she was a
maid; but he did not disown his old Sarah for that reason.

78, Therefore this is a domestic fight, which often happens between
spouses, when one part gives in to his affections and irritations or
suspicions. For if Abraham had been such a one as Sarah thinks him to be
and accuses him of, he would undoubtedly have taken care of Hagar,
defended her and said to Sarah, \"What is it to you if I have been a
wife?

You have nothing to do with it; remain as you were before, and let me
deal well with her, whom I see God has adorned with His joyful blessing.

79 But you do not hear any of these words here, but Abraham simply hands
over his power to Sarah and submits the proud maid to her, so that she
may do with her as she pleases. Such a deed makes the good, pious
patriarch free of all suspicion of unchastity, and proves that he did
everything he did in the case at the instigation of his wife, so that
the promise would not be hindered: and yet he is so fond of his old
housemother, Sarah, that he would rather forgive the hope of the heir
than disagree with his dear wife. Where would we find such a man now,
who would love his wife so much and who would take domestic unity so
seriously?

80 Therefore it is right to rule one\'s wife in love and to deal with
her in reason, as Peter says in 1 Epist. 3, 7. For if he had given word
after word and met his angry wife with a harsh answer and had not wanted
to give in to his right, all unity and conjugal love would soon have
been severed and torn apart. But he, being full of the Holy Spirit,
thought: \"Behold, I am a man, but Sarah is my wife, a weak vessel;
therefore I will keep the peace through patience.

It is a great virtue for such a great man to give way and yield to his
wife so kindly that the devil may not gain the upper hand in his house.
Inexperienced and coarse people, who consider such things their glory
and praise when they prove themselves earnest and hard against their
wives and children, give room to their anger when they encounter such a
challenge and help Satan to drive his little wheel with it. Therefore it
is good for a householder to remember this domestic example often and
diligently. For without such displeasure and unwillingness it is
impossible to lead a marriage and a household; just as such misfortune
and mischief neither the

**[988 L. IV, 23-2S. Interpretation of I Moses 16, 6. s. 1, 1488-1491.
989]{.underline}**

Church can still be overtaken by the police. But one should keep the
consolation that finally the angel of the Lord will protect and preserve
us.

**II.**

**Now that she wanted to humiliate Sarai, she fled from her.**

The Hebrew word anali means to humble, to torment, to afflict; therefore
in the prophet Zechariah, Cap. 9, v. 9, Christ is called ani, poor and
afflicted; and this is also said of Moses, Deut. 12, 3. Therefore this
is the opinion of this text: Hagar had exalted herself, and wanted to
sit in the place of her wife, Sarah, and have everything in her
possession: but Sarah could not be well pleased with this, and
humiliated her, made her wait for her service and work, and perhaps
(according to the way of the same people, which is unknown to me) she
might also have imposed a punishment on her. But now it is very painful
when one, having previously sat high and in honor, is to be humiliated
again and kept in discipline.

\(83\) Therefore this humiliation will have hurt Hagar more than all
punishments, and yet she will not be improved by it. The body had been
humbled, but the heart not only remained hardened in hope, but also in
anger and enmity.

For the puffed-up, proud and furious maid now thinks how she can take
revenge and deprive her wife not only of her body but also of the child.
For she thinks that she has a good pledge with her, which will force
Abraham to seek her out voluntarily and lead her home again with honor,
from which she thought she had been unjustly cast out.

The righteousness of the law is really like this. For where the law is
alone, it blows out and makes angry and fierce people. For where God
will not let happen what we want, but will put us under the cross, the
heart is aroused and embittered against God. That is why Paul says Rom.
4, 15: \"The law causes wrath.\" Now the law includes worldly punishment
and the sword. For with it the wicked are compelled to do what they have
been forced to do.

The fools who come must do against their will; as the scripture Proverbs
19:29, Cap. 23, 13. also says: One should punish the fools with blows
and rods. But just as children cannot bear the rod and the punishment
without weeping, so it is impossible that adults and old men should bear
the punishment without grumbling and enmity.

At the present time the Turks are masters of almost the whole world;
they keep their own under strict and severe discipline, so that they
must do what is their due; they give the prisoners water and black
bread, and yet not enough of it; but the work has its certain goal: but
if they are tardy in it, or keep still, they are driven with cudgels.

\(87\) Though dishonorable and servile natures cannot be dealt with in
any other way, nor should they be kept in any other way, yet it is
certain that they will not be advised in this way. Hagar had been pious
and well to suffer before, but now she has showered her wife with so
much kindness, she is exalted and becomes the worst of all. Since Sarah
wants to advise her and prevent other unpleasantness that might result,
she runs away.

\(88\) Therefore we have here also painted as on a tablet how it is in
the world and how it is about it, namely, that people are taught and
admonished in vain; for also the punishment is in vain, as Isaiah Cap.
49, 4. complains about his Jews. This is what we do when we feel blows
and punishment, we cry, weep and lament; but we should first lament and
weep over our sins, which provoke God to anger and punishment.

\(89\) Since the people of Israel had to be imprisoned and in misery
among the Gentiles in Babylon for seventy years, there was no lack of
lamentation, weeping, sighing and praying; but what do the prophets,
even God Himself through the prophets, say about it? I, saith Jer. 7,
25. cap. 35, 15, sent to you my prophets, crying and weeping that I
might restore you, but you killed them. Therefore I will also make you
weep in vain.

Today, Germany has never cried out, never wept, never lamented over the
horrible sins we have committed.

**[990 L. IV. 25-27. Interpretation of Genesis 16:6-9. W. I, I4S1-I4\".
991]{.underline}**

But when the punishments come and begin, we begin to weep and wail; but
we should have done so long before that time. For if the punishment is
already present, we cry and weep in vain; but those who mourn and weep
over their sin before the punishment comes, God will move their sighs
and make the punishment lighter and easier; as He promises in Ezekiel
chap. 9:4, when God will bring a punishment upon the priests and the
people, He will take out and save those who sigh and weep over the
abominations and idolatries, so that they will not perish with the
wicked.

91 Thus Hagar is an example of the carnal man, who can neither be
punished nor helped. For when Sarah did good to her maid, she puffed
herself up and became proud; but when she was chastised, she ran out of
the door: and yet the following text reports an example of divine grace
and mercy.

**Fourth Part.**

**How Hagar is called back by the angel from her flight, and the promise
of Ishmael is given to her.**

**I.**

**V. 7, 8, 9: But the angel of the Lord found her by a well of water in
the wilderness, that is, by the well of the way to Snr. He said unto
her, Hagar, Sarai\'s handmaid, whence comest thou, and whither wilt thou
go? She said: I have fled from my wife Sarai. And the angel of the LORD
said unto her, Return unto thy wife, and humble thyself under her
hand.**

This is a very beautiful and mighty example, that God loves the marriage
state and the household regiment and preserves it through the ministry
of the angels. That Hagar, out of anger and excitement, had run away
into the wilderness and left her wife was Satan\'s doing; but the
angels, whom God had given to this father of the house as servants and
guardians, bring Hagar back, so that the promise, by which God had
promised Abraham that He would be his and his seed\'s God, might be
kept.

93\) Without a doubt, Abraham and Sarah prayed for Hagar at the same
time, after she had fallen into such a great sin, because she had not
only taken her body from her wife, but had also stolen and kidnapped
Abraham\'s son.

The desert Sur lies between Judea and Egypt, therefore she thought how
she wanted to flee again to Egypt, to her fatherland: and it cannot be
missing, such a mischievous advice and nobility must have grieved and
distressed the pious married couple very much. Sarah must have been
sorry that she had been a little too hard on the pregnant maid: so
Abraham must also have blamed himself for allowing and indulging his
wife so much right over the maid.

Now this is a strange change and reversal: those who are holy and
without guilt are conscience-stricken about other people\'s sins; but
Hagar, who alone was the cause of all sins, is safe as if she had sinned
nothing. And such error and misfortune is common not only in the
domestic regime, but also in the secular and ecclesiastical regime,
namely, that those who have sinned also excuse themselves and do not
recognize the sin.

Who the angel was that spoke to Hagar, Moses does not indicate. Hilarius
thinks that it was God Himself, and is almost inclined to this opinion,
that he would like to refer such appearances of the angels to the
mystery of the Holy Trinity. Although men are also called angels, I
believe that this angel appeared to Hagar in the form of a man; for when
angels appear to men, they take on the form of the body, so that they
appear.

97\) So the angel who was appointed as the guardian of paradise, Gen. 3,
24, was seen with eyes; also the two who led Lot out of Sodom, Gen. 19,
15, 16; also those who sat at the tomb of the Lord, Joh. 20, 12, and
those who were seen when Christ was taken up and told the disciples how
Christ would come again from heaven, Act. 1, 10. 11.

**[992 IV. 27-28. interpretation of Genesis 16, 710 . w. i. 1494-1487.
993]{.underline}**

For this is how the angels appear, whether in the form of a young man or
an old man. For just as we do not always wear the same garment, but put
on one thing and another, and yet do not lose or change anything in our
bodies, so the angels remain the same spirits, even though they do not
always appear to men in the same form, but change, as it were, with
their garments.

99\. And Hagar soon recognized the angel when he called her by her name.
For because she had been a long time in Abraham\'s house, she had often
heard from him that the works of men were governed by the ministry of
the dear angels. Therefore, she somewhat retracts her courage and
defiance, so that she had rebelled against her wife in Abraham\'s house;
and when the angel asks her where she is going, she answers that she is
fleeing from her wife.

\(100\) Thus she accuses herself of her disobedience and robbery,
confessing that she is fleeing and that Sarah is her wife. So the angel
also judges her from her own words: If Sarai is your wife, he says,
return to her and humble yourself under her hand, for this is the duty
of a maid.

101 Therefore this is a sharp sermon of the law, which is powerful to
cause terror and fear. For when Hagar is frightened, she speaks the
truth that she would never have confessed if she had not been
frightened. When Sarah spoke to her, Moses\' face was still covered, but
when the angel spoke, horns and rays of an unpleasant light burst out of
Moses\' face, causing the poor maid to tremble and be frightened, and
she would have died of sorrow and fear if the angel had not lifted her
up and comforted her.

\(102\) This is what the law does: when it strikes the hearts with its
rays and penetrates them, it drives them to despair, as we see with
Judah and Saul. Therefore, this is God\'s unspeakable goodness, that He
not only frightens through the preaching of the law, but also restores
and comforts through His promise.

103\. and does this text also belong to the confirmation of the house
regiment, that it is GOtt

He does not want anyone to change his profession or to leave it, as it
was considered very holy in the papacy if someone left his profession
and hid in a monastery. Hagar could have stayed in the desert, but the
Lord wanted her to stay in her profession and be a servant to her wife.
Therefore, no one should change his status out of his own discretion and
nobility. For God will change it for you by death, or by the counsel and
will of those who are set over you; but where this does not happen,
those who leave their profession sin.

**II.**

104 Thus Hagar, when she is not frightened by the covered but by the
shining face of Moses, speaks with St. Paul, Acts 9:6: \"Lord, what do
you want me to do? Before this fright, however, she despises in hope and
defiance her wife Sarah\'s commandment. Now follow further wonderful and
beautiful sermons of comfort, which do not belong to Hagar for the sake
of her piety, but belong to Abraham for the sake of the promise, which
seed was Ishmael.

V. 10 **And the angel of the Lord said unto her: I will so multiply thy
seed, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.**

This is an excellent promise, by which the frightened Hagar will be
restored. For this is the change God makes with us: after sorrow comes
comfort, after despair comes hope, after death comes life. Satan,
however, turns it around and plays the opposite game: first he gives
joy, then sadness, and finally despair follows security in sins.

Therefore, no one should be so distressed and saddened when he feels
terror and danger, but should encourage himself and hope that God will
comfort and raise him up again; and because such hope is certain among
the faithful, they so earnestly and diligently call upon God for help
and comfort.

\(107\) Now as far as this promise is concerned, it is not equal to the
other one made by Isaac, but it is still considered by the people.

**[994 L IV. W-\". Interpretation of Genesis 16:10, 11. W. 1. 1497-1500.
995]{.underline}**

> Hagarenes, who call themselves the Saracens, are praised very well and
> preferred to the one that is from Isaac. For they rely on this and
> exalt themselves above all peoples on earth, and in their Alcoran they
> tell a great lie, how Abraham spared his son Isaac and wanted to
> sacrifice Ishmael in his place 2c. They invent such lies only to draw
> to themselves the promises made to Abraham and to prove that they are
> Abraham\'s true children.
>
> So the popes also lie and boast that all the promises of Christ fell
> in all the apostles and remained and were confirmed in Petro alone.
> Such vanity is in the hearts of men, from which such loose fame of the
> Saracens and popes has come.
>
> Since the name of the Turks was still unknown to the world, the
> Saracens were very powerful and plagued Greece, Italy and Africa hard,
> until they were forced and made subservient by the Turks for the sake
> of their splendor and court and finally became one nation with them.

Therefore, we see here that when the hope of the flesh can defend itself
and its actions with God\'s word, it shamefully abuses it and blows
itself up. Therefore God is provoked to oppress those who exalt
themselves, and to humiliate the hopeful Hagarenes, who preferred
themselves to the true lineage of Abraham, because Ishmael was the
firstborn son of Abraham. But Paul in the epistle to the Galatians Cap.
4, v. 23, disputes this finely, namely, that not those who are born of
Abraham\'s flesh, but according to the promise, are Abraham\'s children.
The ungodly Gentiles did not see this, but boasted of the firstborn, on
which they drew the promises, and therefore certainly made themselves
believe that they could never fall.

\(111\) But this bodily promise was fulfilled long ago; for out of
Ishmael were born twelve kings, and he gave them power for a long time.
For they held the whole Orient until finally Gog and Magog, that is, the
Turks, humiliated them.

**V.11. Then the angel of the Lord said to her, \"Behold, you have
conceived and will bear a son, and you shall call his name Ishmael,
because the Lord has heard your affliction.**

\(112\) From this text the Jews have invented strange and foolish lies.
They say that Hagar was weary from her journey, and that in the desert
she was troubled and weakened with worry and fear, so that she gave
birth prematurely; but after that she conceived again and gave birth in
due time; and that the angel was sent to her to tell her of this
miracle, so that the poor woman might be comforted. On this poem they
draw what the angel says: \"God has heard your misery\", that is, that
the fruit in your womb has died. But such lies are not worth talking
about.

For \"misery\" the angel undoubtedly calls that which Hagar felt as
misery, namely that she was a maidservant and had been chastised by
Sarah. For on such an opinion the angel speaks to her: \"Do not complain
about being a maidservant, for God loves the servants just as much as
the free, there is no respect of the person with Him, Eph. 6, 9.
Therefore suffer this patiently and submit to your wife, even if you are
pregnant: God loves Sarah, so He also loves you, and with God such
servitude does not harm you at all; for behold, He repays you for such
misery with a very happy blessing; to this you adhere 2c.

This is my opinion of this text. Whoever wants to understand this about
misery from the humility and terror of the law may well do so, but this
understanding is more simple: God hears, the angel wants to say, that
you complain, that you are a servant and bondwoman and have nothing of
your own; but he has seen your misery and wants to bless you: therefore
be of good cheer and do not despair. So we should also comfort one
another: the classes in this life are very unequal; the poor Lazarus
suffers hunger and pain, but the rich man lives gloriously and in joy,
Luc. 16:19, 20; so a king or other high person seems to have it better,
because

**[996 IV, 32-34. interpretation of I Moses 16, 11. 12. w. I. isoo-ivot.
997]{.underline}**

a private person. Such inequality grieves us and often drives hearts
astray that they change their profession and status with sins.

\(115\) But you should take this comfort, which the angel shows here,
and think: Behold, you are a servant, a maidservant, afflicted with
poverty and burdened with work; but let this be a good comfort to you,
that your God looks upon both masters and servants, rich and poor,
sinners and the pious. For he is this God of all, and wills that all men
should take comfort in his grace and favor and rely upon it. The
difference that exists among men in this life makes no distinction among
persons before God, but he hears one in service or servitude as well as
another in freedom.

Such consolation is necessary and should often be impressed upon people,
for it makes hearts certain and serves against the dangerous abandonment
of the profession, which one never undertakes without sin. For men\'s
hearts by nature flee the cross and strive for high things out of blind
ambition.

The name Ishmael means God hears or God hears, and is a very beautiful
name, at which no doubt the Saracens have become proud and puffed
themselves up; for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob are not such praiseworthy
names. But here we are also held up to this teaching that God also
scatters and distributes His very best gifts among the wicked. God takes
care of the miserable and sorrowful Hagar in such a way that He forgets
Abraham and Sarah, as it can be seen; yes, He not only takes care of
Ishmael, since he is not yet born, but also honors him with a very rich
and glorious promise.

\(118\) But lest it be regarded as equal to the promise made to Abraham
and his true seed, it is limited, and the Holy Spirit does not leave it
at that, saying, \"I will multiply thy seed,\" but also describes what
manner of man Ishmael shall be, and what manner of nation shall be born
of him. All this is to be diligently considered and contemplated.

**Fifth part.**

**Of Ishmael and his descendants, and how Hagar is converted.**

**I.**

**V. 12. He will be a wild man; his hand against everyone, and
everyone\'s hand against him; and will dwell against all his brethren.**

119 This is a description of the Arabs, who do not live in a certain and
permanent place, but carry all their goods around with them in wagons
and generally live by robbery. The Hebrew word pere is almost like the
Latin word ferus, wild; for those who have become accustomed to deserts
and forests are commonly wild. The Jews say that pere is an animal
called onager (wild ass), but what kind of animal it is I do not know,
nor have I seen it. In our German Bible we call pere in general, wild.
So we see here first of all that Ishmael does not have a certain and
permanent place on earth, like Abraham, whose family is expressly
promised the land of Canaan.

120 Therefore it is rightly said here that Ishmael\'s manner and way of
life is against everyone. For others stay in certain cities and
villages; but Ishmael loves the deserts, is wild and wild; today he
stays with his family under this tree, tomorrow under that tree; as
today the Arabs and Troglodytes do, who, as Breitenbach writes, consider
it right that they live and support themselves by robbing and stealing.
The angel points to this by calling him pere, a wild man, who will not
ask much about cities, laws and orders, which are necessary for the
preservation of the society of the human race.

But since the gospel has been preached to the whole world, it has
nevertheless come to such a region and God has had a numerous church
there. For in such deserts the hermits or anachoretes have settled down,
of which Jerome writes a great deal; for through them this savage
people, who alone were inclined to war and unrest, has finally come to
an end.

**[998 \".IV. 34-3\". Interpretation of I Genesis 16:12. W. I,
ISO4\^-IS07. 999]{.underline}**

The Romans and Persians, however, have often attacked them with their
robberies.

The lies of the Jews, of which I have spoken above, show that they know
nothing of the right understanding of the holy Scriptures and divine
things; and yet they draw after them great and high men, as Lyra and
others, who in our time are the most learned in their language, and yet
think much of such lies. But this happens to the Jews because they have
lost the knowledge of the matter.

For knowledge is twofold, one of words, the other of things. Whoever
does not have the knowledge of the thing, the knowledge of the words
will not help him. According to an old saying, it is customary to say:
\"What one does not understand and know well, he will not be able to
speak well about. Our time has brought many such examples to light. For
many very learned and eloquent people pretend to be extremely foolish
and ridiculous, because they dare to speak of such things that they have
never understood.

124 For as often as Erasmus, who is an excellently learned and eloquent
man, presumes to speak of justification and matters of faith, he bumps
miserably and produces foolish things; yet when he is to speak of other
matters, he speaks very fully and well.

The same can be seen in Sadoletus. But he who knows and understands the
matter teaches rightly and strikes the heart, even if he is not eloquent
and not finished in words. So Cato did to Cicero before, when he spoke
in the council, even though he brought up such things roughly and
without all adornment and decoration, which were not suitable for
anyone\'s mind and no one thought of them.

\(126\) It is the same with the Jews, for they have nothing but the
understanding of words, but they have lost the thing. A grammarian, when
he hears the proverb: Lupus in fabula (The wolf in the fable), and does
not understand the matter, thinks that the fable is in the mouth; if
then the wolf is in the fable, it follows that the wolf is in the mouth.
Who would want such a doctrine

Do you not laugh at them? And yet one notices such things among great
people in the most important disputations and dealings. The Jews,
because they do not know the true meaning of the holy scriptures,
namely, that God wants the subjects to humble themselves under their
overlords, tell shameful lies about Hagar\'s misery, and invent a new
and unheard-of miracle in such a matter, in which no miracle is
necessary. But how much better and more useful it would be to teach that
God loves and is kind to those who understand that they are being
chastised!

For Hagar is chastised by her wife, and does not accept such
chastisement with patience, but plans to use it to escape, and even
though she sins in doing so, God sees her misery and comforts her. What
could be said here that is more friendly?

Therefore, we should also become accustomed to patience and make do with
our punishment and discipline, the children from their parents, the
subjects from the authorities, the students from their schoolmaster; for
such obedience, when we allow ourselves to be chastened, is pleasing to
God. Our nature, however, when it feels the punishment, not only becomes
impatient and grumbles, but also despairs of God\'s grace and mercy.
Such distress arises from ignorance of holy things. For those who know
that God will take care of them when they are under discipline and are
punished by their parents or by their masters or authorities, will
comfort themselves with this hope in their misery and wait for the
blessing of the Lord, which was also granted to Hagar, although she did
wrong to flee.

Thus the understanding of words or grammar becomes easy when the matter
is rightly understood; as Horace also teaches that words follow easily
when the matter is rightly conceived, known, and considered: but where
one does not have the understanding of the matter, the knowledge of the
words is also in vain.

130 But for this reason I am giving you this account in so many words,
so that you may know when you read the rabbis what masters you have
before you: the

**[1000 IV, 8S-S8. Interpretation of Genesis 16, 12-14. W. 1, 1507-1510.
1001]{.underline}**

They understand words, but they know nothing about the matter, therefore
they cannot do anything righteous.

But of God\'s goodness and grace we have knowledge and understanding of
things; but they are blinded. Therefore, although they know the grammar,
they do not have the right understanding of the Scriptures; rather, as
Isaiah Cap. 29:12, the Scriptures are to them as a book which they
cannot read. Who then would follow them?

Now, let this not be interpreted or understood as if I were rejecting
grammar, which is quite necessary; but this much I say: If a man does
not study the things of Scripture along with grammar, he will never
become a good teacher. For as he said, the speech of a teacher or
preacher should follow and grow from the heart and not in the mouth.

133 We have now seen who Ishmael is and what kind of a people he is the
father of, namely one that lives without law and is used to deserts,
hunting, robbing and stealing 2c. For in this way Isaiah interprets the
word pere, when he calls this people a torn and mangled, a robbing and
stolen people: it has robbed all the lands that were around it, finally
it has been robbed by the Turk himself, who is also an Ishmaelite; for
his hand is against all.

**II.**

**V. 13. 14. And she called the name of the LORD which spake unto her,
Thou God seest me. For she said, Surely here I have seen him that looked
on me afterward. And she called the well a well of the Living One that
looked on me; which well is between Kadesh and Bared.**

Without fruit, God\'s word never departs; therefore, here too, the
rebellious, proud and disobedient Hagar is converted by the angel\'s
preaching, returns to her wife and patiently suffers her violence over
her: yes, she not only does this, but recognizes God\'s mercy, praises
God and calls Him by a new name to praise His good deed, so that He had
shown Himself against her.

In the New Testament we call Christ a redeemer of His work, so that He
revealed Himself to us; we call the Holy Spirit a comforter; Hagar calls
God a seer, as He looked upon her humility or misery. And such an
example is also useful to us for teaching, so that everyone in his
profession may learn to recognize God\'s benefits, be grateful for them
and boast about them; item, that we patiently suffer the discipline of
those who are set over us, because God delights in such patience and
sends us help.

Thus the Scriptures, as St. Paul says in 2 Timothy 3:16, are useful for
teaching, and are not a useless grammar in which we argue about letters,
punctuation and words. For by this example of Hagar we are also taught
to give glory to God, who comforted us, and to say: Lord, you have
helped me from my sickness, you have given me goods, you have given me a
godly wife 2c.

This is the sacrifice of praise and the most pleasing service of God,
namely, when you recognize and praise His good deeds, and call Him
*roi,* that is, He who sees me. As if Hagar wanted to say: I thought God
had abandoned me, but now I see that He has looked upon me and has not
rejected me, poor and miserable maid.

This is a lovely and beautiful name of God; and if God wanted us all to
give it to Him, that is, if we could conclude that He looks at us and
pays the most attention to us, when we think that He has forgotten us
and abandoned us. For he who in his suffering and distress can say so
much: God sees me; he has a righteous faith, and can do and suffer all
things, yea, he compels and overcomes all things.

\(139\) Therefore I think that Hagar should be counted among the holy
women. For the fact that Paul compares her to Sarah in Gal. 4:30, and
calls her a maid who has no place in the house, does not hinder
anything. For it is common in Scripture that even the saints are an
image of the wicked; just as Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Hosea are an image of
the wicked synagogue, yet they themselves are holy and pious. Thus

**[1002 \". rv, 3S-40. interpretation of Genesis 16:13, 14. w. I,
IS10-ISIS. 1003]{.underline}**

I also consider that Ishmael and many others from his descendants have
been blessed, and it does not harm him that his mother is an image of
the synagogue.

For the whole church also bears the image of the eternal curse, for it
is afflicted and cruelly slain by its enemies, yet it is not abandoned.
Thus Simeon Luc. 2, 34. calls the Lord Christ a sign from the 8th Cap.
Isaiah v. 14, 18, item, a stone of offense and annoyance for the fall.
So Hagar, who is justified and sanctified by God\'s word without
suffering harm, bears the image of the wicked.

These words: \"Certainly, here I have seen the one who looked at me
afterwards,\" cause a lot of trouble for the grammarians. But before I
tell the thoughts and understanding of others about this, I will have
faithfully warned them that those who read the interpretations of the
rabbis do not believe them. Grammar is certainly necessary and right;
however, it should not govern things, but serve them. But the blinded
Jews have lost all knowledge of things and argue only about the words of
grammar. Rabbi Salomon says that Hagar was surprised at the angel with
these words, after she had previously seen angels in Abraham\'s house.

But Lyra follows Rabbi Kimalthi and gives these words: I saw him
according to my appearance, that is, first of all I did not know the
angel; but when he suddenly disappeared before my eyes, then I
recognized at first that it had been an angel.

143\] So they hang only on the understanding of the words, because they
have no knowledge of the things; but the right reason and understanding
they do not reach, and do not see that Hagar, who before was grieved and
frightened and is again comforted by the angel, thanks God and is of
good cheer.

For this reason one should first look at the matter. You, God, she says,
see me, do not leave me in my misery, but visit and comfort me.
Therefore, whenever I come to this well or remember it, I will praise
this great good deed.

that I have seen him here who looked at me.

Therefore, these are the words of a person who is amazed and happy about
something. Oh, how I have been so faithless, she will say! I did not
think that God would take care of me, and I did not think that I would
see God in his face, but would see him from behind, that is, I thought
that God had turned away from me. But now I understand that the back he
showed me was his face. He also saw me before; but I, who was swallowed
up by my misery and sorrow, could not recognize him; but now I recognize
him, that he loves me, that he takes care of me 2c.

146\. so this is as it were a general song of all God-fearers- for when
there is distress and affliction, we see God from behind, that is, we
think that God has turned away from us; as He says in the prophet Isaiah
Cap. 54, 8.: \"I have hid my face from thee a little in the moment of
wrath; but with everlasting mercy I will have mercy on you,\" that is,
at first I showed myself as if I did not know you, as if I had rejected
you (for that is, to look back at God when we feel nothing but gloom and
terror), but afterwards, when the temptation is gone, it seems that by
turning his back on us, God has shown us his face, and has not cast us
off, but has turned his eyes a little from us. Thus Peter 1 Epist. 1,
11. says: \"The prophets, by the Spirit of Christ which was in them,
testified beforehand of the sufferings which are in Christ, and of the
glory hereafter.\"

Therefore, this is the song of the whole church, which sings with Hagar:
\"I have seen him who looked upon me afterwards,\" that is, God first
turned his back on me. For in temptations we take it for granted that
God has abandoned us and does not respect us; but at last we learn that
such looking afterwards has been God\'s face, and God has not only seen
us Himself, but we have also seen Him.

Whoever does not learn this in his cross falls into despair. For
therefore

**[1004 L. IV, 40-12. interpretation of Genesis 16:13, 14. w. I,
UU8-ISIS. 1005]{.underline}**

These words are in the 31st Psalm, v. 23: \"I am cast out of your
sight\", that is, God does not look at me, he does not respect me; item,
v. 17: \"Lord, show us your face, let your face go before us\". When
therefore one feels God\'s wrath, let the heart encourage itself in
faith and not weaken or break, but hope that it will one day come to
sing with Hagar this song: \"I have seen him who looked upon me
afterward.\" For these are words of a joyful and rejoicing heart, which
before was overloaded with fear, almost fallen into despair.

Now if anyone wants to look for allegories and something secret in this,
let him do so; I am content with this literal understanding, which
history itself brings along. Lyra says that the back means an imperfect
knowledge, but the face means the perfect knowledge of God. But it is
much more simple that you understand that the back is a sign of anger,
namely, when God turns away from us and does not want to look at us,
that is, when our heart thinks that God is angry with us; but the face
is a sign of grace. So Hagar says: \"I never understood that my service
and servitude was pleasing to God, but now I see that the back that God
showed me was His right face and that He took care of me.

\(150\) This understanding is not given to us by grammar, which the
rabbis alone have, but by the knowledge of things in the holy
Scriptures; and because the rabbis do not have it, they are to be
utterly despised.

. 451 But let us take care that we first become knowledgeable and
experienced in these things, and then grammar will become easy. For he
who sins in this does no mortal sin; but he who lacks the matter and
errs in it does a mortal sin.

Now I call the knowledge of things nothing else than the knowledge and
understanding of the New Testament; which, if it be rightly understood,
the Scriptures of the whole Old Testament also become light and clear.
But because the rabbis not only do not know Christ, but they also do not
know Him.

nor know, but reject him altogether; what then can we learn from them?
And yet today one finds many great and learned people who consider it
great wisdom when they have read through all the rabbis\' talk and lies.

The rhetors call a speaker who is not only rich in words, but also has a
rich knowledge of things; as they say, The heart makes eloquent. For
those whose mouths are full of words are able to wash a lot, but they do
not speak anything wise or understandable. The rabbis are all like them,
none excepted; for they have nothing more than a deceitful and vain
semblance of words.

Therefore let us keep the right opinion of this text, which is not
reported to us by its grammar but by the understanding of the things,
namely, that this is a song, set forth for the teaching of all of us,
who, when we are in trouble and temptation, think that we have been
rejected by God, and that he does not look upon us nor take care of us;
therefore we should finally sing with joy: I have seen him who looked
upon me before, that is, God has not rejected me nor despised me, as I
thought, but he has looked upon me: this I have seen after he has seen
me, that is, since he took away my misery from me.

Accordingly, as a sign of gratitude that she wants to praise God and
prove her service to Him for the benefit He had shown her, she gives a
name to God and to the same place, and calls it a fountain of the Living
One who has seen her.

And both names are full of comfort. For if God is a living God, then we
who are His people will also be granted such a life as He, that is, an
eternal life. And because this is a great gift and benefit, one thing is
compared with another; namely, that the living God is also a looking
God, who does not abandon those who are in distress and misery, but
looks at them and helps them.

157\. with such glory and praise the holy Hagar adorns GOD the LORD and
makes this well famous; and is such-

**[1006 L.rv. 4\"-\<4. interpretation of Gen. 16:13-16. cap. 17:1. w. i,
us-is\". 1007]{.underline}**

This is the proper service we should render to God, who is so gracious
and kind.

158 Kadesh is located toward the south of the holy land, in the place
that was later given to the tribe of Judah, and through it the road from
the holy land to Egypt passes. Now Moses, by remembering such a desolate
place where this well had been, wanted to praise and extol such a
glorious good deed to his people.

**And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called the name of the son that
Hagar bare him Ishmael. And Abram was six and fourscore years old when
Hagar bare him Ishmael.**

Here you see that after this revelation the disobedient Hagar, who
before did not want to suffer any compulsion, has now become completely
different. Therefore she comes home again and is obedient to her wife
Sarah, and tells Abraham what the angel spoke to her, and how he had
given a name to the child that was not yet born: Abraham puts up with
this and does not change the name.

160 And Moses remembered the age of Abraham, that we should know that he
had yet thirteen years to wait, until Isaac the promised son should be
born to him of Sarah.

**The seventeenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**From circumcision.**

**When Abram was nine and ninety years old, the Lord appeared to him and
said to him, \"I am the Almighty God; walk before me and be righteous.**

1\. Genesis has so far told the story of Abraham up to the birth of
Ishmael, of whom the angel made a very clear promise, who had also
persuaded the mother Hagar, who had run away out of impatience of
obedience to her wife, not only that she should return to her wife and
surrender to her obedience; But also, after she had been terrified with
the law and recognized her sin, had again raised her up by the promise
and brought her to the right knowledge of God, so that she believed that
God took care of her and looked upon her; by which faith she was
sanctified and justified from all her sins. When she returned home, she
bore a son to Abraham, who was given a very sweet name and called
Ishmael, so that she might also bear witness to her faith.

The first is that God hears the sighs and prayers of the afflicted and
the afflicted.

Now Moses continues with the history and passes over silently whole
thirteen years, of which he writes nothing what Abraham had done or
suffered the same whole time. But it seems that Abraham, after Ishmael
was born to him, was satisfied, and for the sake of the angel\'s
promise, thought that Ishmael would be the heir of the promise that God
had given him in chapter 12, v. 2, 3, 7.

Therefore Sarah also loved this son of the maid very much and waited for
him very diligently and brought him up. Now that they are both well
satisfied, and because Ishmael was born, they think that there is no
more danger for them, but that everything is safe, Moses is silent, and
reports nothing about what happened from that time until the ninth and
ninetieth year of Abraham, since it is not believable that such a great
man should have been without great and many affairs after such an
excellent victory, and especially because he lived among Gentiles who
were not of his religion.

4 So now that they are sitting in peace and all things are well, God
comes and lays

**[1008 L.iv, 44-\"s. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 1. W. i, i
\"2i-iss\". 1009]{.underline}**

He preaches to them the previous promises of the seed with a new sermon
and even excludes Ishmael from the inheritance of the promise. So the
promises are developed gradually and become brighter and brighter.

5 For when Abraham heard the promise in the 12th chapter, he believed
that a son would be born to him from Sarah. But since one year went by
after another, and there were many signs that Sarah was barren, Hagar
was put with him, so that he might have heirs from the maid. Although
this causes him no small challenge, because Hagar runs away secretly
before she gives birth, she comes home again and gives birth to Ishmael;
because Abraham concludes and certainly believes that the promise has
now been fulfilled. For God at times lets holy people simply believe,
even if they do not understand everything.

\(6\) So Moses begins a new history here, and going over everything that
happened during thirteen whole years, he first reports how God
established a new covenant in this people with circumcision; then he
reports how the promise was explained more clearly, namely, that God
would give Abraham a seed from the old and barren Sarah.

\(7\) Therefore this is a good chapter, because it tells how the
circumcision, which the Jews praise so highly and because of which they
are so proud, is done. Yes, the Saracens also boast that they inherit
the promise of Abraham precisely because they are circumcised. That is
why Paul fights so hard and fiercely against the Jews in Rom. 2, 28. ff.
1 Cor. 7, 19. Gal. 5, 1. ff. that he wanted to take away their fleshly
presumption and hope; yes, since circumcision and the law still stood,
the prophets, Ezekiel, Cap. 44, 7. and Moses, 5. book Cap. 10, 16., had
to argue and fight against it with earnestness; as they call the same
people an uncircumcised people in flesh and lips and admonish them to
circumcise their hearts, Acts 7, 51.

\(8\) Therefore I have often wondered why, after Satan has raised up all
kinds of sects and mobs at this time, contrary to the gospel

that such heretics have not yet exhorted people to circumcision and
taught it as necessary for salvation.

\(9\) For if one would press this chapter hard, he would find
innumerable others who would fall in with his opinion and follow him;
for Moses gives such strong proofs and arguments in this chapter that
circumcision is necessary and right, that St. Paul had to oppose it with
all his might.

\(10\) And if Jerusalem had not fallen and been thoroughly destroyed,
and only a little, as in the time of the apostles, priesthood and Mosaic
police and government were still going on, it would certainly not be
possible to keep our people, with all their great effort and labor, from
being circumcised and becoming Jews.

\(11\) For what did this one article trouble the apostles, since even
devout Christians, believing in the promises of Christ, considered
circumcision necessary? For what do these violent thunderbolts of St.
Paul Gal. 5, 2. 3. 4. show: \"Wherefore ye are circumcised, ye are yet
guilty to do the whole law. Ye have lost Christ: and are ye fallen from
grace, who would be justified by the law\", other than that this trade
is made with great vehemence by the adversaries?

\(12\) Therefore, soon after the beginning of the kingdom of Christ,
this calamity disrupted the church, and unlearned men mixed the gospel
and the law together; as the Mahometan monster, the Alcoran, where he is
at his best, is nothing but a beggar\'s cloak patched together from
sayings of the law and the gospel. For in both parts, the foolish and
mad spirits have put together what has served each part to its advantage
and has pleased the flesh.

\(13\) I have heard that there are still people in Austria and Moravia
today who insist on Judaism, the Sabbath and circumcision. If such
people were to attack others who were not guarded by God\'s word, they
could truly do great harm.

**[1010 L. IV.tS-48. Interpretation of Genesis 17:1. W. I, ISA-IS27.
1011]{.underline}**

do. Therefore, we should not despise and ignore this debate about
circumcision, but act most diligently, not only to shut the Jews up, but
also to make our own certain and arm them against error.

\(14\) St. Paul gives two particular proofs against circumcision. The
first is that he says in Romans 10:4 that Christ is the end of the law;
for if the law looks to Christ, and the Jews are commanded by Moses
himself, Deut. 18:15, to hear Christ, it follows that when Christ
preaches, the law is silent, and those who heard the law before as a
doctrine, which is not enough for salvation, should now hear Christ, for
the best word is the word of life.

\(15\) The other proof is this: Since Abraham was righteous before
circumcision and without circumcision by faith alone, circumcision is of
no value for righteousness. These two arguments or proofs no one will
ever be able to dissolve or overturn: therefore there is no danger with
strong Christians and those who are guarded by the word, although a
fanatic would come along and insist on circumcision.

\(16\) But weak Christians are in great danger, and one cause of this
are the papists, who persecute pious and learned preachers and drive
them into misery, and the poor people whom they deprive of the word,
chase after the devil and all heretics and leave them in error. So they
are like that foolish shepherd who killed his dogs, and after that could
not defend himself against the wolves, nor save the sheep from their
power, after the guardians were gone. For how can one who is not well
equipped with words deny that circumcision is an eternal law, to which
all those who want to be God\'s people must be held.

017 Wherefore thou shalt know that it is not in vain that Moses set the
time of Abraham\'s age so clearly, that circumcision was commanded
thirteen years after Ishmael was born, and fifteen years after he was
justified and sanctified by faith. According to this also

Diligently notice the entrance or preface that the Lord uses before he
gives the law of circumcision.

18 The Jews surely pass by the same preface as if it were of no use; but
who would believe that such excellent words were spoken without great
and certain cause: \"I am the Almighty God, walk before Me, and be
righteous\"? For what did God mean by this other than that Abraham
should remain in the righteousness and faith for which he was accepted
and proclaimed righteous, and be pious, undefiled and perfect?

\(19\) Therefore, if God requires him to remain perfect before the law
of circumcision, it is easy to see and understand that such a covenant
of circumcision does nothing for perfection, but that Abraham is perfect
by faith before this covenant, and that alone is required of him here,
that he remain in such perfection.

\(20\) But I have said several times above what it means to \"walk
before God,\" and we know how the master of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Cap. 11:5, 6, interprets it, when he says that Enoch had testimony that
he had pleased God. For without faith it is impossible to please God,
and whoever wants to come to God must believe that he is, and that he
will be a retributor for those who seek him.

\(21\) Therefore before Abraham is told to be circumcised, the
righteousness of faith is held up to him, by which he was already
righteous, because he is commanded to remain perfect and righteous, just
as he began. For the fact that the Hebrew text says: \"a man of
godliness\" or perfections, cannot be inconveniently interpreted to mean
that there are two kinds of righteousness: the first and perfect is that
in which we become righteous before God through faith; but the other and
imperfect is that in which we are righteous before God and men at the
same time, as far as outward conduct and appearance are concerned.

\(22\) Blind Jews pass by such an excellent preface as if it were
written in vain and of no concern to them, and they do not understand
it.

**[1012- iv. 48-\". Interpretation of Genesis 17, 1. \" i, UM-uso.
1013]{.underline}**

insist on circumcision alone, as if by it alone one would be justified
and blessed; while their father Abraham had been justified for a long
time before circumcision, when he was still in the foreskin, and here
alone is reminded that he should persevere and remain in the same
righteousness of faith and perfect conduct. Does he then, who is already
righteous before God, not have much more beforehand that circumcision
can give him? But we preach this to the blind and deaf Jews in vain.

23 But it shows us a very strong and certain proof that circumcision
does not make righteous. That therefore from this very chapter, from
which the Jews want to establish and confirm their faith, circumcision
is cast down and destroyed. For Moses confesses that Abraham was
righteous before, and here alone does the Lord remind him that he is to
remain and persevere in the righteousness that began with him some years
before. This is why circumcision affected Abraham, since he had been
righteous, holy and perfect before God long before.

\(24\) But that circumcision is commanded him, he cannot be justified
thereby, any more than David was justified when he was promised the
kingdom by the prophet. So that one may conclude and say with certainty
and without doubt that circumcision does not make God\'s people, and it
follows from this certain and good conclusion that circumcision is not
necessary for all peoples.

\(25\) What then, may one say, is the purpose of circumcision? Answer:
For nothing else, except that it is a work of obedience and training in
faith, as it was when Abraham was to offer his son Isaac, and other such
works which God has specially imposed on some of the saints.

26 For this reason St. Paul does not call circumcision righteousness,
but \"a sign of righteousness. For to be justified by works, and to do
works when one is already justified, are not alike. For the person is
first righteous, but afterward this command is given to him to be
circumcised, not

that they become righteous through circumcision. If you think about all
this carefully, it is clear that the Jews are far wrong, ungodly, proud
and presumptuous.

27\) But what does it mean that Moses gives God a new name here for the
first time? For before he called him elohim, but here he calls him
shadai. Undoubtedly, he wants to indicate a secret, which, according to
each person\'s mind and thoughts, one may find here, the other there.
But I believe that this new name primarily means that the commandment of
circumcision does not apply to the whole creature, but that God wanted
to separate this people from the other peoples on earth in this way.

28\. the name el means strong and mighty, or, a strong and mighty one;
as Deut. 28, 31. says, \"Your ox will be slaughtered before your eyes,
and no one will help you,\" or, in your hand there will be no el; and
Prov. 3, 27. \"If your strength will be in your hand to do it,\" that
is, if you have the ability to do it. Thus it is written in the first
commandment, Ex. 20:5, \"I am the LORD thy GOD, a strong zealot.\" And
from this come the names of the angels, as, Raphael, Uriel, Michael,
Gabriel; item, Ishmael, of which I said shortly before. In sum, by this
name God\'s power and authority are signified, that he alone is mighty,
that he is able to do everything by himself, that he is all-powerful,
that he needs no one\'s help, and that he can give everything to whom he
wants.

29 The other name, schadai, is commonly translated as omnipotent,
although some grammarians give it a different meaning and origin, and I
do not dwell on this. For that they put it together from a pronoun and a
noun, and that it should mean as much as one who has sufficient
perfection in himself, I do not dispute, although I do not believe it.
This word has nothing in common with the name shid, which was given to
the spirits to which the Jews sacrificed, nor with the word shadad,
which means to make desolate. But come what may, this text shows me that
Moses did not want to use the common name GOt-.

**[1014 iv, so-\". Interpretation of Genesis 17, I. W. i, iWo-iLW.
1015]{.underline}**

He has found a special and new word to indicate this mystery, that this
covenant of circumcision, which God commands here, should not apply to
the whole world, but should belong to the seed of Abraham alone.

\(30\) Therefore, Moses anticipated the nonsensical hope of the Jews,
who wanted to prove from this text that the whole world was bound to
circumcision, which does not really follow from this: The Jews are
commanded to be circumcised, therefore all those who want to be God\'s
people must be circumcised.

31 For there are many clear examples against it. Jonah was sent to the
Ninevites, whom he converted and did not circumcise; for they believed
God and reformed their lives, and thus became God\'s people without
circumcision; which would certainly not have happened if circumcision
had been commanded, so that they had to accept and keep all nations out
of necessity. Thus Joseph, when he was sold to Egypt and miraculously
achieved such great honors, undoubtedly planted the right knowledge of
God in Egypt, but did not circumcise the people. Therefore the
patriarchs well understood that this law of circumcision did not extend
further than to the seed of Abraham, from whom it was not to be kept
forever, but until the right seed of Abraham came, namely Christ. Thus,
at all times, those who were uncircumcised, such as Job, Cyrus the
Persian king, the widow of Sarepta, Naaman the Syrian, 2c., came into
the fellowship of the church, and at the time of Christ served God in
the temple of their many and worshipped him, such as the eunuch,
Cornelius, and others, who nevertheless were not circumcised.

32 For this reason Paul rightly argues that circumcision should not be
imposed on the Gentiles, but should remain with the people who were
still under Moses before the coming of Christ, the true seed of Abraham.
For this law of circumcision was laid upon the Jews, not that they
should be justified thereby; for then Christ would be to them.

The people of the world were promised in vain, but that they would have
a distinction from all other peoples, so that it would be known from
which people and from which part of the world one should wait for the
Savior.

33 Therefore Moses, who so diligently describes the beginning of
circumcision, gives the Jews a hard sting by calling them to circumcise
the foreskin of their hearts, Deut. 10, 16; as also do the prophets,
Ezekiel Cap. 44, 7. and Jeremiah, Cap. 9, 26.: \"All the Gentiles have
uncircumcised foreskin, but the whole house of Israel has uncircumcised
heart.\" Is not this a serious and harsh word against the glory of the
circumcised Jews? Yet necessity compelled the prophets to do this, so
that they might take away this most harmful confidence from their own
righteousness, since they so stubbornly pretended that circumcision
would make God\'s people righteous.

34 Let us therefore hold fast this opinion, that circumcision is of no
concern to other peoples, but is imposed only on the people to whom God
has made the promise of Christ, and yet it does not concern the same
people in any other way, except that when the promised Christ has come
into the flesh and is now revealed to the world, circumcision should
cease and no longer apply.

35 For since the commandment of the eternal Father is to be heard alone,
and teaches not circumcision, but baptism, and brings it with it,
therefore all who desire to be God\'s true people shall be baptized, and
not circumcised. For circumcision serves the promise, and the promise is
contained in circumcision: since the promise is now fulfilled, what need
is there any longer of circumcision? Thus, if the promise of baptism
were not made, we would be baptized in vain; but if this promise of
baptism is fulfilled in the life to come, then we will no longer need
baptism.

\(36\) Furthermore, some Jews, not only like clumsy and foolish people,
but also like godless people, pretend that the word shadai, omnipotent,
comes from the word

**[1016 8. iv, s2-v4. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 1. W. i, 1532-isss.
1017]{.underline}**

schadad, that is, to damage, so that God alone can damage and corrupt
heavenly and earthly things. For such a name, in such a sense, is given
more favorably to devils than God, who is the Lord and God of light and
life; for he is a God who does good and does not destroy. It is better
derived from the root word schad, which means the mother\'s breast; as
the Greeks had mammosam Deam, the breast goddess, to whom they
attributed the preservation and nourishment; and as we call God a
nourisher, who not only has all power from himself, but also gives
others sufficiency, so that they can nourish themselves. And this
meaning actually belongs to the Jews, to whom alone the promise of the
land of Canaan had happened; therefore he was the same el, that is, a
mighty one, because he was mighty enough to protect his people against
the Gentiles.

\(37\) After this he was also shadai unto them, as thou wouldest say, a
nourishing breast, to feed and to bring them up. For though he protected
and nourished the Gentiles, yet he had to protect and nourish the Jews
first of all, because he had made the promise to them. This, methinks,
is the right cause of this name; and though I will not set myself up as
a judge of such wrangling among grammarians, yet it is fitting to the
opinion of this text and the whole matter here dealt with, that it
should be said how God has preserved this people above others in
protection and nourishment, and as Paul says 1 Tim. 6:17, has given them
abundantly to enjoy all things.

038 Therefore, as this is a new covenant established with a new people
yet to be born, so God also takes new names as new clothing and apparel,
to show that He is not establishing such a covenant with all peoples,
but with the one born of Abraham alone.

\(39\) Of such a thing I would gladly make many words, and would gladly
impress it upon every man; for this question of circumcision is very
difficult and confused, and where St. Paul himself had not intervened.

and this teaching had acted so abundantly and powerfully, we could
hardly have avoided the error of it.

40 For so we read in the Acts of the Apostles, in the fifteenth chapter,
that the Jews, who were converted to the faith after the resurrection of
Christ, still pressed hard on the law, and who were baptized, desired
also to compel circumcision, yea, to keep the whole law: for thus they
said, v. 5, \"They must be circumcised, and commanded. To keep the law
of Moses.\" That this question was very difficult and, as it seems,
caused a lot of trouble for the apostles themselves in the first church,
and caused Paul to have to go to Jerusalem and discuss it with the
apostles.

41 Now in the reported place in the stories of the apostles about this
trade of circumcision there is not one, but two questions. The first is
whether a man is justified by works, and the second is whether
circumcision is necessary. For circumcision was commanded to the seed of
Abraham long before the law was given. Now the law concerns not only the
Jews, but also the Gentiles; for it is an eternal and immutable order
and command of God that one should honor and fear God and love one\'s
neighbor, and such a will and command of God has been written in the
hearts of all men from the beginning of the world; therefore it is well
worth the effort to see how Paul dealt with such trade and disputation.

\(42\) Therefore, as far as circumcision is concerned, this is a perfect
proof, a certain judgment known from the Scriptures, that Abraham was
righteous before and without circumcision; from which it follows that
circumcision is not to be interpreted for the sake of righteousness.

43: So, on the other question, this is also a certain proof that Paul
gives and thus breaks through finely in the epistle to the Romans Cap.
2, 17. ff. Cap. 4, 1. ff. and to the Galatians Cap. 3, 6. ff., namely
that Abraham was counted righteous not because of some work, but simply
because he believed God. Now it is a much different thing that one is
righteous from

**[1018 \"iv,\"-57. interpretation of I Genesis 17, 1. D. i. 1535-1W8.
1019]{.underline}**

divine imputation than from his own works and merits.

44 Therefore these things agree together, and are not only
dialectically, but also evidently proved and verified: If Abraham is not
justified by circumcision, he is much less justified by any other law of
Moses, for there was none written at the time Abraham was declared and
proclaimed righteous: indeed Moses himself, and those under him, were
not justified by the law. For doing the law does not make one righteous,
or is righteousness, but believing in God\'s promise.

45 Thus, St. Paul masterfully and wisely uses this one little word:
\"before circumcision\"; and if either the papists or the Jews want to
fight against this, it is their fault and lack of understanding, not
ours. For this is clear and certain, that Abraham was righteous before
circumcision; and since he is accepted by God as righteous because of
faith, righteousness is not of the law or of works, but simply of faith
or trust in the promise of God. For the written law was given to the
Jews alone; to the Gentiles it was written in their hearts, that is, it
was born with them; and today, after the gospel has come to light, we
must diligently teach the law and hold it up to the people. But we can
also conclude from our reason that the law does not make righteous.

Aristotle argues that a work is not good unless it comes from right
reason and good will: since the will is evil and reason errs, as
experience proves, it follows that such a defect in our will and reason
cannot be corrected or remedied by works, however good they may seem. So
that even the philosophers conclude that before good works the person
must first be good, that is, that the will must first be good, and
reason right, before one can work anything good; and nothing at all can
be raised against such an opinion.

But the Jews are pushing against it.

It says here that there is an eternal covenant, and it says that whoever
is not circumcised should be cut off from this people. Now this
discussion comes to the point that one must say yes or no to it.
Therefore it must be said against it that it cannot follow from all this
that circumcision makes one righteous.

48 Why then, they say, is it given? St. Paul Rom. 4:11 answers: Because
it was a sign of righteousness, which signified this work of
circumcision, and was to be like a handwriting for the confession that
the promise was true. In sum, it was a sacrament by which they were
reminded that they were God\'s people; but they did not become God\'s
people through circumcision.

\(49\) But the Jews again insist on these circumstances, that
circumcision is not commanded as a work for Abraham alone, but is put
upon his whole posterity at the same time, and that the promise embraces
not Abraham\'s person alone, but his whole posterity. For so says the
text, \"That I may be thy God, and of thy seed after thee.\" Therefore,
those who are not circumcised must be excluded from this promise and not
be God\'s people: so, on the other hand, let it follow that Abraham\'s
lineage becomes God\'s people through circumcision.

50 This is no longer a philosophical argument, like the previous one,
namely, that right reason and good will are necessary to a good work and
should precede a good work; but it is a theological argument and proof,
against which Paul, who understood it best, especially argued.

\(51\) And it cannot be avoided, but it must be confessed, that this
promise of bodily life alone is not to be understood. For God does not
speak to stones, wood, oxen and donkeys, but He speaks to men and to the
lineage of Abraham. To them he promises that if they keep his covenant,
he will be their God not only in this life but in the life to come and
in eternity.

52\. for the word \"GOD\" here means as much as that Abraham\'s lineage
has him as a

**[1020 L. IV, 57-59. Interpretation of Genesis 17:1. \". 1, 1588-1541.
1021]{.underline}**

believes in and accepts a God, and who in turn shows himself to be a God
who wants to do good for him forever. And the mockery is not valid here,
by which some pretend that the water, sun and moon also know and
understand God, because they do His will: but we are talking here about
the true Promiser, and about the word of His promise, which truly
neither the sun, nor wood, oxen and donkeys understand.

\(53\) Thus it follows, say the Jews, that circumcision makes righteous;
for it contains the promise, yea, it makes the promise strong and sure,
that God will be God to the seed of Abraham; for if they were not
circumcised, the promise would be of no avail, because they that are not
circumcised shall be cut off, that is, have no God.

54 What then shall we say to this? For since it is said that Abraham
became righteous before circumcision, here the contradiction is set up,
namely, that circumcision makes and makes known that God offers Himself
to us, that He wants to be our God. Answer: Circumcision was given to
Abraham, so that through him this sign of the covenant might be
inherited by and extend to all his descendants: therefore, in this case
of circumcision, Abraham was much different than his descendants. For,
as Moses clearly testifies, God was already Abraham\'s God before;
therefore, he did not become a child of God only when circumcision was
imposed on him: but because God nevertheless commanded him to be
circumcised, he by no means wanted to go against God\'s will and disobey
Him. To his descendants, however, circumcision was a sign that they
should be heirs according to the promise made to Abraham while he was
still in the foreskin.

\(55\) Thus we necessarily make a distinction in one work, if it is done
by unequal or different persons. As far as the work is concerned, there
is no difference between the baptism of the Lord Christ and the baptism
of other believers; for they are both sprinkled with water in the
Jordan, and are baptized in the same way.

Both parts have this consolation, that God will forgive sin; but there
is a great difference between the persons.

\(56\) Christ is baptized, not that he might be justified thereby; for
he is the Son of God beforehand, and is clothed with everlasting
righteousness, that we might obtain righteousness through him: but he is
baptized, that I may speak thus, as an example unto us, that he should
come before us, and that we should follow his example, and be baptized
also.

057 And in this manner circumcision is almost a sacrament unto the seed
of Abraham: because it hath a promise, whereby they that believe and use
this sacrament in faith shall be justified: but they that believe not
shall not be justified, though they be circumcised. And according to
this opinion Abraham was not circumcised, because he had the promise
also before this sign, and was justified by faith in the same, while he
was still in the foreskin.

\(58\) There are many such examples. A schoolmaster does not teach
grammar to his pupils so that he may learn it, for he has already
learned and practiced it, but so that his pupils may learn it. So we
read and teach the Scriptures before the congregation, not for our own
sake, for we can study them at home without that, and have already
learned them; but for the sake of the hearers.

\(59\) Thus circumcision was commanded to Abraham to be a sacrament for
his descendants, so that those who believed in the promise that God had
attached to circumcision would be justified. Abraham himself, however,
who had already become righteous, had a different meaning in such a
work, although it was also a sign of righteousness for him. In this way
one could answer this question. But a Jew is not yet satisfied with
this, for he insists: \"If circumcision was a cause of righteousness to
the lineage of Abraham, it follows that all who want to be righteous and
saved must be Abraham\'s children; but since it is impossible by nature
for all men to be Abraham\'s children, they must be Abraham\'s children.

**[1022 L.IV,SS-SI. Interpretation of Genesis 17, I. W. I, isti-1S44.
1023]{.underline}**

Flesh and blood should be born, so it follows that they must be
circumcised, so that after this work, so this promise has, they become
like Abraham; as the Jews were among the people of God, as Herod and
others.

\(60\) We can meet all these by believing that Christ has come. But
those who believe that Christ has come in the flesh know that
righteousness does not come from circumcision, but from Christ alone, in
whom all the promises are amen and yes, 2 Cor. 1:20.

\(61\) For although Christ himself is circumcised, yet he does not
command circumcision, but commands that we be baptized in his name. Such
a cause and answer a devout Christian accepts as sufficient proof; but
the Jews, who do not believe in Christ, give him no power, neither do
they accept him; therefore they must be met in another way.

\(62\) For as for Abraham\'s lineage and this law of circumcision, as it
is written by Molle, truly the Jews can never prove that circumcision is
also necessary for the Gentiles to be justified, and will be able to
prove nothing more with this text, except that circumcision was
commanded to the seed of Abraham, and that those who are of Abraham\'s
seed cannot be God\'s people unless they are circumcised. But this they
will never prove, that no one else but the Jews alone can be justified
and be God\'s people.

For Moses himself says that Abraham was to be \"a father of many
nations\": therefore, if Abraham is a father of nations or Gentiles, and
God is God of the seed of Abraham, it follows that the Gentiles are also
Abraham\'s seed, and God is God of the uncircumcised. Thus the Jews can
be urged that they can neither argue nor say anything else than that
circumcision is necessary only for the physical seed of Abraham.

64\. but this is also followed by another

Proof from this that God\'s word, where it is preached, has its effect
and bears fruit. For from this we conclude? correctly: Since Joseph
preached in Egypt, King Pharaoh was converted, knew God and was
justified by this knowledge, even though he was uncircumcised; for the
text Gen. 43:32 clearly states that the Egyptians are abhorred to eat
with the Jews because of circumcision; therefore, even those who are not
circumcised are justified.

Thus the king Nebuchadnezzar has a glorious testimony in Scripture, as
did Darius and Cyrus, that he knew God, and yet he was uncircumcised.
Thus Job, the widow of Sarepta and Naaman of Syria were also righteous,
and the Jews are thus afflicted with these examples, so that they cannot
deny that the Gentiles in the foreskin are also God\'s people and please
God, and that the law of circumcision does not apply to the Gentiles.

For this reason, as long as the Jews do not believe in Christ, they are
under the law and are forced to be circumcised: but that the Gentiles
should also be circumcised, they can by no means prove. And Christ saw
this, when he said Matth. 23, 15: \"Woe to you, Christian scholars and
Pharisees, hypocrites, who wander over land and water, that you make a
Jew a Gentile, and when he is born, you make him a child of hell, more
double than you are.

67\) Jonah, when he preached to the Ninivites, and Elisha, when he
cleansed Naaman, 2 Kings 5:18 ff, did nothing of the kind; indeed, he
allowed him to remain in his position and profession, and permitted him
to go with his king to the temple of the idols; only that he worshiped
and kept the God of Israel with his heart, which testimony of faith was
the earth that was brought to the Gentiles from the temple at Jerusalem.
Thus it clearly follows from the effect of the divine word that God is
not only the God of the Jews, but also the God of the Gentiles.

68 Now this is a strange thing: Ishmael\'s lineage is excluded from
circumcision, and yet in the

**[1024 L IV, 6I-\". Interpretation of I Genesis 17, 1. W. 1, 1S44-ist6.
1025]{.underline}**

What is it then that the Jews are so blinded and stiff-necked that they
boast that they alone are God\'s people, because they have circumcision?
Or do not these examples brought against them prove clearly enough that
circumcision before the birth of Christ was necessary for the Jews and
not for the Gentiles; but for the Gentiles faith in the promise or trust
in the promised seed was necessary for salvation? Just as Abraham
himself was accepted as righteous through faith in the promise, not
because of circumcision, but because he was still in the foreskin.

\(69\) Why then, someone might say, did he allow himself to be
circumcised? Tell me, why did Christ allow himself to be baptized? For
we are justified by baptism, if we believe the promise: but Christ,
though he was baptized, was not justified by baptism: for he was
baptized, not for himself, but for all them that should believe after
him.

So Abraham did not allow himself to be circumcised for his own sake. And
I must use this simile, so that I may explain the matter somewhat
clearly, although I know and realize that not everything can be compared
with each other, and that everyone who is a little practiced and
experienced in divine Scripture can easily see and understand it for
himself.

\(71\) Although we cannot therefore take away circumcision from the Jews
who do not want to believe in Christ, but as long as they persist in the
error that Christ has not come, they must bear the same burden of
circumcision, it is certain that circumcision is of no concern to the
Gentiles, and anyone who interprets it to the Gentiles as necessary for
salvation sins; as in the stories of the apostles, Cap. 15, 5, who were
converted to Christ from among the Pharisees.

72\. but those who know Christ know that (because they also have a clear
commandment in Moses that they should hear Christ: \"A prophet I will
raise up for you from among your brethren, whom you shall hear as you
have heard me\"),

Deut. 18, 15). Christ is the end of the law, Rom. 10, 4., we also know
that not only circumcision, but the whole law of Moses shall cease in
Christ. For Christ is one and all. \"In Him dwelleth all the fullness of
the Godhead,\" Col. 2:9. \"Through Him we have grace for grace, and have
received of His fullness all things,\" Jn. 1:16. Therefore we can say to
the Jews that the promise made to Abraham has been fulfilled, and now
the prophets and visions are fulfilled; as it is written in the prophet
Daniel Cap. 9:24. Therefore it is not Abraham who reigns, nor the
circumcision, but Christ, who is Lord of Abraham and of the
circumcision.

73 And it belongs here that Paul says Rom. 2, 25. ff. that circumcision
is nothing. For it was given unto Abraham of old for a sign of
righteousness, which was not imputed unto him for circumcision\'s sake,
but that he should thereby plant it in his seed, until Christ the
promised Seed should come. And if the Jews were not so blinded, they
should take special offense at the words which God here appends
throughout (v. 7): \"I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee, among their seed\"; (v. 9): \"Keep therefore my
covenant, thou and thy seed after thee, among their seed\"; item (v. 8):
\"I will give thee and thy seed after thee the land wherein thou art a
stranger within.\"

For these words, \"with their descendants,\" are to be diligently
heeded. He could have simply said thus: My covenant shall be between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee; but because he appends, \"with their
seed,\" he clearly indicates that such covenant shall stand for a time,
and fall again. That this is the opinion: This covenant or circumcision
shall stand as long as your generation or descendants last.

75 Now it is certain that Abraham\'s seed is no more. For after the
destruction of Jerusalem neither the kingdom, nor the people, nor the
lineage, nor the sacrifices remained. But if the seed of Abraham were
still present, there would still be a house, a place, and perhaps
another form of his kingdom.

**[1026 \". iv.\"\"-\". Interpretation of I Genesis 17, 1. \". i.
ins-,\"\". 1027]{.underline}**

be present. For what else did God promise Abraham?

\(76\) But now, which is the main thing, Moses himself also lies down
and is silent: how then will it be possible to insist on circumcision,
if there are no longer any of them to be circumcised, that is, they no
longer have a certain generation, nor a certain place in which they are
to be found. Therefore, after Christ came, circumcision should depart as
the shadow departs when the sun comes.

For what purpose was it given? For nothing else, but that it might be
known that the Savior was to be born of this circumcised people and not
of the Gentiles. For he in whom all nations hoped did not become man in
all nations, but only in this one, which God commanded to be
circumcised. This special ceremony was commanded to him so that the
whole world would have a warning and a memorial sign that Christ was to
be born from the Jews. For he was promised to the Jews alone, although
the Jews were not to enjoy him alone.

\(78\) I wanted to say this more broadly about circumcision: and if the
Jews could believe that Christ had come, they would easily admit that
the whole law, with circumcision and all other ceremonies, should not
have stood longer than until Christ. For Moses tells them to hear
Christ. For this reason Christ was to bring a new doctrine and new
ceremonies, which Moses called his people to accept, and to leave the
former ceremonies in the law; although Christ himself actually commands,
Matt. 28:19, \"Go ye, teach all nations, and baptize them in my name.\"
But because they still stubbornly stand and persist in their error, and
await the Messiah, we will not only not be able to free them from
circumcision, but because they recognize themselves as Abraham\'s seed,
they remain indebted to the whole law.

79 But whether they believe or believe not, and whether they remain in
the circumcision or not, this doctrine and rule remain to us wholly and
unaltered, that we Gentiles are free from the

Law and of circumcision; as at the same time before the Law and in the
Law of them many of the Gentiles were converted to God, and yet remained
free from the Law and circumcision.

80 Rather, we Christians are free from the law and circumcision, knowing
that the Father commanded that we should not hear Moses, but his Son,
Matt. 17:5; and though he himself was circumcised, yet he commanded us
to be baptized, and not to be circumcised. This opinion is true and
certain. Just as when the promise of the New Testament is fulfilled in
eternal life, we will no longer need baptism, so circumcision is no
longer necessary after the promise made to Abraham is fulfilled through
Christ. Therefore the Jews may be converted, or they may be condemned
under the law, which, according to the letter, is impossible for them to
keep.

Now one should also consider what was God\'s counsel and opinion in this
chapter. The multiplication of the seed of Abraham, to whom God promises
here that he shall be a father of many nations, was now present. But
because it was not convenient that God should establish a new covenant
with each generation or people and make assurances with new promises to
each one, as He did with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: He gives here a
common sign and report to the whole descendant generation of Isaac, so
that it would not only be separated and distinguished from other
nations, but also be reminded as by a sacrament that it would be God\'s
people and God would be its God again, that is, would do good to it at
the same time in this and eternal life; and all this for the sake of the
promised seed of the woman or Christ.

First of all, the Jews are a separate people from all nations through
circumcision, so that their race would not be mixed with other nations
and the promise of Christ would be certain to which nation it would be
shown. After this, circumcision is a sign of faith to them.

**[1028 iv. S5-S7. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 1. W. i, isis-isss.
1029]{.underline}**

For by this work, which they suffer rather than do in their bodies, they
are reminded that they are God\'s people and that God takes care of
them.

Now see what strange things St. Paul spins out of this and concludes
Gal. 3, 8. f. Rom. 4, 18. For from this separation of the seed and
lineage of Abraham from all nations, as Moses says, he concludes that
the Gentiles are bound to the Jews and the right seed of Abraham in the
closest possible way and are related to them. For so the text says:
\"You shall become a father of many nations.\" But what else is this
said, but that the Gentiles, as children and heirs of Abraham, should
also come to the possession of the promise made to Abraham? Otherwise,
how could Abraham be the father of many nations if this did not happen?
And yet you see that the Gentiles are separated from the Jews; for God
commands that Abraham\'s seed be circumcised, but the Gentiles he does
not call circumcised.

\(84\) All this follows very clearly from Moses himself, that the
Gentiles come together with the Jews, who are to be separated from all
nations by circumcision, and are united, that they may be made partakers
of the promise; and yet they are not to be circumcised. So Ishmael is
set apart from the seed of Abraham, yet he is not set apart like the
other Gentiles. For as far as outward fellowship and bodily union are
concerned, Ishmael and the Gentiles are set apart from the Jews, for the
Jews alone have the same sign of righteousness, but the Gentiles are not
set apart from the promised Seed.

From this St. Paul took Gal. 4, 28. Rom. 9, 8. the distinction he makes
very masterfully between the children of Abraham, who are children
according to the flesh and according to the promise; John Cap. 1, 13.
also points to this, since he calls God\'s children, \"who are not born
of blood, nor of the will of man or of the flesh, but of God\".

86 And this also shows a special mystery of circumcision, which has been
imposed on the Jews until the future.

Christ, and they also had to carry the same until Christ came, so that
the other peoples would also be reminded and have cause to believe in
the God who promised Abraham the given seed and to hope in Christ.

So that both of these things happen, that the Jews are separated from
the Gentiles at the same time and yet are united with them. And from
such a cause, as has been said, comes this glorious and excellent
doctrine, which St. Paul diligently teaches to the Romans in 9:6, 7, 8,
namely, that it is not enough to be Abraham\'s children according to the
flesh, but this is required as necessary, that the Jews themselves, who
are the fleshly seed, become children of the promise, as the text says:
\"In Isaac shall the seed be called unto thee.\"

\(88\) And from this comes the main part of the whole theology, that God
is the God of the Jews and Gentiles, rich above all, Rom. 3:29, even at
the same time that the Law and circumcision were going on. For the other
nations heard Abraham, heard the prophets, saw the worship at Jerusalem,
and believed that the Jews alone were the true and right God. However,
the Jews alone had this sign of righteousness, so that they stood out
among all the other nations, so that, although the other nations were
not circumcised, they nevertheless called upon and served the same God
who had revealed Himself to the Jewish people through circumcision.

Therefore we do not despise St. Paul, who is the best and most skillful
interpreter of Moses. For he gives us such an account of this chapter,
namely, that Moses had hitherto written how Ishmael was born and
Abraham\'s seed was according to the flesh, but was born a seed without
the promise. For God had not spoken to Abraham about the son to be born
to him from the maid; it was Sarah\'s suggestion that Abraham should
join the maid, and not God\'s command, much less a command with a
promise. Therefore, it was human advice, or, to put it more mildly,
love, and not faith, that was valid, for there was no such thing.

**[1030 iv. \"7-m. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 1. W. i, isss-i-m.
1031]{.underline}**

The promise was made that Ishmael would be born of the maid.

But with Isaac it is a different matter: he is born of and according to
the promise, and the promise is based on him. Such a difference, if one
notices it, makes this discussion of circumcision easy and clear.

\(91\) But the Jews are so immersed in the thoughts of the law that they
do not see the promise or pay attention to it, nor do they distinguish
between the law and the gospel; indeed, they know nothing at all about
the gospel and hate and persecute it. And yet they cannot deny that
Ishmael, although he is Abraham\'s true son according to the flesh and
circumcised by God\'s command, is not counted among Abraham\'s seed, but
only Isaac, who was born according to the promise.

Now this is not to be understood as if we were to condemn Ishmael, who,
in my opinion, remained in the right knowledge of God and became
blessed, but rather that the Jews, the godless and proud people, might
be taught that the fleshly birth, of which they boast so much, is of no
use, nor is it valid. As Christ says John 3:6: \"That which is born of
the flesh is flesh\"; item v. 3: \"Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God.\"

This is a necessary doctrine, which alone can humble the hopefulness and
stubbornness of the Jews. For they cannot deny that Ishmael was cast out
from the inheritance of this promise, and yet was Abraham\'s true seed
according to the flesh. But this was not enough; if he wanted to be
saved, he had to become a believing son of the believing Abraham.

\(94\) So it is clear here that birth according to the flesh has no
preference, not even in Isaac; for everything depends on the promise,
but the promise can only be grasped and grasped with faith. For as far
as the fleshly birth is concerned, we are all born in sins; therefore,
if we want to be saved, we must be as

who are born through water, that is, through baptism (not through
circumcision), and through the Spirit, who awakens faith in the promise,
and thus redeems from sins and makes one blessed.

95\. But that this people must be circumcised is done, as I have often
said, in order to distinguish it from others, so that the Gentiles may
be astonished at it and thus learn to recognize the God of the Jews,
until Christ comes and sets up a new sign, so that the Jews and the
Gentiles may at the same time be designated as inheriting together the
eternal grace that is shown through the Son of God; and that the Jews
should not have a special freedom from the Gentiles and preference of
fleshly birth, but should believe or be born again by water and the
Spirit.

96 Thus Paul here diligently considered the text of Moses, namely, that
the Jews were separated from the Gentiles by circumcision, and yet the
Gentiles came into one company with the true children of Abraham through
faith: for a certain sign and proof, by which it was to be made known to
the whole world that birth according to the flesh was of no use before
God for salvation, and that even the Gentiles had free access to grace.

97\. As it is said above about Cain\'s descendants, who, although they
were rejected for their sins from the promise that was made to the pious
Seth, it is nevertheless credible that many of his descendants joined
Seth and were saved: But not by a certain promise, nor by his own, but,
that I speak thus, by chance; as Pharaoh in Egypt had not his own
promise, nor a certain promise, as Isaac, that he should be saved, but
yet, hearing Joseph, and accepting and honoring the same God, he also is
saved. So the promise overcomes him who has no promise. But the Jews,
who had the promise, did not come to the righteousness of the law, even
though they stood by it, Rom. 9, 31.

98\. therefore his fleshly birth, his lineage and ancestry, his

**[1032 8. iv, sy-71. interpretation of I Genesis 17- I. W. i, isss-E.
1033]{.underline}**

For God is a God of the Jews and of the Gentiles, Rom. 3, 29. And
although there is a difference in this, that the Jews have the promise,
and their special emblems and jewels, whereby they are known that they
are God\'s people: yet God does not exclude the Gentiles from the
promise, if they accept it with faith.

\(99\) Thus the family of Esau, from which the wise men of Teman came,
had many excellent saints, even though they were not circumcised and had
never known the Law of Moses. For they were content with the accidental
promise and thanked God for it. So that from the beginning to the end of
their many Gentiles were saved, even though the promise had not been
made to the Gentiles. Even more strangely, the Jews, for the sake of
their hope, lost the promise that was theirs and belonged to them, but
the Gentiles, to whom it did not belong, took it and came in the place
of the Jews, as John says in Matt. 3:7, 9: \"O generation of vipers, I
say unto you, God is able to raise up children unto Abraham out of these
stones.\"

\(100\) Such hopefulness and obstinate stubbornness, from which they
always pretended and argued that they were God\'s people, deprived them
of body and soul. If someone asked them what they were proud of, they
answered: We are Abraham\'s seed and circumcised. But if this cause were
valid, what else would follow from it, but that the other nations were
all condemned, since they were not Abraham\'s seed, nor circumcised?

For this reason St. Paul disputes this opinion very earnestly and also
refutes it. He does say that the promise was made to Abraham and that
his seed was separated from all nations by circumcision; but because he
sees that Abraham is called a father of many nations by Moses, he
rightly concludes that the Gentiles also celebrate God\'s people,
insofar as they accept the promise with the faithful Abraham. They are
probably not circumcised,

Nor do they have the promise of the future Lord Christ, for it was taken
from Japheth and Ham and given to Shem alone; yet Japheth dwelt in the
tents, and many of the Hamites were saved. For the gospel was to go
forth and be preached among all nations.

Therefore both of these things are true: \"Salvation comes from the
Jews,\" John 4:22, but not only will the Jews be saved, but the Gentiles
will also receive the promise of salvation. So the Holy Spirit wanted to
forestall the error of the Jews. The blind Jews, however, did not want
to notice or understand this, but only paid attention to the fact that
they were commanded to be circumcised with the promise that they would
be God\'s people. But that it is said to Abraham that he should be a
father of many nations, they do not see. For this reason, their horrible
fall should not be attributed to the Holy Spirit, who has diligently
tried to counteract this error, but to their own blindness.

Thus the Holy Spirit has forestalled the heresy and error of the papists
concerning the celibate life by teaching and reporting that by God\'s
order and appointment Adam and Eve were entrusted to each other and
joined together. Thus, the Jews are also warned here with this text that
they should not presume anything on account of their fleshly birth,
because those who are God\'s children are not born according to the
flesh, but out of God\'s grace and mercy.

\(104\) For as God gave a sign and promise to them that were not yet
born, by grace, and not of merit: so also the Gentiles are made
partakers of the promise and of salvation by grace. But say what you
will about this, it is in vain with the Jews. For because they do not
accept Christ, the veil remains before Moses\' eyes, which is not taken
away from them where they do not believe in Christ. Therefore they may
be left to the devil, their god, like the Turks and Papists, who also
let their thoughts and delusions be heard, so that they also ignore the
most clear-headed and unbelieving.

**[1034iv . 71-7\". Interpretation of Genesis 17:1-6. W. i, iss7-iiM.
1035]{.underline}**

The most important testimonies of the Scriptures either do not see, or
even blaspheme and ridicule. But enough about what God\'s counsel was in
this chapter and what it is mainly about. Let us now explain the text
one by one.

The ninth and ninetieth year of Abraham is therefore to be remembered
and praised, because in it all things happened, of which Moses writes in
the next four chapters; namely, that in it circumcision was established,
and by it Abraham\'s family was separated from all other peoples: but
Ishmael was sent out of Abraham\'s house with his mother. The
Sodomites\' pride and ungodly life were punished from heaven, 2c., which
are all excellent histories, as will be shown hereafter. Therefore, this
year should be well remembered. We have said above about the names el
and shadai.

\(106\) Now what this is, that God calls Abraham to walk before Him and
to be righteous, we have also heard above. For with the word \"walk
before him\" he includes both tables: the first, that he calls him to
believe in God, to call on God, to preach his word, and to practice his
obedience and service; for he includes all these things with the one
that he calls him to walk before him. Although he also includes the
works that belong to God\'s honor and service in calling him pious, he
primarily looks at the other tablet: \"Be pious,\" that is, your life
should be upright and blameless, so that you walk blamelessly and
without offense before men.

107\. But that tham, that is, perfect, pious, and unchangeable, is here
put in the plural, is not done in vain. For a householder, and every one
who sits in office, is guilty not only for his own person, that he do
nothing sinful and criminal, but also for those over whom he is set.

108 St. Paul 1 Tim. 3, 2. wants a bishop to be thamim, that is, one who
does not live a blameless life for himself alone, but also keeps his own
with strict discipline, so that they do nothing that is not due to them,
nor is it proper for them: but they do not want to be disciplined,

They should rather be expelled from the house or the community, because
they are annoying to others. So every ruler should also be thamim, not
lava, that is, pious not only in one commandment of God, but in all. Let
this be enough of Abraham\'s piety or perfection. It follows now
further.

**Second part.**

**Of the promise God made to Abraham for the increase of his seed, and
of circumcision.**

**I.**

**V. 2. And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee almost greatly.**

Here God promises him the increase of his family or seed, as he promised
him several times above, and adds the covenant of circumcision to
confirm this promise. But where this was directed and what it was
supposed to mean, we have dealt with and said far enough. Without a
doubt Abraham had this hope, as if Ishmael should be the right heir of
this promise.

\(110\) For although the promise which the angel revealed to Hagar
concerning Ishmael clearly indicates that Abraham was to have another
son, yet he allowed his thoughts to be led and captivated and based them
on Ishmael. For what should he hope from Sarah, who was now at ninety
years of age and barren by nature?

Therefore, both father and mother took equal care and diligence for the
son and loved him dearly as the right tribe from which such a rich
lineage should grow and follow. But God came unawares and informed
Abraham of the heir of the promise, namely the son who would be born to
him from Sarah.

V. 3, 4, 5, 6: **Then Abram fell on his face. And God spake further unto
him, saying, Behold, I am, and have my covenant with thee, and thou
shalt become a father of many nations. Therefore shalt thou no more
Abram**

[**1036 L. IV, 73-75. interpretation of I** Moses 17, 36. w. **I,
1563-1565. 1037**]{.underline}

**but Abraham shall be thy name: for I have made thee the father of many
nations. And I will make thee almost very fruitful, and will make of
thee nations; and kings also shall come of thee.**

The fact that Abraham falls to his face on the earth is not only a sign
of reverence for God, but also of joy and thanksgiving. For the holy
patriarch understands the high and great blessing, that God first of all
wants to grace and shower him with various gifts and benefits in this
temporal life; then he also wants to lift and remove the curse on him,
under which all nations were because of sin, and to grant him blessings
and eternal life.

\(113\) And this is the text of which I said above that St. Paul
masterfully expounds. Just as the Jewish people were separated from all
the nations by circumcision, so the Gentiles are united and joined to
the Jews by the promise, that they may be one and the same people in one
grace and under one God.

The fact that God changes Abraham\'s name does not happen without a
special secret. His previous name had been abram, that is, a high
father. The other name becomes one letter longer, abraham. And the text
itself indicates from where this is taken, namely from the word hamon,
which means a heap or multitude. So that the name of Abraham is made
from three words, *ab,* father, *ram*, high, and hamon, that is, heap or
gathering; from this also comes the word mammon, which means a heap of
good and abundance. Now one should say, *abram hamon*; but because the
syllable *am,* if it is repeated twice in succession, makes an unlovely
word, it is put only once. Now, as I said, it does not happen without
mystery; as I will perhaps say more about it later.

**II.**

\(115\) Now the text of circumcision is very important: therefore we
must interpret it first. For the sake of the Jews

We do not care if they keep circumcision or do not keep it; we have
enough against them that they cannot prove that circumcision is also for
the Gentiles, because it is commanded for the seed of Abraham.

Secondly, they cannot deny that circumcision did not make Abraham
righteous. For he was justified before he was circumcised, as Moses said
in chapter 15, verse 6. But if Abraham himself was not justified by
circumcision, how can his descendants claim to be justified by it?

117 Third, if it were true that the Jews were justified by circumcision,
which it is not, it is certain that it was not instituted to remain
forever, but only until Christ\'s future, that is, as long as Abraham\'s
lineage lasted, as long as it dwelt in the land of Canaan and was a
nation or had a government. For the text proves this, and Moses himself
testifies to it, that when Christ comes, he will set up another sign and
seal. Therefore he exhorted the Jews that they should then obey him and
hear him. These three things are certain and easy to remember.

What then, a Jew might say, is circumcision? Answer: First of all, if
one wants to speak of it according to natural reason and
philosophically, one cannot say that it is a work like the other works
commanded by the ceremonial law and the moral law. For the works of the
moral law, such as the obedience of children and subjects to their
parents and overlords from the second table, and the invocation of God
and thanksgiving from the first table, are commanded to go on and on all
the days and hours.

119\) But circumcision happened only once in the whole life and could
not happen again; as it is enough in the New Testament if one is
baptized once in the name of Jesus, and it would be unchristian if one
were to change to the other name.

**[1038 L. IV, 75-77. interpretation of Genesis 17:3-6. W. I, I56S-I56S.
1039]{.underline}**

times wanted to be baptized. According to this opinion, there is a
difference between circumcision and the other works of the moral law. So
the ceremonies were repeated all the time, and it was not enough that
one sacrificed once, worshipped God once in the temple, was reconciled
to the church once 2c.

120 Secondly, circumcision is rather a suffering and a cross than a
work. For he who is circumcised does not do the same work, but suffers
it from others, and with pain. Therefore circumcision is not a ceremony,
nor a moral work of the Ten Commandments: what is it then? Therefore
Paul is a fine master and a good dialectician, who knows very well how
to discuss a matter, for he says Rom. 4:11: \"Circumcision is a sign of
righteousness, which Abraham had in his foreskin before he was
circumcised; and such a sign was put into Abraham\'s flesh, and into all
the flesh of the males that are born of him.

121 If anyone should say that circumcision is a ceremony, he will admit
that it is unlike the other ceremonies, that it is a ceremony that is
not performed but suffered, just as baptism is.

Therefore (when this foundation is laid, that circumcision is a sign, so
that Abraham is not justified, but is a sign and signification of the
righteousness that is in Abraham before) this question arises: Whether
this seal was a vain sign, or a thing that was presented with this seal.
To this is my answer: That circumcision in Abraham was a mere sign,
without any effect, that is, it was therefore a sign, that it did not do
that which it signified, but that it only signified. For St. Paul\'s
argument, to prove that Abraham was righteous before circumcision, no
one can overthrow. Thus circumcision is a sign which alone signifies
righteousness, but does not give it; for it finds Abraham to have been
righteous before, but does not make him righteous.

123\. but with his generation, which came after him, it has a different
relationship.

had the knowledge of the righteousness. For the circumcision found not
the same people in righteousness, wherein Abraham found it. Therefore it
was a sign and seal of righteousness, that it was given by it. For it is
written hereafter (v. 14), \"If a child be not circumcised in the
foreskin of his flesh, his soul shall be cut off from among his people,
because he hath omitted my covenant.\" This means the spiritual and
eternal extinction. Thus it follows again that a male who is circumcised
on the eighth day is blessed and counted among God\'s people. Therefore
circumcision was powerful in Abraham\'s lineage, that is, it gave
righteousness, not only because of the work, which was a purely
suffering work, but because of the promise of God, which was connected
with the same suffering work.

124 Since circumcision has had its power and effect because of the
promise, but the promise cannot be grasped in any other way than by
faith, it follows not only that the circumcised children have been
accepted as God\'s people and have become righteous, but also that they
have faith through the cooperation of the Holy Spirit.

This is a very important and high doctrine, therefore it should be well
remembered. For from it it is clearly understood that God has accepted
the children of the Jews into the company of His people and the eternal
graces. And the Jews know nothing of such honor of circumcision, but
boast only of the mere suffering work and count righteousness as a
merit, but do not consider the promise or the faith, which is the work
of the Holy Spirit in this.

This is a great blindness. For circumcision, insofar as it remains a
mere work and circumcision, does nothing, but must be accompanied by
faith in the word. When this is present, circumcision is first of all a
seal of righteousness and constitutes righteousness.

But the Jews also speak of a foolish cause of circumcision.

**[1040 L. IV. 77-79. interpretation don Genesis 17:3-6. w. I.
IÜ68-IV71. 1041]{.underline}**

For they pretend that the foreskin is taken away for this reason,
because otherwise there is no other place or member left and useless in
the whole body of man: as if there were not other parts of the body that
one would like to consider useless and left over than the hair, nails,
etc., which we cut over for this reason, so that we consider them left
over and useless: or, as if God were such a master, who creates what is
unnecessary and useless.

These are all the thoughts of blinded hearts, which have not a grain of
salt of right understanding. For this we believe and want to follow St.
Paul, who calls circumcision a seal and sign of righteousness, and
traces it back to faith, because it has the promise. For if circumcision
is separated from faith and torn off, it is dead and nothing. And yet
the Jews know of no other circumcision, but such as is without faith and
nothing, they boast of with their carnal mind.

There is also another question: If the uncircumcised males of the Jews
are condemned, what shall be said of the children who perish and die
before their eighth day? Item, what shall one say of the little
daughters? And what shall we Christians say of our children who die
before baptism, either in the womb or soon after birth?

\(130\) Of the children of the Jews, which die before the eighth day, it
is easy to answer; as also of our children, which die before their
baptism. For these do not sin against the covenant of circumcision or
baptism. For since the law holds that they are to be circumcised on the
eighth day, how would God condemn those who perish before the eighth
day? Therefore their souls should be left in the hand and will of their
heavenly Father, who, as we know, is merciful. And it also belongs here
that Paul to the Romans on 5. v. 14. gently says of those \"who have not
sinned with the same transgression as Adam\", and of Jacob and Esau he
says Cap. 9, 11, \"before they had done neither good nor evil\".

\(131\) For although the little children bring into the world with them
the inherent sin that we call original sin, it is a great thing that
they have not yet sinned against the law. Since God is merciful and
gracious by nature, he will not let them be condemned for not having
received circumcision in the Old Testament or baptism in the New.

\(132\) As for the females or daughters of the Jews, the answer is easy.
For since this seal has been put on and commanded only for the male
gender, it is of no concern to those of the female gender, who, though
they are Abraham\'s seed, are not excluded from Abraham\'s
righteousness, but receive it by faith. But they that are grown up, and
have either despised circumcision, or despised baptism, are surely
condemned.

133 But now we must remember the commandment of circumcision, so that we
can counteract the nonsense of the Anabaptists. For they think that it
is necessary to be baptized again, and not to baptize children but
adults, because little children do not yet have understanding; from this
it follows that where there is no understanding, there can be no faith.
But you answer me: Circumcision, as I said, has its use for the sake of
faith: now God has commanded that the little children should be
circumcised on the eighth day, and with such a commandment is a very
strong promise that God will take care of them and preserve them.
Therefore, either the commandment of circumcision must have been in
vain, or the young children, who are without all understanding, must
have believed and with faith attained through circumcision the
righteousness that Abraham still attained in the foreskin.

For the circumcised are promised that they are God\'s people, and that
God will be their God, that is, they are in the company of God\'s
kingdom, righteous and blessed through the faith that justifies, which
God gives them through the Holy Spirit.

**[1042 L. iv, 7s-8i. Interpretation of Genesis 17:3-6. W. i, is7i-is7i.
1043]{.underline}**

If this happened to the Jews in the Old Testament through the means of
circumcision, why would God not do the same to the Gentiles through the
new covenant of baptism? For this command Marc. 16, 15. goes absolutely
and concerns all people: \"Go into all the world, teach and baptize all
nations.\" Whereas circumcision was commanded to Abraham\'s seed alone,
baptism is commanded to all nations on earth with the promise of certain
blessedness if they believe.

\(136\) Therefore, if Abraham\'s seed had this blessing by virtue of the
promise, that all those who were circumcised on the eighth day should
come to faith and become God\'s people, why should such a blessing be
denied to the Gentiles who are united to God through the covenant of
baptism? For baptism cannot be less or inferior to circumcision,
especially since circumcision applied only to males, but baptism unites
the male and female sexes.

137\. just as a Jew, if he fell away from this covenant of God through
sin, did not need to be circumcised again, but if he was restored to
this covenant and kept the promise, was again accepted by grace: so also
those who fall away from grace through sin must not be baptized again,
but must keep the promise made to them with firm faith, and hope for
forgiveness of sins for Christ\'s sake.

Therefore, this strong proof goes against those who claim that little
children should not be circumcised because they have neither
understanding nor faith. For here it is commanded that the little
children, when they have reached the eighth month, should be
circumcised, and to such a commandment is attached a promise: \"I will
be their God. So both the commandment and the promise testify that
righteousness was imputed to the little children through this means of
circumcision, just as it was imputed to Abraham through faith before
circumcision. For \"without faith it is impossible to please God\",
Hebr. 11, 6.

139\) But this covenant of circumcision was to stand only until Christ,
who, because he was also to gather and bring the Gentiles to the kingdom
of God, was to do away with the old sign or covenant and establish a new
sign; as he says John 3:5: \"Unless one is born of water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter the kingdom of God. Of this one can take a likeness,
though not so perfect, from worldly dealings. One of them has bravely
and courageously stood up for his fatherland against the enemy, and for
his bravery the emperor gives him a new coat of arms, gives him towns,
villages, castles 2c. All his descendants enjoy such gifts and are
thereby encouraged to imitate the bravery of their ancestors. If,
however, they do not imitate it but degenerate, but the emperor has
bestowed such honor on their forefathers for the sake of their manhood
and virtues, he can take it away from the undescended descendants.

Thus God gives circumcision to the most victorious patriarch, who in
faith overcame not only enemies but also sin and death, as a special
emblem of his virtue, to be worn on his flesh; but not as an empty sign,
but his descendants shall also rejoice and enjoy such blessings, so that
they may follow the virtue of their father. Although Abraham\'s lineage
alone was to bear such a sign or emblem before the whole race, yet by it
the Gentiles also were provoked to recognize and serve the God of
Abraham. Therefore St. Paul says Rom. 4, 11, that circumcision was given
to Abraham as a sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, which he
still had in the foreskin, and soon adds: \"That he might become a
father of all who believe in the foreskin\"; item v. 12: \"That he might
become a father of circumcision, not only of those who are of the
circumcision, but also of those who walk in the footsteps of faith,
which was in the foreskin of our father Abraham.

141, This is the proper description of circumcision, namely, that it is
given for this purpose.

**[1044 IV. 81-83. interpretation of Genesis 17:3-6. w. i. 1574-1276.
1045]{.underline}**

be that it should be a public coat of arms, by which others are
encouraged, whether circumcised or uncircumcised, to follow in the
footsteps of Abraham or to follow his faith. For he is a common father
of both the Gentiles and the Jews, and is therefore graced and adorned
with a new coat of arms and sign, so that the Gentiles may come to him
as a forerunner and recognize, confess and honor his God.

For to the same righteousness of faith which Abraham had, the Gentiles
also are invited, that Abraham may become a father of many nations
according to the promise. Thus Job, Pharaoh and countless others were
saved throughout the whole period of the Law and before, even though
they were not Abraham\'s seed. For Abraham was not to be a father to the
Jews only, but also to the Gentiles who believe.

143 For though the Gentiles and strangers were not compelled to be
circumcised, yet they were accepted into the fellowship of
righteousness. In the meantime, circumcision had its place and effect,
so that a certain people would remain until the one to whom all things
had been planned came, who was to set up a new banner or sign, not in
one people, but over the whole face of the earth.

For henceforth the church is not to be shut up in a corner, as the Roman
Pontiff will not recognize the churches that do not recognize him. For
the banner and sign that Christ set up when he said, \"Go into all the
world,\" is not only in one corner and in a certain people or race.
Therefore it is called the universal church, and yet it is the same
church only among those who have been baptized. For apart from baptism
there is no salvation; just as in the days of Abraham and his
descendants, salvation came from circumcision, not because of
circumcision alone, but because of faith in the promise, which was
related to and, as it were, incorporated with circumcision.

145 For this is how divine wisdom has ordered and directed it from the
beginning, that at every time there should be a public sign for all
peoples to see and to know the right God.

The Jews were to find, honor and worship it, even the Gentiles, although
not all who had this sign believed and were corrected to righteousness.
So before the circumcision, the sacrifices were signs; for the two
brothers Abel and Cain sacrificed. And to Abel his sacrifice was a sign
of righteousness, because he believed; but to Cain it was no sign of
righteousness, because he believed not, and kept the mere work without
faith.

146\. And so the circumcision is set up as a sign or banner for those
who are to be saved to see. For since Abraham was to be multiplied by
God\'s blessing into many peoples and kingdoms, the church was for a
time to be incorporated into his flesh, as it were, and God gave a
general sign, which affected the church to such an extent that those who
did not have and believe in such a sign were not excluded from it.

Augustine says that a sacrament is a visible form and sign of invisible
grace. This is well said, for it also indicates the reason why the
sacraments are commonly despised by those to whom they are proper and
specially given, as Isaiah 65:1, 2 says: \"I am found of them that
sought me not. I stretch forth my hands all the day long unto a
disobedient people that walk after their own thoughts.\"

This is God\'s judgment, and one must be satisfied with it. God judges
signs of grace so that he may be known by sinners and they may be saved;
but it commonly happens that they despise those to whom they are set up.

So baptism is established as a sign of righteousness to all who believe
in Christ; and the papists also boast of it, but in vain, because they
do not believe and condemn and persecute the doctrine of righteousness.
Thus St. John was a voice calling in the wilderness, and his baptism an
uplifted sign; but the Pharisees despised it. So also Isaiah Cap. 11,
10. says: \"The root of Jesse shall be raised up as a banner and sign\";
but the Jews do not want such a sign, but the Gentiles hope for it.

**[1046 L- iv. 83-ss. Interpretation of I Genesis 17:3-6. W. i,
isrs-iörs. 1047]{.underline}**

\(150\) This we say of circumcision also, that the Gentiles should not
be burdened, and yet be enticed and provoked to the same faith, that
Abraham might be the father of circumcision and of the foreskin.
Therefore many of the Gentiles have come to believe, but the Jews have
kept their uncircumcised hearts; so that circumcision has also become a
cause of salvation for the Gentiles and has been useful to them. For we
must have such signs and characteristics by which we are brought to the
knowledge of God, and human reason cannot find God unless such signs,
established by God Himself, precede us and, as it were, lead us by the
hands. There is nothing more dangerous than when someone imagines a way
to God and to salvation for himself and stands on his thoughts and
speculations.

151\) As we did in the papacy, when one thought to find God in Rome,
another in Spain, a third in another place in the world. And since each
one tried such ways, it finally came about that we all deviated, and all
of us became unfit, as the 14th Psalm v. 3. says. For why did we not
follow our signs, which were set up by God Himself, so that we would be
gathered together in unity of faith? God\'s word, baptism and the
Lord\'s supper.

Thus, since the Jews had the temple, circumcision, and a certain way and
order of worship, for which they were to assemble as under a war flag
and recognize One God as their ruler, they abandoned all this and turned
to their own thoughts; each one devised his own way of serving God and
followed it to his certain condemnation.

But if God reveals Himself with a sign, no matter what kind of sign it
may be, then one should seize Him in it. Now the devil does this for and
for, that he removes the right signs from people\'s faces and puts false
signs in their place. Just as he gives burning candles and lights to
those who go astray by night, so he gives them false signs.

The people who follow them lead them into abysses and water.

For this reason Christ very diligently and earnestly admonishes us to
beware of such snares of the devil, saying Matt. 24:23: \"If then any
man shall say unto you, Behold, here is Christ; or there, believe it
not. For Christ is to be sought there, where He has revealed Himself,
and where He wants to be known, as in the Word, in baptism, in the
evening meal; there He can certainly be found. For the Word cannot
deceive us. But, as I said, it often happens that reason does not pay
attention to such signs and turns to the harlot who sits at the door,
Proverbs 9:14.

Therefore, let each one learn and remember to walk in the way God has
prescribed, not the way we choose for ourselves. For our choice is made
with sins and is deceptive; as the prophet Isaiah Cap. 66, 3. says:
\"They choose such things in their ways.\" And St. Paul Col. 2, 18. 23.
rejects those and warns against those who walk in their own choice and
fictitious holiness. For it is certain that a man cannot find God
through his own wisdom; therefore we must also be concerned about the
great danger that Satan will disguise himself as an angel of light (2
Cor. 11:14), and will lay claim to divine majesty by performing signs
and wonders to confirm his errors.

Now we will be safe from such danger if we follow this visible figure or
sign that God has presented to us. As, in the New Testament, we have for
a visible sign the Son of God, who sits in Mary\'s womb and suffered and
died for us, as we speak in faith. And over and above this we have other
visible signs, such as the holy sacraments of baptism and the Lord\'s
Supper; item, the oral word itself: therefore we truly cannot complain
that God has left us unprotected and uninsured.

Now, on the other hand, Satan first of all, and then also his members
and servants, as the pope with his whole church, try to lead us away
from such visible signs that God has established, and point us to their

**[1048 v IV, 85-87. interpretation of Genesis 17: 36. w. i, 1579-1582.
1049]{.underline}**

false signs, as, on the holy canonization, invocation and service of the
deceased saints, on dumb idols and images, erected in special places for
the sake of money and profit 2c.

Therefore, we must be guarded against such wiles of the devil and be
armed with God\'s word, so that we can say: Before Christ\'s future I
know of no church but that which was in Abraham\'s house and lineage,
and whose characteristic was circumcision; so also after Christ\'s birth
I know nothing else but Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2:2, who revealed
Himself to us in manifest and visible signs, as in the use of the keys
and in the sacrament of the altar: there I know that I find God; there
and nowhere else do I obtain forgiveness of sins 2c.

But the pope and his mob say no to this. For God has given His saints
many gifts: St. James\' Church in Compostela is graced with many
miraculous signs; in Rome, too, many miraculous signs take place:
therefore, God also wants to be sought and found there. Thus St. Francis
has also left behind him a most glorious rule, which must make all those
who keep it pleasant and pleasing to God; for how could such a thing be
lacking, after the holy fathers have now and then considered it good by
its use 2c.?

The devil has so much to do that he may lead us astray from the signs
that God Himself has prescribed for us. But hold fast, and follow this
certain rule, which will never deceive you, that this is the counsel and
order of divine wisdom, that he reveals himself to men by a certain and
visible image and sign, which can be seen with the eyes, grasped with
the hands, and, in sum, grasped with all five senses: so very near does
the divine majesty show itself to us.

And it is the highest wisdom, if one can adhere to such visible images
and signs. But the examples of all the patriarchs, prophets and saints
show and teach us that the devil, as I have said, deals with them for
and with them and tries himself as he would have done.

may such images obscure us and put others before our eyes.

Thus, circumcision was also a visible image, not presented by men, but
by God Himself, so that He would be recognized through it, and not only
the Jews, but also the Gentiles would believe in such a God, who would
have revealed Himself to the Jews in such a way and form.

\(163\) Therefore I am of this opinion, that I believe that all the
circumcised children of the Jews, who died in their infancy, have been
saved. For they were found in the bosom of Abraham, that is, in the
promise that God would be their God. I think the same of our baptized
children. But because adults lose their faith through sin, they are not
saved, because they do not believe, even though they have been baptized.
This does not happen to the young children, therefore they remain in the
blessedness they have received and will certainly be saved.

This is a necessary doctrine, so that our sacraments may be praised,
which make the senseless, perverse spirits worthless and low, because
they do not pay attention to the word. For God does not play and joke by
saying of circumcision here, \"I will be their God, and of your seed
after you.\" And circumcision was an outward and visible sign, by which
the Jews were also recognized among the Gentiles and thus knew one
another.

Circumcision not only brought this people together externally and was a
sign and motto among them, but it was also a sacrament, that is, a sign
of the divine will, which is why it was a sign of eternal blessedness to
the faithful. For it proved that God was God to the circumcised people.
\"Now God is not a God of the dead, but of the living\", Matth. 22, 32.
Therefore, through circumcision, to which faith came, they not only
became citizens in the same church and police, which had been
established to distinguish them from other peoples, but also heirs of
the eternal God.

**[1050 2- IV, 87-88. interpretation of I Moses 17, 3-6. W. I,
1582-I5S5. 1051]{.underline}**

life. Because God is immortal and eternal, therefore he also gives
immortality and eternal life to his own.

166 We should also think the same of baptism and the sacrament of the
altar in the New Testament, that we do not consider them, as the foolish
spirits do, to be outward signs, made for the sole purpose of making a
distinction between Christians and other Gentiles. They do indeed make a
distinction, but they do not do so alone, but all who believe the
promise and use such signs become God\'s people and are saved.

We should note, as I said above, that circumcision was commanded only to
the seed of Abraham and imposed only on the male gender, and yet neither
the female gender of the Jews nor the Gentiles are excluded from this
grace, which confirms circumcision. Circumcision by itself, as a work,
did not count for anything, but faith in the promise, which was attached
to circumcision, settled all this.

Before circumcision, the sacrifices and the ministry were visible signs
of the invisible grace: but circumcision, which was established under
Abraham, had its power and was to last until the future of the seed that
was given. According to Christ\'s future we now have Holy Baptism, the
Sacrament of the Altar and the Office of the Keys, by which signs God
reveals Himself and makes blessed all who use them in faith.

Now if Cain\'s descendants, who were instructed by God\'s word, have had
this faith, they have been saved. For Cain was not cast out of the
opinion that his descendants should also be eternally rejected and
condemned by God.

For God had another reason for the same judgment, namely, that the
church might be more clearly remembered and recognized, and that no one
might think that there were two churches. For at all times there had to
be only one certain generation and people in the world, from which it
was believed that Christ should be born.

On such an opinion Ishmael is also rejected and nevertheless accepted
into the company of the promise. For Abraham prays for him, and has a
promise that he shall be a father to the other nations also. So Ishmael
is not excluded from blessedness and eternal life, but he is excluded
from honor alone, because he is not supposed to be a father of the Lord
Christ, who was supposed to come from his people. Therefore, God had to
ward off the hope of the fleshly birth in such a way that he could not
boast that he was Abraham\'s son, but seized Abraham\'s faith: which, as
I believe, has indeed happened.

But let us return to the text. Abraham hears here that both the physical
covenant of the land of Canaan and the spiritual covenant of the eternal
blessing are confirmed. After he recognizes God\'s goodness, namely that
He wants to place His church, in which he will certainly be found by all
peoples who call upon him, in his family, he falls on his face and gives
thanks to Him.

For it is a rich, excellent and mighty promise that God has confirmed
with a covenant that out of Abraham\'s seed should come the church that
dwells in the land of Canaan until Christ is born, so that both Gentiles
and Jews who believe what Abraham believed may be saved. For this cause
is the sign of circumcision given unto him, that through the
righteousness of the faith which is in him all men might be saved, and
the church of the sacrifices of the former. The church will be
transferred from the sacrifices of the previous fathers to this one
circumcised church.

And the words are mighty, earnest and full of love: \"Behold, it is I\",
as if he wanted to say: You do not hear another God now than before I
called you from Ur in Chaldea. But I promise you this, that your lineage
shall be the church before the whole world, which is a treasury of
grace, wherein all nations, and not your descendants alone, shall find
salvation and blessedness, if they alone abide in your faith.

175 For in Christ, who is here promised to Abraham, all nations, young
and old, will be gathered together: the young, through those who are in
the

**[1052 L. IV, 89-91. interpretation of Genesis 17:3-6. \" I, ILSS-ISS7.
1053]{.underline}**

The adults or old people who are so easily deceived and follow the flesh
and its lusts, and therefore it would be better for them, as Peter says
in 2 Epist. 2:21, if they had never known grace, because they would fall
away again from the known grace through sin.

Weiler also notes here a strong text against the vain and loose boast of
the Jews of their circumcision. The name Abram is changed, and is now
called Abraham, that is, a father of many Gentiles, before he is
commanded to be circumcised. This is why God wants Abraham\'s faith to
be propagated, not only to Ishmael\'s and Isaac\'s seed and the other
sons born of the Keturah, but also to the Gentiles who did not spring
from Abraham\'s flesh.

177 For this is by no means to be indulged in, that the Jews impudently
say that no nation shall be saved except those who are circumcised, and
that all nations must necessarily keep the law, and especially
circumcision, which are impudent lies, worthy of the blinded and
hardened Jews.

For God wanted Abraham to perform such signs for his seed, but in such a
way that the Gentiles would also be invited to faith. For the Gentiles
could not become God\'s people through circumcision, but through faith
in the given seed.

So the queen of Sheba, so Hiram, knew the God of Solomon the
circumcised, though Hiram remained in the foreskin. Therefore this is
Abraham\'s bosom, into which the Gentiles also are gathered, that is,
the faith of Abraham, through which they also come to the promise, even
though they do not receive the visible sign attached to the promise. For
the same was not laid up and commanded for the Gentiles, but for the
seed of Abraham.

180\) I have said above about the changed name of Abraham: and so be it
as it may, this is not without a special mystery, that the Hebrew letter
*h,* which has a gentle and mild meaning, is the name of Abraham.

The Holy Spirit has come in the midst of this name. Perhaps the Lord
meant to indicate that the Holy Spirit would come in a gentle and very
sweet and friendly swoosh, calling and gathering the Gentiles to the
fellowship of faith and promise.

181\. As they say that this letter *h* summarizes the two words hamon
gojim, that is, the multitude of the Gentiles, so that Abraham has the
name with the deed and is set as a father of the church as a high
priest; not because of circumcision, which alone was a sign and seal of
righteousness, and not righteousness itself, but because of faith in the
promise of the blessed Seed, by which faith all who have it, whether
they dwell in Egypt or in the land of Canaan, are Abraham\'s children,
and gifted even with the Spirit of God, so that Abraham, the father of
the Gentiles, himself was gifted and enlightened; So that there remains
one single and certain church, and to it one way, not many and uncertain
and deceitful ways.

182\. which follows further in the text: \"I will make thee almost very
fruitful\" (for the word is here twice) \"and will make of thee
nations\" is also contrary to the dreams and thoughts of the Jews. For
the text certainly testifies that Abraham\'s lineage will not be
increased to one people, but to many, so that many kings will also come
from him.

Now \"people\" means a certain nation, which has its community and
police, its authority, order and laws. A bunch of highwaymen, who live
without any rights and laws; item, hermits, and at present the Jews, who
are scattered now and then in all countries, cannot be called a people;
for they have had neither a head, regiment nor kingdom for more than
fifteen hundred years, but are like an army in the field, which has
neither an ensign nor a head.

184 Therefore they are far from this promise, however much they boast of
their father Abraham, and in vain is not only circumcision, but all that
is circumcised.

**[1054 L. rv. 91-93. interpretation of Genesis 17:3-7. W. I, E-15S2.
1055]{.underline}**

They do according to the appearance and manner of the law, and are no
longer God\'s people.

And this text should also be remembered to confirm the secular
authorities from it. Nations and rulers cannot be without laws, must
wage wars, protect the subjects, punish the wrongdoers 2c. All these
things are proven and approved by this text as right and just; as such
things the Scriptures call God\'s judgments, God\'s wars 2c.

In the same way, in the New Testament, temporal judgments, orders and
statutes are approved and established by the reputation of Christ and
the apostles. Yes, not only is the authority that is in the church and
with us of one faith confirmed and approved, but God can also suffer the
regiment and order of the Gentiles; as here not only Abraham\'s kingdom
and police, but also Ishmael\'s and the other neighboring Gentiles, who
came from him, were confirmed.

**Third part.**

**Of the covenant of God with Abraham, and of the promise of the land of
Canaan.**

**V. 7 And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee, among their seed; and it shall be an everlasting
covenant, that I may be thy God, and thy seed after thee.**

I have often said that the histories of the patriarchs are excellent
because God speaks to them in them. And especially Abraham\'s history is
favorably preferred to all other histories, because no patriarch is
found with whom God spoke so often.

188\. therefore he rightly bears the name of a patriarch; for he is a
father of faith, and God\'s special friend, with whom he speaks so
kindly, and to whom he so often promises how he will bless and multiply
him with a great family; also promises him not only the land of Canaan
as his own and hereditary, and a physical and temporal kingdom, but also
the church, namely that it will

and his descendants alone; and he draws and paints them with
circumcision, so that there may be a certain sign and visible image in
the world, in which God is shown or appears not only to Abraham and his
family, but to all peoples, who should see such a sign and image for
their salvation and through such a cause come to the knowledge of God.
That therefore circumcision was a cause of salvation to many of the
Gentiles.

The letters of lords and princes, they say, should be read three times;
but truly the letters of our Lord God (for so St. Gregory calls the holy
Scriptures) should be read three times, seven times, even seventy times
seven times, or, that I may say more, infinitely; for they are the
divine wisdom, which cannot be grasped so soon with the first sight.
Whoever therefore reads them above as known and easy things, deceives
himself.

\(190\) The prophets can truly be seen to have contemplated and
meditated day and night on what Moses wrote, and especially on these
histories of the patriarchs, from which they saw and concluded wonderful
things. For such diligence is helped and encouraged by the Holy Spirit.
Therefore, since God is not displeased to speak so much and so
extensively to Abraham, let us also meditate a little more diligently on
all things.

**I.**

191\. That he repeats the words, how he would establish a covenant with
him and confirm it, is to be understood, as I have often said, not only
by the fleshly or bodily seed of Abraham, but also by the Gentiles, who
should believe in the God of Abraham: just as King Pharaoh in Joseph\'s
time and Abimelech in Abraham\'s time and many others of the Gentiles
recognized the right God and were saved.

Therefore the words, \"I will establish my covenant,\" are to be
understood very broadly. But that he adds, \"It shall be an everlasting
covenant,\" the Jews pull their hair to it, so that the Gentiles also
must

**[1056 2- IV. W-95. Interpretation of I Genesis 17, 7. W. I, 1592-1594.
1057]{.underline}**

to be circumcised if they want to become God\'s people. But in this they
knowingly and willingly err. For why do they not see and consider these
words, which are written: \"between me and you, and your seed after you
with their descendants\"?

193 For what else does this text declare, but that this covenant shall
be upon Abraham\'s seed, and shall not be changed for ever, as long as
Abraham\'s seed shall be upon the earth? So that a goal is set and the
time is actually set, that as long as there will be descendants of
Abraham\'s seed, that is, as long as there will be a police, kingdom,
priesthood and a certain form of a people, this covenant shall also
remain unchangeable.

194 Therefore Abraham\'s descendants have their end and cessation in
Christ, who is the head and founder of a new generation. And as the
former generation had circumcision in itself, whereby it was to be
known: so the new generation and people of the Lord Christ have other
signs, whereby they are to be known.

195\. Abraham\'s lineage lasts for a certain time, as Mary finely sings
in her Magnificat Luc. 1, 50: \"His mercy endures forever\" (or from one
lineage to another) \"with those who fear him. For thereby it indicates
that God would preserve this people if they feared Him. But since the
godless synagogue of the Jews no longer feared God, killed His Son and
persecuted His word with cruel enmity and hatred, God did not care so
much about circumcision that He would let such great sins go unpunished
for its sake.

For this reason the fleshly lineage of Abraham ceased at that time, and
in its place came the new lineage of the Son of God, of which the
prophet Isaiah Cap. 53, 8. says: \"Who will speak the length of his
lineage?

197 That therefore the circumcision and this covenant of Abraham had its
time and duration, but nevertheless was changeable and extended to a
certain time. Nor has any man, as long as this generation of Abraham
stood, changed under any circumcision.

may stand to change the same. But Christ, who prepared a new generation
for himself, did not change the same covenant, but the sign of the
covenant. Therefore the Jews boast in vain that their circumcision is
eternal, that is, without end, both in breadth and in length, for which
reason it must also be imposed on the Gentiles.

198\. For a certain time it was to stand and be kept in Abraham\'s
house. But when the spiritual seed, promised to Abraham, came, the
fleshly generation ceased; the sign of the same generation according to
the flesh also ceased, which was not established for the sake of
Abraham\'s seed alone, but also for the sake of the Gentiles, as I said
above. And such a sign, as far as men are concerned, has been eternal
and without change, but nevertheless God has finally changed it.

199\. I have said above several times that these words, \"that I am your
God,\" not only include the physical promise of the land of Canaan, but
also the spiritual promise, of which the Scriptures have said above,
Cap. 15, 1: \"I am your shield and your very great reward. For there God
indicates with a covenant and clear words that the church should be in
Abraham\'s house, and Abraham\'s house in the land of Canaan, where
Abraham himself was a stranger. For this word, \"to be God,\" not only
means that God is the creator of a thing, but it also includes the
service of God. He is also the God of the Gentiles, for he created them,
but he is not recognized or honored by the Gentiles.

200\] Because he says, \"I will be your God,\" he indicates that Abraham
will always have God\'s word in his house and lineage, from which his
descendants will learn to know God and serve him rightly.

201\. Thus it is written in the first commandment, \"I am the LORD your
God,\" that is, I reveal myself to you through the Word, and you shall
serve me and know me. Therefore, the name \"God\" is not to be
understood merely in terms of its essence and majesty, but so that it is
called a God whom one serves and knows.

**[1058 L.IV, 9S-97. interpretation of Genesis 17:7. 8. w. I, Iö94-NN7.
1059]{.underline}**

worships. \"I will be your God,\" that is, I will perform my service in
your house, and I will be the God in you and in your services, who will
reveal myself to your descendants with signs, visible images, miracles
and great deeds, so that they may surely know me, worship me and serve
me. For in these two things consists the right worship.

To \"worship\" means to turn to God, to call upon Him in distress, to
thank Him for His help and salvation, to remember His benefits and to
boast that He creates, does good, promises and keeps His promises.

Just as the Gentiles know and understand this about God from natural
input, namely, that there is an eternal and almighty divine being whom
one should honor, call upon, praise, and have recourse to in all
troubles; as Paul says in Romans 1:21 that the Gentiles have known God
from their nature. For God has planted this knowledge in the hearts of
all men, so that they call God a helper, a benefactor and a gracious
God, even though they may be mistaken as to how the same God is and how
He is to be called upon and honored.

When God is known to be gracious, to be reconciled and to do good to all
men, then I go out from him and turn from him to men, that is, I wait
for my profession. If I am a regent, I wait on my lands and people; if I
am a householder, I govern my servants; if I am a schoolmaster, I
instruct my pupils, train and direct their hearts, thoughts and conduct
to godliness. 2c. Such works are also called right services. For with
all such works we serve God, who has commanded us to do them and placed
us in such a calling that we must do them.

205 And this doctrine of divine service is very necessary. For everyone
knows what strange and whimsical works the papists have devised, so that
they have also finally considered it a worship service if one were to be
buried in a monk\'s habit. These, however, are the right main parts of
right religion and worship: First of all, faith in God, so that we may
have faith in God.

Receive the remission of sins, invocation, thanksgiving, and true
confession; and after these the works of our profession toward our
neighbor, that thou govern, instruct, teach, comfort, exhort, nourish
thy work 2c.

In the schools, the sophists used to argue as if he were also in one of
the categories (basic concepts), so that they showed that they did not
understand anything about holy things. For whoever wants to ask of God
what He is, let him look at the service of God, which consists entirely
in the invocation and service of God, John 4:23.

Moreover, it is not enough to teach about God that this is the honored
God who reveals Himself through His word: but one should also add that
the God who teaches us how to serve Him also gives eternal life; as
Christ argues against the Sadducees, Matth. 22, 32. For the honored and
worshipped God that I am speaking of here is the only and necessary part
that belongs to this life.

This service and worship should not be Sadducian or Epicurean. For they
consider God to be a God of the dead, whereas Christ teaches that God is
a God of the living. Therefore he is a God of the saints, as Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob: all these are alive and not dead before him, though they
are dead before us.

Therefore, with this word (in which He promises to be Abraham\'s God),
God calls not only Abraham, but all his descendants, even all the
Gentiles who believe in Abraham\'s example, to the hope of eternal life,
that they may live as long as God Himself lives, that is, forever. For
such understanding has been revealed to us by God\'s Son Himself, who
says: \"God is a God of the living.\" That is why Abraham, Isaac, Jacob
2c. live, and live in an eternal life, even though they are dead before
our eyes.

**II.**

**V. 8 And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
wherein thou art a stranger within, even all the land of Canaan, for an
everlasting possession: and I will be their God.**

**[1060 L. IV, M-IM. Interpretation of Genesis 17:8, W. I, ISS7-1SM.
1061]{.underline}**

These words can be seen as if they were contrary to each other. Abraham
is promised that he will have eternal possession of the land of Canaan,
and yet he is called a stranger in the same land, which is then contrary
to each other. But by this the contradiction can be resolved, that the
God of Abraham is a God of the living. That is why Abraham, who
worshipped and served God, was a stranger in this life and yet at the
same time had the land of Canaan in the promise. But now that he is
dead, he is not dead but alive and has possession of the promised land
through his seed.

211\. so Stephanus, Ap. Gesch. 7, 5. says: \"God did not give Abraham an
inheritance in the land of Canaan, not even one foot wide.\" That both
are true, namely, that Abraham, after he is dead, possesses the land and
is a stranger in it during his life; therefore he is dead as if he were
not dead but alive, according to the promise: \"I will be your God.\"

From this we can easily conclude what Abraham was like and what his
thoughts were. He heard and saw the promise and considered it certain
and true; he also saw and felt that he had nothing of his own, but was a
stranger in the land.

\(213\) But because he could not lack the promise, and because he did
not obtain the possession of the land of Canaan while he lived, he
certainly believed that he would die, but not perish altogether and be
extinguished, but would rise again and be made alive in his own person.

For how could he think or be of any other mind? In this life he is a
stranger, and yet he is promised the possession of the land of Canaan.
Therefore this is a certain sign that he will not die. For of his person
it is actually said, \"To you I will give the land.\" Lest we say that
Abraham died and lived for his person, but possessed the land in his
descendants; such is a sophistical gloss. For GOD says specially and
personally to Abraham himself, \"To you and to your seed.\" Therefore,
the be

The first session of the land of Canaan was to follow and be given not
only to the seed but also to Abraham himself, and yet in his life it did
not come to this; therefore he had to live, since he was already dead,
so that he might be an heir to the land of Canaan.

215 Therefore he has this promise, that the God whom he honored and
worshipped in this life, even though he is now dead, will remain in his
house and with his descendants; but his house will be in the land of
Canaan, and when he dies he will live as a rightful heir and owner of
that land.

Such a rich and great treasure is God\'s word, and such wonderful
revelations of invisible and impossible things does it bring with it,
that Abraham concludes for certain that he will live, even though he is
dead, and have the land, which he was not to possess in this life, after
his death, and thus will live with God forever.

How could he not be happy? How should he not thank God, now that he is
certain that in his house and among his descendants the Church and the
faith sealed with circumcision will remain without the will of the devil
and the world, and that he will also remain in an eternal life with God?

Therefore he waited in joy for the hour of his departure from this
world. And what else could he do throughout his life but thank God and
praise His goodness and mercy, after He spoke so kindly to him and
comforted him so kindly?

219\. If I could thus think, and conclude with certainty (therefore I
call upon God daily, and know that He will hear me), that when I die I
would not die, but live and proclaim God\'s work: item, that with these
my disciples, whom I shall leave behind me when I die, the word and the
right worship should remain, and they should be a cause of the
blessedness of the whole world: how do you suppose that I would be
minded against death? Do you also think that I will be afraid or tremble
before it, and not rather with

**[1062 \"- rv, 100-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 17, 8. W. 1,
1600-1602. 1063]{.underline}**

would say to dear Simeon Luc. 2, 29: \"Lord, now let your servant go in
peace\"?

220 Therefore Abraham is certainly a wonderful man in his faith, and is
not to be wondered at if he was undaunted in adversity and danger and
was able to bear all misfortune. For he knew that the church would
remain in a certain place, with certain persons, and until a certain
time, namely until Christ, who was not of the generations of this world.
He also knew that after his death he would live in eternal life,
regardless of the fact that he did not yet have the Son, in whom the
blessing would begin, which not only affected the Jews, but all nations
who wanted to worship the God of Abraham and believe in him.

I have said this so that one might understand what it means to be God.
And does this understanding rhyme with what Daniel Cap. 11, 36. said of
King Antioch, but St. Paul 2 Thess. 2, 4. said of the Antichrist, that
he would rise above everything that is called God and above all worship.
For the Antichrist, that is, the Pope and the Turk, do not rise above
God as he is in his divine nature, an unknown and hidden God, as Isaiah
Cap. 45, 15: but above the God who proclaimed Himself through the Word
and revealed Himself through the divine services.

For both the pope and the Turk not only do not respect the word and
service of God, but are also hostile to it and persecute it. Therefore,
the pope has exalted himself above God and placed himself in God\'s
stead, so that he may be worshipped and served in God\'s stead, and the
word of God and the proper worship of God be abolished and suppressed.

For look at his decrees and canons, and you will find that the
transgressions of the pope\'s statutes are punished much more severely
than the transgressions of the divine commandments; indeed, he tramples
underfoot and blasphemes the Lord Christ, whom alone one should worship
and honor, but he wants his teaching to be accepted and honored, to be
feared, and to be believed and trusted in what he teaches. This is what
it means.

I mean, to set himself above the proclaimed and honored God. That is why
he is cheaply called the Antichrist.

How many do you think there were of the teachers, before the light of
the holy gospel came, who could have counted the Ten Commandments or the
petitions in the Lord\'s Prayer? For the ordinances of men were upon us
all, and when we had done them enough, we thought that all the service
of God was rightly ordered and arranged.

\(225\) I mean that this means to rise above God and to sit in the
temple of God, not in heaven, where the unrevealed and hidden God dwells
in His divine essence, but in the place of God who is proclaimed, who
allows Himself to be taught and revealed in words, and in the place of
God whom one serves.

226 He has not only abolished the marital state, which God ordered and
instituted, but has made it completely impure and worthless, as if it
were an unchristian state and displeasing to God.

227\. From the sacrament of the altar he has not only taken away the
chalice, and robbed and stolen it against all the rights of the church,
but has disguised the testament of the Lord Christ and turned it into a
sacrifice and a fair, which has borne him money: and that I may say it
briefly, he has buried Christ altogether, and has assigned the
righteousness to his human statutes and false services, which he has
devised and set up without and against the word of God. That is what I
mean by exalting oneself above all that is called God.

I mean God, to whom we turn our faces and whom we worship, give thanks
and call upon, as from whom we have all kinds of goods, both physical
and spiritual; whom we also serve with love and all kinds of service to
our neighbor, being obedient to the authorities and parents, serving the
children by feeding them and teaching them faithfully. 2c. For all these
things are to be done for the sake of God, who has revealed Himself in
His Word. The pope, the Turk and the Jews do not do this, but all of
them exalt themselves above God in that they are His

**[1064 L- iv. los-ioi. Interpretation of I MHe 17, 8. W. i. ims-i\"\".
1065]{.underline}**

commandments, and since they want to be holiest of all, they are
subordinate to serve God and to recognize Him in His essence. But there
is no life to be hoped for from such a God, for such a God does not
speak to us. But the God who has revealed Himself with visible signs,
who has given us the word of His promise and instituted the sacraments,
is the true God and Beatificator, whom we can grasp and understand.

But you must be careful not to add to or take away from these things in
which God has revealed Himself. But if you let go of God, who has thus
revealed Himself to us, and seek God and want to investigate how and
what He is in His divine nature, His majesty will become too heavy for
you and you will be consumed by it, Prov. 25, 27; \"for our God is a
consuming fire,\" Heb. 12, 29, and \"dwells in a light that no one can
approach,\" 1 Tim. 6, 16.

Therefore, stay with the proclaimed and revealed God, above whom the
Antichrist rises, that is, the Pope of Rome, and the Turk as well;
although the Turk is rather the beast of blasphemy, of which Revelation
13:5, for he is outside the church and publicly persecutes Christ: but
the Antichrist sits in the temple of God. Therefore the Antichrist, if
we want to speak actually and according to the dialectic, is one who
sits in the church, in which God\'s visible signs and images are, which
he tramples underfoot and invents new signs 2c.

Now we see what a great man Abraham was, adorned with such great
promises, from which he certainly concluded that he would live forever.
For when the Lord says, \"I will be your God, and your seed after you,\"
he not only points to the most certain place of the church in Abraham\'s
lineage, but at the same time promises him eternal life, and puts a sign
of it on his body, namely circumcision.

232 We would consider such a thing to be great and excellent if it were
promised to us by a secular prince, namely, that he would be our most
gracious emperor or king and would give us letters and seals of such a
promise, since it would be

The first thing that can happen to a man is that he might become of a
different mind, as in the German proverb \"Herrengunst\" and
\"Fürstengunst\" are likened to the weather of April, which is never
quite pure and very unstable: April weather, which is never quite pure
and very unstable. And at all times many excellent examples testify to
this, many who were held very dear by lords and princes, but were
finally hunted down by them to the gallows, or otherwise badly punished.
Even deceitful, uncertain, and unstable people put up with false,
fabricated, and fraudulent favors and friendships and take pleasure in
them.

But Abraham has such a God for a promise, who could not, as he well
knew, change nor lack. He promised him, saying: \"My Abraham, keep my
covenant with me and walk righteously and uprightly before me, and you
will know that I will be your God and your seed after you; indeed, for
your sake I will be the God of all the nations who will believe in me
according to your example.

These, I say, are words not only of this temporal life, but also of the
immortal and eternal. And do we have such thoughts about it: If God
spoke such things to us, we would easily overcome in patience and hope
all the misfortunes that can occur to us in this life; and yet we have
this very promise much richer and more powerful than Abraham ever had.

For Abraham sat down with his own only in a corner and a small place, in
which God\'s word was preached and the visible signs of God were seen:
but we have at this time the whole world full of such signs; as the
seraphim sing in Isaiah Cap. 6, 3: \"All the earths are full of His
glory.

236 Abraham had circumcision as a sign of this promise, but we have
baptism, which is more abundant and glorious than circumcision, because
we are baptized in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

237 And the Son of God was not satisfied with this sign of grace, but
left his body and blood as a testament to his church.

**[1066 iv\> ivt-i\". Interpretation of I Moses 17, 8. S. W. i,
ims-isii. 1067]{.underline}**

Food and drink for eternal life, so that no one could doubt that the
blessedness which the Son of God acquired with His suffering and death
also belongs to us and not only to St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Mark and
other highly pardoned servants of God, as we in the papacy (since we
were corrupted by the teaching of the pope) thought.

For the Pope\'s teaching did not show us certainty of blessedness;
indeed, it was still a devotion and holiness when one doubted whether
God would be gracious or ungracious to us. This doubt Christ wanted to
remove from our hearts not only through His word, but also through these
visible signs of grace. That is why he has made such clear promises for
such signs, which are useful to all those who use such signs.

239 Just as Abraham had circumcision, with such an excellent word and
promise attached to it: \"I will be your God, and your seed after you\":
so we have many more visible signs, namely, first of all baptism, which
is adorned and graced with a very excellent and lovely promise, namely,
that we shall be saved if we believe. But because in this weak and frail
nature of ours we often fall into sins and stumble, there are bound up
with baptism the keys or oral ministry (for none of these is to be
separated or set apart from another), which is also a visible sign of
grace, bound up with the oral word of the gospel, according to the order
and appointment of the Lord Christ, namely, \"What you shall loose on
earth shall be loosed also in heaven,\" Matt. 18:18. 18, 18. If you now
grasp and accept such a word in faith, you will again be accepted in
grace and come back to the life that was lost through sin. This also
happens in the use of the sacrament of the altar. For these words:
\"This is my body, given for you, and my blood, shed for you, for the
remission of sins,\" Matth. 26, 26. 27. are not empty words at all, but
strengthen and assure mightily the hope of the remission of sins.

240 So you see that we have the promise of eternal life much more
abundantly and

more glorious than Abraham himself had. Therefore, with this gift and
great grace, we should also defy and be proud against the devil and the
world, and comfort and uplift ourselves with it in all adversity; as the
holy patriarch Abraham did.

241 But our misery and sinful flesh prevent us from doing so; thus we
have also fallen into the last and worst times: therefore we either do
not see or recognize such precious treasure and eternal goods, or we are
not surprised about them.

The holy martyrs, St. Stephen, St. Lawrence, St. Sebastian, St. Fabian,
and others like them, overcame death and all their torment and torture
in this way. Because they held on to the faith of Abraham and comforted
themselves with these visible signs of grace, all torment and torture,
as Vincentius said, was a game and a pastime and, as it were, child\'s
play for them.

Faith is such an excellent thing when God reveals Himself through His
promise and a heart grasps it with earnestness and keeps it; and this
very promise still resounds daily in the church: \"I will be your God.
For this reason the apostles and prophets have diligently reflected upon
it and explained it with many beautiful and glorious sermons; they have
taught how one should direct one\'s whole life so that one may serve
one\'s neighbor and bring much to the knowledge of God; and when
misfortune and hardship occur, one should hold on to the hope that God
will help, and call upon the name of the Lord. For since He promised to
be God to those who believed in Him, eternal life and joy would follow
this temporal misfortune and sorrow.

**Fourth Part.**

**About circumcision in general and in particular.**

**V. 9. And God said unto Abraham, So then had my covenant, thou and thy
seed after thee, with their seed.**

244\. we deal with this text for a long time and treat it with many
words, which

**[1068 L. IV, 106-108. interpretation of Genesis 17:9. w. I, ISII-I6I3.
1069]{.underline}**

For it is not necessary for the sake of the Jews alone, whom we do not
esteem highly, but also for the sake of the consciences. That is why
Paul is so diligent about this commandment of circumcision and therefore
about the whole law.

And is this wisdom above all wisdom, that a right distinction may be
made between the law and the gospel, and that one may be a good
dialectician in this doctrine. The two are indeed different in nature,
but in the struggle of the conscience it is not easy to see how far the
law binds and how far it does not bind.

**I.**

The Jews say that Abraham was commanded by God to be circumcised, and we
also confess that he, as a commander, was commanded such a sign or
covenant, so that through circumcision all peoples would have a certain
place and certain person, in whom God would visibly reveal Himself, and
unite with the same, and thus meet and find the right God, who should
not be found in any other place on the face of the whole earth.

This has been a great and high grace and blessing of God, but we must
also consider the other circumstances. We see that here the persons are
actually named and clearly expressed: \"Thou shalt keep my covenant,
thou and thy seed after thee\"; item, \"with their descendants. These
words, because they are so often repeated and impressed upon Abraham,
indicate that the circumcision was limited and set within a certain
boundary and purpose, and did not apply to the Gentiles, who, as we
know, are not Abraham\'s seed.

248 So that it is said: \"Your seed shall keep this covenant with his
descendants\", clearly proves that such a burden is not laid on, that it
should last forever. For this example and experience shows that
Abraham\'s and his seed\'s descendants have now ceased longer than
fifteen hundred years ago; for they have neither temple, priesthood, nor

Kingdom. What else can this be, but that their descendants and lineage
have ceased and are no more? What a foolish and foolish thing it is that
they still insist on circumcision, which has been commanded and imposed
to stand and last for a certain and definite time, and should not be
held so hard to it, as if it were an eternal and immutable law of God.

249 And such abrogation of the commandment brings with it the time
itself. For since the generations and descendants are no more,
circumcision is no longer necessary; indeed, a repeal or dispensation of
the same law was necessary at the time it was given. For it was
commanded that the children should be circumcised on the eighth day, and
yet Ishmael is circumcised only in his fifteenth year, and Abraham in
his ninety-ninth.

\(250\) And it is great wisdom to see where one should be strict about a
law and where one should soften and abrogate it. Therefore it is rightly
said that one should read the letters of princes three times, and the
letters of our Lord God much more. A prince and a high person have other
thoughts than another common man; therefore one should well move and
consider what lords and princes write or speak (with princes and lords
everything is high and important, but with private persons small and
low): but how much more cheaply does one do this in the things which
divine wisdom calls and commands!

251 Thus such words of the Lord refute all proofs and arguments of the
Jews, who claim that circumcision is eternal and pretend that it must
also be imposed on the Gentiles. For the Lord clearly says: \"You and
your seed shall keep my covenant\". This covenant is of no concern to
the Gentiles; moreover, he says, \"in their descendants,\" that is, as
long as their kingdom and priesthood shall stand.

252 If then this should be either a general or an eternal commandment,
it would certainly not be so limited, and the Lord would not say so
clearly about the bought and foreign servants in the house.

**[1070 n IV, 108. las. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 9. W. I,
I6I3-16I6. 1071]{.underline}**

Abraham, but would sum up in general and say of all the children and
servants of all nations.

253 From this it is certain that the Gentiles, who are not of the house
of Abraham, have no need of circumcision. For circumcision does not
apply to all nations in general, but to the house of Abraham alone; and
for this purpose it is appointed for a certain time, namely, that it
should continue as long as Abraham\'s descendants remain. A sensible
Jew, if he is any other sensible Jew, can never deny this.

254 And this very thing, that circumcision should not go over all
nations, but remain in Abraham\'s house alone, will have grieved and
challenged Abraham greatly. For his house alone was chosen to be the
church in which God would dwell through this visible sign and image of
circumcision. Without a doubt, however, Abraham felt a challenge from
this order of God, so that he would have been concerned about the other
nations that had not been in his house.

For this is what he thought: If my house alone is to be the church in
which God will dwell, how will it be with the other nations? Shall they
all be condemned? Will God forsake them? For this is innate in us by
nature, that we cannot do otherwise, we must take care of others. So,
when St. Peter hears from the Lord how he will fare, he asks John 21:21
as soon as he hears what John should do. And is this not a small
question: whether those alone who have circumcision and the law will be
saved, or also the others who do not have the law?

Now these words: \"You and your seed\" cannot be seen in any other way
than as if all the Gentiles were excluded from God\'s grace and
blessedness and if the same was turned to the house of Abraham alone and
closed up in it. Such disputing of Abraham with himself, or
contestation, is indicated here in short words, as also afterwards, when
he says Gen. 20:11: \"Perhaps there is no one here who fears God.\"

For since God says, \"You and your seed shall keep My covenant,\" he
will have thought: How will it be with the other nations? And was this
not a small challenge, that he should look at himself and his profession
alone, and not worry about others or ask for anyone?

The pope and his followers were unable to overcome such a challenge. For
he had before him the way to salvation, namely faith in Christ, but he
abandoned it and chose other ways than the sacrifice of the Mass,
monastic vows, and the like.

Thus, everyone has his profession in which he serves God by diligently
waiting for Him. A ruler who presides over and governs his subjects
serves God; a housemother who waits on her children, a householder who
nourishes himself with his work, a student who studies diligently serves
God.

\(260\) Such a certain way to a Christian and blessed life has been
abandoned by monks and nuns. For they thought that the works which each
profession entailed were far too few, and looked around for other works
that were more apparent and more respectable: thus, at the same time,
they fell away from the faith and became disobedient to God.

Therefore it is great wisdom when a man does what God commands him, and
does not turn to others, nor ask what they do, but only pays attention
to himself and his profession. But truly, there are few of them who do
this: the majority thus hold themselves, as the poet says: The farmer
would gladly be a citizen, the citizen a farmer, or, as is said in the
German proverb: The chickens that are in the basket would like to be
out, but those that are outside would like to be in.

For very few are found who are content with their rank and profession.
He who is a layman would like to be a priest, the disciple a master, the
citizen the mayor, and there is almost no one who does not grow tired
and weary of his profession; yet there is no other way to serve God,

**[1072 D. IV. IOS-U1. Interpretation of Genesis 17:9, W. I. I616-1S19.
1073]{.underline}**

For to walk in simple faith, to be diligent in one\'s profession, and to
have a good conscience.

Thus Abraham sees that such a law of circumcision could not be without
difficulty for him and his descendants, but he accepts it in humility
and with thanksgiving; but the concern whether the Gentiles will also be
saved, he commands God and does not inquire about it in a presumptuous
manner.

He could have had such a challenge because of the female gender, so that
he would have thought: Does God not also want to put a mark on the poor
women, like on our babies? But he also lets go of this concern, and is
careful to do what he knows God has commanded him to do; with this hope,
which he keeps in his heart, that God will not, as St. Peter Ap. 10, 34,
35, that God is not a ruler of persons, who makes distinctions among men
and prefers one to another, but that he is pleased with every man of
whatever nation he is, who fears him and does right. Thus the holy man
overcomes such temptation.

But those who work in the vineyard all day and see that others who have
only worked for an hour receive the same wages as they do, cannot
overcome this challenge and therefore they come under the wrath and
displeasure of the householder, because they want to have an advantage
over others for the sake of working for a certain amount of time.

Thus Abraham could have thought (as there are many temptations for pious
and God-fearing people): Behold, I alone am chosen with mine own to be
circumcised, and God says to me that he will be my God; how then will it
be with the Gentiles? will God condemn and cast them out? As the Jews
say in the Gospel, \"We have borne the burden and heat of the day,\"
therefore we alone are holy. But the Holy Spirit governs him so that he
does not fall into sin over this challenge, and gives him another
thought, so that he thinks, \"What is it to me what God wants to do with
the Gentiles?

But to Mr. he imposes what he pleases, therefore I will also gladly
tolerate and do such things and not worry much about others. Peter is in
just such a challenge when he asks Christ Joh. 21, 21. 22. about John:
\"What is this? But he answered him, \"If I will that he remain until I
come, what is it to thee?\"

So God wanted me to be a preacher, that is, he wanted me to bring envy,
hatred and enmity upon myself for the sake of his word. To other people
he puts on manual labor, which, when I look at them, I consider
blissful; for their work is airy and pleasant to them, they live along
without worries and special burden and challenge, and would not like
that they should not work, or be in a quiet and idle state; for work
strengthens the body and preserves health. But I, while another does his
work playing like a child of seven years, must be afflicted with danger
and challenge, and yet becomes a common craftsman as blessed as I am.

What should I do about it? Should I become impatient or withdraw from my
profession? No, but rather I should think that God has many ways of
grace and distributes it among us according to His will, but it behooves
us to be obedient to God when and where He requires us, Rom. 12, 3. 1
Petr. 4, 10.

In a man\'s body, it seems as if the hands are much worse off than the
eyes, because they have to work, but the feet have to hold and carry the
whole body; and if one wants to see such a burden, they are the most
miserable and afflicted limb of the whole body. For the tongue has it
much better, which feels what is good for it, and is wonderfully cared
for. But as it is, the gifts are various, but the unpleasantness and
burden should be borne patiently, since it is imposed on everyone by
God, who gives the ability and strength to bear it, and everyone should
remember that Paul says in 2 Cor. 12:9, \"Be content with my grace.\"
For although the feet alone must bear the burden of the body, so have

**[1074 L. iv, iii-iis. Interpretation of I Moses 17, 9. W. i, isw-ini.
1075]{.underline}**

They derive their wealth and health from the body and enjoy everything
that benefits the body. Even the eyes, however splendid a limb they may
be, can never be subjected to this little service, as it seems, of
carrying the body. For they are different and created for a different
office and service of the body.

270 That one should keep this rule by all means, that each one should
stick to his profession and be satisfied with his gift, but he should
not ask for others.

The monks are such fools and fools that they dare to put every man\'s
shoes on the same last and want to govern all men according to one rule.
For so they said to me when I entered the monastery: As it has been done
to me, so shall it be done to you. But how much better says Augustine:
\"Each man is not to be measured by the same yardstick, for one is not
always equal to another in strength and health.

Such would be an arithmetical calculation and proportion, that the eyes
and feet, because they are members of one body, should also bear the
same and equal burden and work; but it makes a wicked regiment and
abolishes all order. Therefore, in such worldly household and regimental
affairs, one must lead and need the geometric proportion directed to
each one\'s ability.

But the arithmetical proportion and calculation applies and is kept in
the Kingdom of Heaven: there everything is divided equally among those
who are unequal. For as I have just said from the stories of the
apostles in 10:34, God is not an observer of persons; He finds us all
sinners, even though one is more careful, wiser, more understanding and
more moral than the other.

274 And because reason has great regard for such gifts, it considers God
to be unreasonable in distributing His grace equally; just as those in
the Gospel who labored more boast that they bore the burden and heat of
the day, and are displeased that those who labored only one hour
received equal reward with them.

But the pious patriarch Abraham does not do so, but is without all
glory,

Defiance and hope, marvels at God\'s counsel and praises Him. He does
not say, \"Why is circumcision imposed on me and not on the Gentiles?
Indeed, why is it not imposed on my brother\'s son Lot, who lives not
far from there, and on his family? but he is glad that they are of one
faith with him, and therefore bears the burden that is especially
imposed on him with the greatest willingness as a special sign of divine
goodness and grace, which, although the Gentiles do not have, he knows
that they are in grace, just as he is, if they believe.

276 As will follow more clearly hereafter; for those of Sodom and
Gomorrah did not have circumcision, and yet Abraham hoped that fifty
righteous men would be among them. If then circumcision, at the same
time that it was most promoted by the patriarch Abraham, and went on in
pregnancy, was not imposed on the Gentiles, nor on Abraham\'s friend
Lot; yea, that is still more, if Abraham himself, while he was yet in
the foreskin, became righteous: what then do the wretched Jews pretend,
that the Gentiles also should be afflicted therewith?

Therefore this is the decision, that each one should look at his
profession and follow it. It may well be that Anthony and others who
lived in the desert were pious people, but you would be committing a
great sin if you were to leave your profession and, following their
example, hide in a corner. For God has commanded you to do many other
things, namely, to be submissive and obedient to your parents, your
authorities and your disciplinarian.

278 Thus, before the Lord Christ\'s coming, the calling of the Jews was
to be circumcised, and they were to follow it and not impose it on
others.

Now this common profession is that one should not be circumcised, but
should believe in Christ and be baptized in his name: whoever does this,
let him do hereafter, in whatever state he may be, father, mother,
authority, 2c., what he is commanded in his profession, and he will be
saved. Now follows the law itself of circumcision.

**[1076 L. rv, 114-na. Interpretation of Genesis 17:10. II. W. 1.
1W1-1W4. 1077]{.underline}**

**II.**

V. 10, 11: **Now this is my covenant, which ye shall keep between me and
you, and thy seed after thee: Every male among you shall be circumcised.
And ye shall circumcise the foreskin of your flesh. This shall be a sign
of the covenant between me and you.**

This whole text has five main parts: First of all, God calls for the
circumcision of infants, from which it follows that females are excluded
from this law, as are the Gentiles, who are not Abraham\'s seed nor in
Abraham\'s house.

The word *mul* is ambiguous, Ps. 118, and means to cut off with the
sword, as for example the trees are used to be cut off. To make the
matter clear, he adds that the foreskin of the flesh is to be
circumcised, so that the remaining members of the whole body remain
unharmed. And this is the other part of this text, that God has chosen
this part of the body alone.

Thirdly, after the female sex, the Gentiles and all the members of the
body without the foreskin are excluded, the eighth day after birth is
appointed for circumcision.

283 Fourth, the purchased servants also come to Abraham\'s seed, and
those born in Abraham\'s house he also calls circumcised.

Fifth, he makes a promise and threat to this law. The promise is this:
\"I will be your God.\" The threat is this: \"If a child is not
circumcised in the foreskin of his flesh, his soul shall be cut off from
among his people. For promises and threats meet together externally or
worldly and theologically. \"If thou wilt enter into life,\" says
Christ, Matt. 19:17, \"keep the commandments\"; with this he includes
the threat that he who does not keep the commandments shall enter into
hell. In a worldly way one says: If you want peace, honor the sword.
Such a promise contains in itself this threat that those who do not
honor the sword shall perish by the sword.

For this reason the ancient teachers said that in all his sermons a
preacher should pay attention to these four things, namely, that he set
vice and virtue, punishment and reward, one against the other. And if
this had not been so badly said, they would also have kept Christ. For
the law deals with these four things: with vices or sins against the
law; with virtue and obedience to the law; with punishments of sins
against the law, and rewards of virtue and obedience to the law. But
such teaching does not make Christians. For it is a teaching of the law
that does not lead to perfection. But the gospel of grace must be added,
and only then will a perfect Christian be made.

286 That the Lord alone is said to circumcise infants, the Jews give as
a reason that there is no other member of the human body that the body
can do without. But I have said that this shows the deepest blindness in
which the Jews are.

This is the real reason, which the history of the holy scripture brings
with it, that God wanted to condemn the man, not the woman, because the
man had sinned. For if Eve had been alone and Adam had not consented to
her sin or punished the woman, he would have escaped punishment: but
because he consented to the woman\'s sin, he is a cause of harm and is
justly brought to punishment by circumcision; but the woman is let go,
who nevertheless also bears her share of the punishment.

Thus, God shows with the circumcision, which He only imparts to the
males, that the original sin was inherited from the first father Adam to
the entire human race; as St. Paul Rom. 5, 12. everywhere only says of
Adam that sin came through him, but of Eve he remains silent.

289 As to the question of women, who are the other part of the human
race, item, of infants who die before the eighth day, I have said above,
and Peter Lombard also deals with this question, how women are saved
without circumcision. For on this is

**[1078 iv, ue ii7. Interpretation of I Genesis 17:10. 11. W. i. i
\"2\"-1\"27. 1079]{.underline}**

It is easy and simple to answer: The law excludes the women themselves
and says only of the males; therefore the women, if they are not
circumcised, do not sin against this law, just as also the small
children do not sin, who do not live to the eighth day. For the law
enjoins circumcision only on those who have reached the eighth day after
their birth.

\(290\) Therefore the women and the young children who die before the
eighth day are excluded from circumcision, but they are not excluded
from the blessedness and faith of Abraham. Therefore the uncircumcised
women dwell in wedlock with circumcised men, and both are blessed in the
faith. Thus Ruth, who followed Naomi, her sister-in-law, says: \"Your
people are my people, and your God is my God\", Ruth 1:16. Although she
was not of the holy people, for she was a Moabitess, she nevertheless
became blessed, because she clung with faith to the God of Israel.

291\. the women have for themselves a circumcision hard and difficult
enough, of which Moses 1. B. Cap. 3, 16. says: \"You shall bear your
children with pain\"; there they are circumcised until death, and this
saying says of God\'s wrath and grace: the wrath is in the word
\"pain\"; but grace in the word: \"You shall bear.\"

For although the female gender is also condemned for the sake of the
original sin, it is not completely abolished or perishes: and such a
burden and punishment is not laid upon Eve alone, but upon all women who
give birth. Therefore the holy women comforted themselves in their pain
with these thoughts, that although such pain was a certain sign of sin
and God\'s wrath, it was also a certain sign of divine blessing, that
through childbearing the human race is increased and the Church of God
is built up again.

For if God alone had wanted to be angry and punish and not forgive and
show mercy, He would have said: You shall remain barren, or: I will
create a new Eve, who shall not be a sinner, but holy. But the merciful
and gracious God does

such, but gives such words of his grace from himself: \"You shall bear
children.\" But so that sin would not go unpunished, he adds, \"You
shall give birth with pain and anguish.\"

294 Since Eve was comforted and assured by this word, she received
certain hope of blessedness, since the holy seed was also promised, and
the blessing was left to them that they should bear and multiply: which
blessing God did not revoke, even though He may have retracted it a
little by adding pains to it, which would not have been in the perfect
and uncorrupted nature.

295 Hence it has come about that the holy women at all times have
considered childbearing to be a great sign of divine grace; and Rachel
is thus impatient with her husband, since she says Gen. 30:1: \"Produce
children for me; if not, I will die.\" For she indicates that she must
die of sorrow, seeing that barrenness is a sign of divine wrath. And in
the 127th Psalm, v. 3, the children are gloriously praised: \"Behold,
children are a gift of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is a gift,\"
that is, the Lord\'s gift and gift. Such is a glorious name, that
children are gifts of God.

For this reason, 1 Sam. 1, 10, Hannah laments so miserably; and
Elizabeth, John\'s old mother, leaps for joy and boasts Luc. 1, 25:
\"The Lord has taken my shame away from me. Therefore, barrenness was
considered a sign of wrath, but fruitfulness was considered a sign of
grace at the time when the world was still more pious.

But since the marriage state has fallen into abuse and fornication has
become more and more prevalent, what was left of this blessing has been
obscured from year to year, even among the Jews; as even today one finds
many such misers who consider many children not as a blessing, but as
God\'s punishment and misfortune.

The holy women, however, have always considered this gift, if they have
been fertile, as a great honor; just as, on the other hand, they have
considered barrenness as a sign of wrath.

**[1080 HV.I17-NS. Interpretation of Genesis 17:10. II. W. 1, 1827-1830.
1081]{.underline}**

nes, shame and disgrace. That it is no doubt, this challenge, that she
saw and found out that she was barren, will have almost worn out poor
Sarah, that she will often have had to comfort Abraham. So the female
gender is condemned by this painful punishment, but therefore the
blessing is not completely canceled.

299 Although women\'s limbs are condemned to punishment, they are not
condemned to infertility. And this is also done in the circumcision of
males. For this purpose, males and infants are required, and by
circumcision of the foreskin they are told that their birth is condemned
and full of sin: and yet this consolation is found: \"I will be your
God.

Thus God presses and strangles His church according to the flesh with
the cross, and yet makes it righteous and blessed according to the
spirit through faith; so that promise is set for punishment, and comfort
for terror, so that godly and pious people may know how to comfort one
another in trouble and misfortune.

The holy fathers, however, saw what misfortune and misery had befallen
the entire human race because of sin; therefore they humbled themselves,
and they conscripted and forced the lust of their flesh, and then they
consoled themselves with the kindness and grace of God, that even in
wrath and punishment He had left a blessing after Him. This much is said
of the fact that circumcision was imposed only on the male seed.

302\) But that God means to circumcise the foreskin in the flesh, and to
let such a law pass over this lewd member, as we call it, which belongs
to the discipline and increase of the whole human race, and does not
rather mean to cut off either a piece of the ear, or of the lips, or of
the hair, or of the beard, which are honest members, and of which one is
not ashamed before men: of this Peter Lombardus disputes, namely,

that God wanted to indicate that more abuse and disobedience would be
committed with this limb than with the others. But how this is
interpreted, others may judge.

For the origin of all sins is that the hearts are full of ungodly
thoughts and unbelief, therefore not only this, but all the other
members of the body are abused: and if one wants to compare one with the
other diligently, will one not have to say that with the tongue many
more sins are committed, and the eyes and ears awaken many more
disorderly lusts?

This is why this cause is better: this member is a member of the
discipline and increase of all flesh and was created for the sole
purpose of producing children; therefore God takes hold of it and calls
it to be circumcised, so that He may show us and keep before our eyes
the original sin that is innate in us and grows up with us, and not the
common or real sin.

This is the reason why the male is condemned in this limb, because it is
called a male; and yet this is not a true condemnation, but rather a
threat and sign of wrath. For since it can be seen as if God condemns
the whole member, he still preserves its use. Such a cause is brought
about by history and is consistent with other works of God. For just as
he condemns childbearing and pronounces it blessed; just as he kills and
gives life; just as he threatens and promises at the same time: so he
condemns the male member and at the same time preserves it through
circumcision. For in his counsel and works he is marvelous.

The mystery of the incarnation of the Son of God is also revealed. For
the sake of the only virgin Mary, from whom Christ was to be born, God
spares the entire female gender and requires only the males for
circumcision. For if there should yet come a woman who would give birth
without a man, for the sake of this God spares the entire female gender,
and places this law, which is foolish in the eyes of reason, on men
alone.

307\. so circumcision is such a

**[1082 L.IV, U9-121. interpretation of I Moses 17, , 10. II. W. 1,
1630-1K32. 1083]{.underline}**

sign, in which God exemplified the whole theology, namely, sin and grace
in the male and female sex. For circumcision of such a secret and
dishonest member not only reminds us of sin, that we are by nature
children of wrath, and have sin born with us, but there is also grace in
the fact that not the whole member, but only a small part of it is
shortened and circumcised, and childbearing, necessary for the church
and the police, is preserved and left as a blessing.

308 So also in the female gender, to whom circumcision is not imposed,
is a sign of grace. For it is signified that he shall be born of a
woman, by whom circumcision shall be abolished, and we shall be saved
from sin and death. The Jews understand none of these mysteries, but we
must diligently search them out and know them.

Of the third part, this is the question: Why did God want the infants to
be circumcised on the eighth day? And Peter Lombard and the scholastics
also deal with such a question with great diligence, as they make
themselves believe. But I think that such a question should be cut
short. For what is it to me why God willed it thus, since we have enough
to know that he willed it thus? For one should neither inquire nor ask
about the causes of God\'s will, just as one should not inquire about
the causes of His wisdom, omnipotence and goodness. For all such things
are inscrutable and incomprehensible, and it behooves us human beings
not to ask why God creates this or that, but to be obedient to him in
what he commands us.

This is the simple and right answer to the question, which we can use
against the rebellious spirits, and who presume greatly on their wisdom.
And yet, without danger of faith, one can ponder such a thing, rhyming
with such and such a question, and perhaps find a cause that can be
useful either to teach oneself and others or to comfort.

311 Now, however, above all else we are to

to take it as certain and conclude that because of this law of
circumcision on the eighth day, the infants who die before it are not
condemned. For they have not sinned against this law, neither have the
women, who, though not circumcised, have been a part of the people of
God.

312 Peter Lombard and other teachers argue that such children are
damned, but we have here a clear text, on which we can certainly rely,
that God does not condemn the uncircumcised children, nor those who are
circumcised after the eighth day. But if one includes the original sin
of the little children, it is a different question. But here we ask of
circumcision, that this child\'s soul, which is not circumcised in the
foreskin of his flesh on the eighth day, shall be cut off from among the
people of God.

313\. Such a threat shall not be stretched or extended further than God
Himself has stretched it. Now from this law, which speaks of the
children who are not circumcised after the eighth day, it follows very
well that those who do not reach the eighth day are not therefore
condemned.

\(314\) And we know this rule, that what is well and favorably meant is
to be extended and enlarged; but what is said too harshly and severely
is to be retracted. We do this in this matter for the glory of God, for
His nature is to forgive and to be merciful, so we do not conclude that
He is so harsh and merciless toward the children of His people whom
death has overtaken that they could not have obtained such a covenant.
For he wants all men to be saved, 1 Tim. 2, 4.

\(315\) With this, those teachers who pretend that such children are
condemned are to be met and the promises of God are to be extended to
the utmost, but wrath and severity are to be retracted. For if this rule
applies in outward life and worldly dealings, from which it is also
taken, how much more shall it have force and apply here? \"If you,\"
says Christ Luc. 11:13, \"who are evil, are able to give good gifts to
your children, how much more shall the Father in

**[1084 8. IV, 121-123. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 10. 11. W. 1,
1632-1635. 1085]{.underline}**

Heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask Him?\"

316\. date Let us not dispute about the children who are not circumcised
before the eighth day, but entrust them to God\'s divine goodness and
grace. But let us dispute about things that are not uncertain,
inexperienced, and unconscious to us, but are revealed and commanded to
us in God\'s Word. What God does with others, we should not worry about;
but we should hear Christ, as God the Father commands us from heaven,
Matth. 17, 5. and let the mysteries of the divine majesty, which God has
not revealed to us in His word, pass by and not try ourselves at them,
so we will not run into them and be overthrown.

For this reason Jesus admonishes Sirach Cap. 3, 22: \"Think not beyond
your ability\"; for to inquire into the divine majesty is not commanded
of us, nor is it of any use to us. For \"he who inquires into difficult
things finds it too difficult,\" Proverbs 25:27. For God, as I have
often said, is incomprehensible in His essence, and dwells in a light, 1
Timothy 6:16, where we cannot come even with thought; and one who wants
to inquire into His judgments does nothing else but strive after
impossible things.

318 Therefore, we should rest in God\'s word and keep quiet, hearing
what He promises or threatens us. Mail can do this with benefit, as the
1st and 119th Psalms teach. But all the other things that are not
revealed to us in the Word should simply be left aside, because they
cannot be tried without danger and harm.

319\. I gladly speak of this much and often, for it is a doctrine that
is very necessary for the sake of original sin, for Satan\'s sake, and
for the sake of nonsensical spirits. For if Adam had followed this rule,
he would not have fallen into sin. But because he deviates from the word
and commandment of God, which he had given him, and listens to the devil
talking about the reasons why he is forbidden to touch the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, he is plunged into sin and death. For he
should not have asked or thought about the cause of such a commandment;
for

This is to judge the will of God, to search His ways, which are
unsearchable, and to reach for His judgments, which are
incomprehensible.

And I have no doubt that Lucifer will also have fallen into a similar
sin, that he has wanted to inquire and know more than is due to him
about the unknown God, that is, the God who has not been revealed
through the Word; for what he is, what he does, what his will is, is not
mine to know; but that is my business, that I know what he has
commanded, what he has promised, and what he has threatened. Now if you
diligently pursue such things, you will find God, yes, God Himself will
draw you to Himself into His bosom: and if you fall out of it again,
that is, if you will presume and presume to know anything about the
things revealed in the Word, you will fall into the abyss of hell.

That is why that hermit said rightly: If you see a young monk going up
to heaven, and now he wants to put one foot in heaven, withdraw him as
soon as possible: for when he has put both feet in heaven, he will find
and see that he has not gone to heaven, but to hell.

322 This is not meant in any other way than that we should restrain our
pride and keep within the limits that God has set for us. For He did not
want us to float in the air, but to walk on the earth; He also wanted us
to learn His word diligently, and not to take thoughts of things that
are too high for us. He willed that we should follow his word and
commandment, and not ponder rashly why he had commanded this or that
this way or that. And because Adam and Eve undertake to inquire such
things, they are lost; for thereby they sit down in the place of God,
the Creator, and forget that they are creatures and creatures of God. As
Satan says to them in Genesis 3:5: \"Then you will be like gods,\" and
not creatures who have to worry about doing God\'s bidding; but you will
be gods yourselves, judging God and doing other things that are proper
to God alone.

**[108k L.IV, ILS-1N. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 10. II. W.I,
ISM-ISW. 1087]{.underline}**

323 O the unholy godhead, which Satan put on us through sin, and dealt
with it alone, that we despised God\'s commandment and promises.
Therefore this is the right and powerful original sin, if one wants to
become gods, and we should fight and contend against such a plague all
our lives, and say with St. Paul 1 Cor. 2, 2: \"I know nothing but
Christ crucified.\"

324 It may happen that some of you will read such disputations of the
followers of Peter Lombardus, so learn this from me and do not follow
these disputations, but remain with your churches in the promises and
commandments of God, so that you do not become gods through Satan\'s
poisonous promises: let God know what is good and what is evil, and you
remain His humble creatures.

\(325\) Therefore, as far as the question of the infants who die before
the eighth day is concerned, I know for certain that they are not
condemned by this law of circumcision. But to this question, what God
will do with them, I answer that I do not know. If they reached the
eighth day and were not circumcised, they did not belong to the people
of God; but if they die before the eighth day, such belongs to God\'s
judgments, of which I know nothing, and which are far above me and too
high for me, without only knowing that God is gracious and merciful.
These good things he has made me know, for these he teaches in his word;
but the other things he has not made me know.

Thus we remain on the road that God Himself has shown us through His
commandments and promises. In this way it is impossible to err, since
others who take this road and want to go straight to God in His divine
and omnipotent being will be overthrown and oppressed, for it is not
good, as Solomon says, to eat too much honey, Proverbs 25:27.

327 Therefore, this is the first answer to this question, why God wanted
the children to be circumcised on the eighth day, namely, so that it
would please Him.

thus pleased. After that, other credible causes can be indicated, which
are without danger, namely, that God spared the infant\'s weakness, as
it would have recently been harmed by the pain and labor in childbirth,
so that it would not die.

With this, God\'s kindness and great mercy is also praised here, that He
so warmly takes care of the little children and cares for them, that He
does not burden them with circumcision until they have come to some
strength and can endure it. So we have here also an example that the
30th Psalm v. 6. says: \"He desires life\"; item Ezk. 18, 23.: \"God
does not want the death of the sinner.\"

329 And although such a cause is made from history and the text itself,
it serves to praise and extol God\'s grace and mercy for the
preservation and increase of faith in the pious: just as this again,
that in the flood and destruction of the Sodomites the little children
also perish, serves to frighten the godless and impenitent.

330 The spiritual interpretation or cause, of which Peter Lombard and
the other teachers say, is to suffer. For this reason, they say,
circumcision is appointed for the eighth day, so that in the
resurrection, which is signified by the eighth day, we may be fully
circumcised and clean from all sin.

Not only do we not reject these thoughts, but we confirm them as
Christian and masterly conceived. For according to the secret
interpretation, the eighth day means the future life. For Christ lay in
the grave for the Sabbath, that is, the whole seventh day, and rose
again on the day following the Sabbath, which is the eighth day and the
beginning of the new week, after which no day is counted. For Christ
with his death ended the week of time, and on the eighth day entered
into another life, in which no more days are numbered, but is one and
the same eternal day and not night.

**[1088 \". IV. iss-irs. Interpretation of Genesis 17:10-13. w. i,
isW-isii. 1089]{.underline}**

This is wisely, masterfully, and Christianly conceived, that the eighth
day is an eternal day; for when Christ rises, he is no longer under
days, moons, weeks, or any other reckoning of times, but in a new and
eternal life, which beginning is seen and counted, but there is no end
to it. And in the same life the right circumcision will be fulfilled.
For then not only will the foreskin of the heart be circumcised, which
is only done in faith, but the whole flesh and its whole being will be
cleansed from all its infirmities, ignorance, lust, sin and filthiness,
so that it will henceforth be an immortal flesh.

This secret interpretation is also a prophecy that after Christ\'s
resurrection a spiritual, right and perfect circumcision will begin,
which will be outside of all time in an eternal life; for in the holy
Scriptures the seventh number of time signifies purpose and revelation;
for when one has come to the seventh day, the number is repeated from
the beginning.

For this reason those who wrote of the times and ages of the world
divided it into seven ages, as into seven days, by which the week of
this temporal life is closed. The first age is counted from Adam to
Noah; the second, from Noah to Abraham; the third, from Abraham to
Moses; the fourth, from Moses to David; the fifth, from David to Christ;
the sixth, from Christ to the end of the world; the seventh age, they
say, is that of the sleeping, perhaps following the example of Christ,
who rested in the grave on the Sabbath. Every man may keep such
divisions according to his own pleasure, for they are not to be accepted
as articles of faith. The eighth age will be the resurrection to eternal
life.

**V. 12, 13: Every child that is eight days old you shall circumcise
among your descendants. In like manner also shall all that are born of
your household, or that are bought of all strangers, which are not of
your seed. So shall my covenant be upon your flesh for an everlasting
covenant.**

This belongs almost to the fourth part of the commandment of
circumcision, for we have divided this whole text into five parts above.
But here God explains Himself and indicates which persons are to be
circumcised, and makes three different kinds of males.

336 First, he calls the child born of Abraham\'s tribe, that is, born of
Abraham\'s flesh, with the tribe of Abraham itself. Second, the babe of
Abraham\'s seed and born in his house. Third, the male or female child
not born in Abraham\'s house but bought into it.

Such a difference in the clear interpretation of the persons is a
certain proof that circumcision does not concern all males. What kind of
nonsense drives the Jews to pretend that the Gentiles must also be
circumcised?

Secondly, this text shows that the ranks in this life are unequal and
diverse. If one wants to reckon according to fortune and dignity, the
status of a householder is much better than that of a servant, and that
of a freeman much better than that of a serf. But since God commands
that all of them be circumcised without distinction, and testifies by
this circumcision that He wants to be their God, it follows that those
who are distinguished in the world on the basis of class and are unequal
to one another have the same honor and grace before God and are equal to
one another.

339\. Therefore we should not exalt ourselves above others, because we
are above them with our status; but we should recognize that there are
various graces, various and unequal statuses in this life, but that God
is all Gods at the same time, whether they are servants or free, rich or
poor, if they only keep the word and persevere in the faith.

340\) This is a useful doctrine, from which it is proven that there are
various classes in this life, and it also proves and explains God\'s
mercy, who at the same time has mercy on all and does not reject anyone,
whether he was born from Abraham himself or from Abraham\'s household,
only that he also believes according to Abraham\'s example.

**[1090 iv. 128-150. interpretation of i Genesis 17:14-16. \" i. i
\"i-is\". 1091]{.underline}**

V. 14 **And if a child be not circumcised in the foreskin of his flesh,
his soul shall be cut off from among his people: because he hath not
kept my covenant.**

God adds this threat so that this sign of grace, which was not only
considered small but also foolish, would not be despised. For however
small and contemptible this ceremony may have been in appearance, it was
nevertheless established for the salvation of many, not only of the
circumcised, but also of those who would believe from among the
Gentiles.

342\. Further it is asked here: Whether this text is to be understood by
the civil or spiritual extermination? And some say that Moses is
speaking here of civil extermination, namely, that a child who is not
circumcised should be excluded from the police and be set apart from the
sacrifices, and have neither the laws nor the freedom of this people to
enjoy. But this interpretation is wrong, and proves that such teachers
never understood what God meant by circumcision.

343 Therefore these words are to be understood of spiritual
extermination, which does not concern the Gentiles, as I have often
said, for although the Gentiles are excluded from circumcision, they are
not excluded from the blessing, if they believe with Abraham.

344\. But over this faith the Jews also needed bodily circumcision, or,
if they despised it, they were never God\'s people, and not only not in
the community or police of this people, but also excluded from the
blessing which the promised seed should bring to those who were
circumcised. Heaven was closed to them, their sins were retained, and
their reward was hell and eternal fire. This may be called being cut off
from God\'s people.

345 And this judgment, as I also said above, does not apply to children
who died before the eighth day. For even though they have original sin,
the gracious and merciful Lord will not let them die before the eighth
day.

God will find a way to deal with other sinners that will help them. But
as far as this threat is concerned, they are free from it, because they
have not sinned against the law of circumcision. The guilt of their
birth or original sin remains with them, but not the guilt of
circumcision.

346 This is also to be understood of children who have not been
circumcised because of the negligence or disobedience and malice of
their parents, or of those who still today among us do not want to be
baptized; as there was a constant rumor about Pope Clement the Seventh
that he had never been baptized. Such children should be entrusted to
his goodness and grace, who will know how to deal with them according to
his mercy. For what fault can these little children have in this law,
which either die, or are neglected by ungodly parents? Therefore, let
them be commanded to God in His goodness and let no one condemn them, as
the scholastics condemned them. This is enough of the fifth part of this
text. Now let us see what follows about Sarah.

**Fifth part.**

**Of the promise made to Abraham concerning Isaac, and of the joy that
Abraham had in it.**

**And God said again unto Abraham, Thou shalt no more call thy wife
Sarai, but Sarah shall be her name. For I will bless her, and of her
will I give thee a son: for I will bless her, and nations shall be of
her, and kings over many nations.**

347 We have now dealt with the commandment of circumcision, and have
seen how God has so limited it that He has excluded from it not only the
Gentiles, but the entire female gender, as well as the males who die
before the eighth day. Therefore the Jews rage and cry in vain, claiming
that circumcision is common to all peoples and to the Gentiles.

**[1092 iv, 130-122. interpretation of i Genesis 17:15. 16. W. i. i
\"s-ists. 1093]{.underline}**

both of them and of the Jews. This is also the name of the member of the
body that should be circumcised; therefore the priests of Baal
circumcised and tore their bodies in vain, 1 Kings 18:28.

348 And such a law was taken away when Christ came. For circumcision was
not given to be a perpetual law, but to keep Abraham\'s seed together by
such a sign, until Christ should be born of him. Now that he is born,
not only circumcision, but the whole law with all its ceremonies and
services, has ceased.

**I.**

What follows now belongs to the explanation of the promise of Christ,
because it has become brighter and brighter. At first, Abraham had
doubted that he would not have an heir, and he was suspicious that if he
died without an heir, his servant from Damascus would claim the
blessing. But then he was assured by God\'s word that an heir would be
born from his womb. Since such a promise had been explained to him and
made certain, he was challenged by Sarah\'s age and infertility. So he
follows her advice and lies down with Hagar, his maid, and begets
Ishmael from her, whom he completely believes to be the right heir of
the blessing. But the pious spouses are now exposed to this error, for
Abraham is promised a true heir from the old and barren womb of Sarah
herself.

After some time the promise is passed on to Jacob and not to Esau, and
since Jacob now has twelve heirs, the promise is given to Judah alone.
Finally, David is named to be the heir of the promise, of whose house
was the blessed Virgin Mary, the mother of Christ, who was the end of
the law and circumcision.

351 Therefore the Jews, with their insisting and arguing, are judging
that circumcision

eternally and shall pass through all nations. For a time it was needed
as a visible sign for the children of God to see, for them to be found
who would hear and worship God; as before, before circumcision came,
instead of a sign for the Gentiles to gather, there were the sacrifices
of the fathers.

Such signs, that God has revealed Himself to the world, are to be
esteemed above all other miracles. For even the Gentiles heard God speak
through His servants and instruments, and were saved when they believed
the word. Therefore, the grace and mercy of God is greatly praised in
that he did not let the human race go astray and stray in its thoughts,
but presented public and visible signs to those who feared him, so that
they could come together.

For this cause Abraham and all his posterity were circumcised, that the
Gentiles also might be brought and obtain salvation: therefore we give
thanks to a gracious God, that He hath thus manifested Himself at all
times, and hath gathered Himself a church.

354 And all this also goes against the blindness and darkness of man\'s
statutes; for reason seeks God through innumerable errors and thinks to
find him in its ways and ways. Hence have come so many orders of monks,
each of whom thought that he was closest to God. That is why so many
services and works have come, which each one undertakes in vain. For God
does not want us to lack and err in our thoughts, but He shows Himself
to us not only in the invisible thoughts of our hearts, but also with
such signs and images that can be seen, felt and grasped.

As in the New Testament, such signs are baptism, the key and the
sacrament of the altar, and whoever uses them in faith does not believe
in vain, nor lack God, but hears and finds Him with certainty.

356 Therefore we should learn such signs.

**[1094 rv. iW-iZt. interpretation of Gen. 17:15, 16. w. 1, 1618-1651.
1095]{.underline}**

follow them and keep them with the highest diligence. God says 2 Mos.
20, 24. to Moses: \"In which place I will establish the remembrance of
my name, there I will come to you.\" That is why one looks in vain for
other places, other services, statutes and precepts. For God cannot be
found in them. But where he himself makes a memorial of his name, that
is, where his word goes, he does not come with a curse but with a
blessing.

This should be diligently impressed upon the people against the terrible
ravages of Satan, who does not cease to seduce the world, and adorns
himself in a divine and angelic guise, so that he may obscure us, or
completely remove from our sight the most consoling and lovely signs of
grace, so that God has revealed Himself to the human race.

Therefore, we should thank God from the bottom of our hearts that we can
hear His word, see His signs and use them. But, unfortunately, they grow
old by habit and also become disgusting, like a food that one eats every
day. And we think much more of a black or white cap and such foolish
works of men, devised and put on without God\'s word and commandment,
than of such sure and undeceiving signs of God\'s eternal grace.
Therefore, the world is worthy of being sunk deeper and deeper into
error and danger for the sake of this greatest ingratitude. But now let
us hear what God says about Sarah.

Just as God changed Abraham\'s name for the sake of the promise of
blessing, so He also changed the name of Sarai. This name is derived
from the word sarab, which means to rule, to struggle, to fight, to
overcome and to conquer. From there also the name Israel comes, because
Jacob had wrestled with God, Gen. 32, 28. Thus Sarah is called a
fighter, fencer, woman or princess. The letter *i,* added at the end, is
a possessive pronoun and means Sarai in Latin Domina mea, as the
Italians say, Madonna Misersi, my wife. For the Hebrew word, of which
Sarah is made, means to fight, therefore

it also means to rule, to overcome, to govern. Therefore, the name Sarah
is such a word, as with us is the word woman, which means not only a
woman, but also a housemother, who rules the house, food and servants.

\(360\) Just as God calls Abraham Father by a new name, so that he alone
may possess such a name of fatherhood for the sake of blessing, so Sarah
is called a woman and a ruler of the house, so that she alone may be a
mother of many and innumerable generations in the Church.

So that with this name the unity of the church is praised. For God does
not want to have many and diverse churches, therefore He brings all the
churches together in such a way that they have one father in Abraham and
one mother in Sarah; so that as there is one God, so also one church is
gathered from many kings and peoples, whose father is Abraham and whose
mother is Sarah.

So at the same time there was no church apart from Abraham\'s house, and
yet in Abraham\'s house there was not only Isaac, but also Ishmael, yes,
also servants bought from the Gentiles, yes, also women, virgins and
wives, who all belonged to this church and were one of God\'s people
with Abraham\'s seed.

Thus Christ says in the New Testament, Matth. 23, 8: \"You shall not be
called Rabbi, for One is your Master, who is in heaven. And Sanct
Jacobus Cap. 3, 1. says: \"Do not forbid anyone to be a teacher.\" For
God does not want many masters or teachers and the church to be in many
houses or families: not that there should not be many persons, for
Christ had twelve apostles and there was a great company of prophets
among the people of Israel, but that each one should not presume to make
a church. So that such sayings are said against the heretics. As if
Christ wanted to say: \"Do not tear my church apart and do not make me a
church; as Paul also says 1 Cor. 1, 10. ff: I will that as there is One
God, One Christ, One Baptism, so also there be One Father Abraham and
One Mother Sarah.

364\. well, the promise, so here Sa-.

**[1096 iv, 134-is\". Interpretation of Genesis 17, 15. 16. W. i,
issi-iss4. 1097]{.underline}**

rah is immeasurable and inexpressible. We, however, who read such
histories of the Old Testament with certain courage and carelessness, do
not soon see what is particularly shining and important in them. Paul,
however, has studied them diligently, which is why he excerpts this text
in a very masterly way. \"Abraham\", he says Rom. 4, 19. f., \"was not
weak in faith, nor did he look at his own body, which was already dead,
because he was almost a hundred years old, nor at the dead body of
Sarah. For he did not doubt the promise of God through unbelief, but
grew strong in faith, and gave glory to God, and knew in all certainty
that what God promises, He can also do. That is why it is counted as
righteousness for him. Now this is not written for his sake alone, that
it is counted to him, but also for our sakes, to whom it shall be
counted, if we believe on Him who raised our Lord Jesus from the dead\"
2c.

St. Paul takes into account the fact that the promise is still in the
word alone, but the thing itself is not yet present anywhere. That is
why these two pious husbands and wives were not a little concerned. For
what could they have taken away from a dead body, which was also unfit
for birth by age? For Sarah was like a dead corpse, from which no fruit
nor inheritance was to be hoped.

For this reason, this history, among others, presents us with a likeness
and image of the resurrection of the dead; since from a dead body comes
not only a fruit, but also a male fruit, which is made a father of many
nations, kings and peoples. Therefore, this is an excellent history, in
which one should especially look at God\'s word, that God speaks so much
and so kindly to Abraham that whoever reads it must almost forget the
divine majesty and think of God as a guest or a common friend.

367 Furthermore, it should be noted that these promises, which the Lord
makes to Abraham here, include and conclude the Lord Christ, even
eternal life, whether or not they read as if they were saying

not from Christ, but from Isaac. Therefore Paul says to the Romans in v.
23, 24, that these things were not written for Abraham\'s sake, but for
ours, who also like Abraham should believe. For the temporal promise is
like a nut that closes in on itself and covers Christ and eternal life
as a kernel. For this reason the shell or bark, in which the kernel is
decided, is broken when Christ comes, that is, the temporal promise
ceases and the spiritual takes its place.

Now Abraham saw not that these promises were fulfilled. He saw his son
Isaac and the grandsons born of him, Esau and Jacob, but Sarah died
before Jacob and Esau were born. But what is this, someone might say,
compared to such glorious and magnificent promises, which were not made
to Abraham and Sarah, but to their descendants?

Almost all of us have such thoughts, and such annoyance strikes the Jews
most of all, who see only the shell, but the core, that is, Christ and
eternal life, which is hidden in this shell or rind of the bodily
promise of the land of Canaan and Abraham\'s lineage, they do not see.

The Holy Scripture shows clearly enough that the bodily and temporal
promises include the eternal and spiritual ones. For we were not created
like cows and donkeys, but were created for immortality and eternity.
Therefore, when God speaks to us through the promises, he does not speak
to us solely for our temporal needs, nor does he provide only for our
belly, but he wants to preserve the soul so that it does not perish and
give it eternal life.

Therefore the outward promises are like the shells around the nut, but
the real core is Christ and eternal life. For God, who promises, does
not speak to donkeys and oxen, as Paul says in 1 Corinthians 9:9, \"Does
God care for oxen?\" but to the understanding creature, created in His
image, so that it may live with Him forever.

**[1098 v. iv, is\^-138. interpretation of I Moses 17, 15. 18. W. i,
IW4-IM. 1099]{.underline}**

The temporal promises are like nuts or apples to entice children, for by
the temporal promises we are also enticed and provoked to love eternal
things and to cherish and keep the hope of immortality within us. God
does not give me bread and water so that I may eat and drink like a
horse or a donkey, in whom there is no understanding, but so that I may
recognize His goodness from such a bodily gift and take comfort from it
in other needs as well. For if God does not give you more than a straw,
he wants you to know that he is an eternal God of unspeakable goodness
and grace. If you believe this, you have eternal life.

373\. Even though Abraham did not see such promises during his life, he
believed God; therefore he had eternal life and could not die, but is
still alive. For he believed God, who promised him kings, nations, and a
son who would be heir to the blessing. Therefore he closed his eyes, and
with faith surrendered to those things that are dark and gloomy to
reason, in which he found eternal light.

In this way, the promises should be expanded, so that although they
speak only of temporal things, we nevertheless direct and point them to
eternal life for the sake of the person who speaks them, for he is
eternal and also attracts us to him with physical things, so that we
should believe him. But he who believes God lives eternally, for he is
not an ox or a donkey, but he understands, sees and recognizes that God
is good. Such knowledge is eternal life.

But here we must still dispute a little with the Jews. They cannot deny
that this temporal promise has already come to an end, for the husk has
been loosened and broken, and the chaff or husks have been threshed out
of the grain and wheat; as John the Baptist prophesied in his sermon
that it would come to this, Matth. 3, 12. For the nut had to be broken
and the kernel brought to light; and now fifteen hundred years have
already passed, in which

at which time they had no king, nor any certain place. Their worship,
however, after the temple was destroyed, was also completely abolished.

Now I ask them: What other signs do they have of this promise made to
Sarah and Abraham? For the fact that the Jewish people have been
completely destroyed, and that they are scattered throughout all the
countries of the earth, does nothing for them; for God promises Abraham
a kingdom here. Now we understand such a kingdom, in which is a people
and regiment in a certain place and everything else that belongs to a
people or order and regiment of a people. For a bunch of highwaymen
cannot be called a kingdom, even if they raise up a head among
themselves and keep themselves in a certain place. For in a kingdom, as
in a man\'s body, there are various offices and services, all of which
are directed to the end that a whole and healthy body may be prepared
and ordered. But a body that is cut into pieces and torn, on which
neither the hands, nor the eyes, nor the feet can do their work, is much
more cheaply called a dead carrion than a body. So now the Jewish people
is like a carrion, not a kingdom, as they must testify about themselves.
For what did they have that could be compared to the people that existed
before and after the Babylonian prison until the birth of Christ?

What shall we say to this? God does not lie, and His promises are true,
certain and firm. They do not promise Abraham that any mob or despised
multitude of people shall come out of him, but kings and nations. Where
then has such a kingdom remained these fifteen hundred years? Where have
their fathers\' laws and order, their worship 2c. remained? What are the
Jews of this day but a body miserably torn and torn and scattered
throughout the world? For they have no certain place, no offices, which
are necessary for a regiment and police, but they are servants and feed
themselves only with sins. So it follows that either God must lie in His
promise, or the Jews must no longer be God\'s servants.

**[1100 L. IV, 138-140. interpretation of Genesis 17, 15. 16. w. I,
1657-1659. 1101]{.underline}**

people, but are rejected by God and are outside the Church.

Therefore this promise confirms and assures our faith that we can be
sure that after the Jews no longer have a kingdom and the shell is
broken on the nut, Christ must necessarily be revealed and the multitude
of the Gentiles must come in the place of the Jews.

For the promise made to Sarah cannot lie: \"Kings and nations shall come
out of you. Tell me now, where have the Jews had a united king or prince
these fifteen hundred years?

Experience itself must testify to this, that they have often tried to
help the people and the kingdom, but it has gone very badly for them. So
they were supposed to have the land of Canaan in their possession. But
because they came and were scattered throughout the world in the most
miserable servitude, the work and the experience itself testify that
they are no longer God\'s people nor Abraham\'s seed, to whom God
promised kingdoms and also gave them until Christ\'s future.

381 That they are still stubbornly hoping for a kingdom and for the
return of the land of Canaan is completely nonsensical and does not help
them. First of all, they have no promise of it, so they hope in vain.
Secondly, it is not possible that they should return to the land of
Canaan, from which they have been exiled longer than they have lived
there. But what kind of promise is this that remains unfulfilled much
longer than it is fulfilled?

382 Because they are out of the land of Canaan, and yet keep the
circumcision and the law, they also do evil. For they shall not use the
law anywhere else but in the land of Canaan; therefore circumcision, as
well as all the law, should not stand longer than the people and their
descendants lasted, and they kept the possession of the land of Canaan.

383 Therefore, as I have said, this promise is part of it, so that our
faith may be

and the stubborn and stiff-necked mind of the Jews is met and resisted.
For this we say, that long ago, while their kingdom and police still
stood, the promise was fulfilled, both of the bowl and of the nut, that
is, the bodily and spiritual promise, which is wrapped up and included
in the bodily. For out of Sarah\'s womb came not only kings, as David,
Solomon 2c., but also nations, as the Edomites and others, who are
counted among Esau\'s family and descendants. This is the physical
promise. The spiritual one is also fulfilled, since Christ was born of
the Virgin Mary.

384 And this was the right time of blessing, when the mighty heroes of
God lived, namely the apostles and those who followed them first. After
that, the Gentiles were found, who were Abraham\'s descendants and
lineage because of their faith in the blessed Seed, not a fleshly or
natural lineage and people, but, as Paul calls it in Romans 11:17,
grafted in.

The promise also points much more to the spiritual seed, that is, to the
faithful, than to the fleshly or natural descendants. And Isaac himself,
though born of Abraham\'s flesh and blood, was nevertheless a son of
promise, because he was not born carnally or naturally, after both
Abraham\'s and Sarah\'s bodies were unable to bear and had died. And as
we rightly call him a son of faith, not of the flesh (for if you look at
the flesh, Abraham and Sarah are like two dead corpses, and yet they
beget and give birth, not of the strength and capacity of their dead
bodies, but of faith): so all those who believe according to Abraham\'s
example are Abraham\'s seed and partakers of the blessing, whether
Gentiles or Jews, circumcised or uncircumcised. This is the apostolic
interpretation, which caused much envy and hatred at the time when the
Jewish people still existed, because it made the Gentiles equal to the
Jews, as Paul calls them Eph. 2, 19. 20, citizens with the apostles and
prophets.

**[1102 \" IV, 140-142. interpretation of Genesis 17:15-17. W. I,
iWg-1682. 1103]{.underline}**

But nowadays, after the Jews are no longer one people and are miserably
scattered all over the world, it does not seem that this interpretation
is so important. So we know that the promise is fulfilled. For
everywhere where Christ, the Son given, reigns, there is the Church,
there are kings and nations born of the faith of Abraham, who have the
promise and believe. But the descendants of Abraham according to the
flesh, after they did not want to accept the promised Christ, are
rejected according to the prophecy of Moses and the other prophets; as
Hosea Cap. 2, 23: \"I will say to that which was not my people, Thou art
my people\"; and Moses in the 5th book Cap. 32, 21: \"I will provoke
them again against that which is not a people\"; likewise Christ\'s
Matthaei Cap. 21, 43.: \"The kingdom of God will be taken from you and
given to the Gentiles who bear its fruits.\"

The same thing has happened to the papists in our time. They rejected
the doctrine, did not want to be teachers or bishops, but wanted to be
mighty and princes of the world: therefore God rejected them. He raised
us up out of the dust and mire and set us beside the princes of His
people, Ps. 113:7, 8, so that through our preaching ministry Germany
would join God\'s kingdom and come to the right knowledge of God. For
God has no regard for the world\'s pride and splendor. If those who are
anointed and called to the preaching ministry do not want to teach, then
those who are not anointed must be teachers and preachers. So they keep
the name and leave the deed to us. This grieves them, they become
impatient about it, and complain that it disturbs and shatters the peace
and unity that should be in the church.

So did the Jews. That is why God scattered them and the Church remained
among the Gentiles. So, after the pope, cardinals, bishops, abbots,
monks and the great doctors are rejected, the church remains with the
poor and despised little group of believers; as the prophet Hosea Cap.
4, 6. said: \"You reject God\'s word, therefore I will also reject you,

that you shall not be my priest.\" For God does not complain about
wealth or honor, but about knowledge; as He also says in another place,
Hos. 6:6: \"I delight in the knowledge of God and not in burnt
offerings. He wants the people to be taught so that they may know him
and thus come to eternal life. If, for this reason, we were to remain
silent in favor of the Popes, God would much sooner raise up wood and
stones before He would allow there to be no true knowledge of God and,
consequently, no Church in the world.

**II.**

V. 17 **Then Abraham fell on his face, and laughed, and said in his
heart, Shall a child be born to me an hundred years old, and shall Sarah
bear ninety years old?**

This is a lovely and joyful text and holds up to us an excellent example
of faith. Therefore, I will not be able to deal with it according to
need, and as it would be well worth it, and I think that Christ saw and
pointed to this text, when he says Joh. 8, 56: \"Abraham saw my day, and
rejoiced.

For though Abraham did not doubt the promise until now, he was mistaken
about the person. For he did not think that Sarah would still give
birth, but that the promise would fall on Ishmael. But here the circle
is completely closed, and Abraham sees that a true heir is to be born to
him from Sarah. Therefore he leaps out with joy in the most beautiful
and perfect faith, falls down on his face, laughs and says with great
amazement: \"Shall a son be born to me, who am now a hundred years old,
and from Sarah to boot?\"

These are by no means the words of one who doubts, but one who is amazed
and leaps for joy; just as laughter is a sign of exuberant joy in the
heart. Therefore, these things cannot be adequately described in words,
but must be spiritually experienced. For just as the sadness of a
sorrowful and anxious heart cannot be described with any

**[1104 \" IV, 142-144. interpretation of Genesis 17, 17. w. 1,
1662-1688. 1105]{.underline}**

words, so this joy and rejoicing in the spirit is also quite
inexpressible.

For here Abraham leaves out of his eyes and his heart the son Ishmael,
whom he had held so tenderly and lovingly, as if the hope of blessing
stood on him. He forgets his dead body and his old Sarah, who now walked
every day on the pit, and sees certainly that he shall still have an
heir from her. Therefore he laughs and rejoices, and afterwards, out of
the same laughter and inexpressible spiritual joy, a name is given to
the child and he is called Isaac, for the eternal memory and sign of
such a beautiful, constant and certain faith, from which the holy man,
since such a word is hardly spoken by God, becomes so full of great joy.
The fact that he falls to the earth and laughs is also, as Christ
interprets it, a gift of the heart that overflows with joy and
rejoicing, so that he is now certain that he is the father and Sarah the
mother of the Lord Christ, the Son of God, through whom salvation and
blessing shall come to the whole human race.

Therefore he does not fall down in terror, nor does he laugh as if he
doubts the promise, but out of great joy and rejoicing. Below in chapter
45, v. 26 ff., when Jacob is told that his son Joseph is still alive and
in Egypt, the text says that he acted like one who wakes up from a deep
sleep, thought much differently, and did not believe his sons who told
him this; therefore he did not give any signs of joy: but when he saw
the chariots and gifts that Joseph, his son, had sent him, his spirit
first came alive.

For such great and sudden excitations, whether they come from joy or
sadness, cause a heart to freeze and know nothing of itself; as one
reads in the histories that some have died from sudden and unforeseen
joy. So Abraham is also full of joy that he falls to the earth, laughs
and thanks God for such a great and unexpected blessing.

wonder at this and have joy and rejoicing?

But when we read such histories, we should be ashamed in our hearts that
such earnestness and zeal of the Spirit is not felt in us, who, as I
also said above, are either equal to Abraham or even superior to him as
far as the gifts of God are concerned; for we also have God who speaks
to us in His word, in baptism, and in the evening meal.

But what is it when he speaks to us? Does he frighten us, does he
threaten us with it, or does he accuse us? O no! but this voice goes for
and for in the church: \"Be of good cheer, my son, your sins are
forgiven you,\" Matth. 9, 2. I will be merciful to you for the sake of
my Son, and you shall be an heir of eternal life 2c.

397\. But regardless of the fact that we have God\'s word so abundantly,
our hearts are harder than an anvil, and receive the word without any
fruit, like a stony land that does not have sap, nor does it take root,
Luc. 8:6, since the holy patriarchs marveled at the unspeakable goodness
of God. And though I feel such hardness of heart in myself and am an
enemy to it, I also pray against it every day. For, as Isaiah Cap. 6, v.
10, Jeremiah Cap. 5, 3, 21 say, it is a people of a sluggish heart who
have sleepy eyes. Thus, after being so abundantly showered with God\'s
word, we also feel heavy ears, hearts and eyes so full of sleep.

This is not the fault of God, who speaks kindly to us and, as St. Paul
says in Titus 3:4, in all godliness. He gives us the ministry of
preaching, gives us his sacraments for the pledges of eternal grace; but
we have sleepy eyes and deaf ears, and despise all this as common and
small things; and what is still more abominable, we let ourselves be
more concerned with the decrees of the popes and the statutes of men.

Therefore, we should ask God to give us a joyful heart in addition to
His so joyful promises, so that we may also rejoice and be glad with
Saint Abraham, because we are God\'s people. But, alas, you poor,
sorrowful, and deprived

**[1106 L. IV, U4-I4S. Interpretation of Genesis 17, 17. 18. W. 1,
1S6S-1S67. 1107]{.underline}**

flesh of the flesh! How you dampen our spirit and prevent us from all
laughter and joy! But if our flesh did not hinder us and we were true
Christians, we would be able to sing nothing else all our lives, but
vain \"My soul exalts the Lord\"; vain \"Give thanks to the Lord, for he
is kind, and his goodness endures forever\"; vain \"Glory to God in the
highest\"; vain \"Holy, Holy, Holy\".

400 And I think it is true that the holy patriarch froze with such great
joy and was, as it were, enraptured, but then wept with joy until he
finally came to himself again and laughed, when he became satisfied in
his heart and felt such joy, which feeling is a piece and foretaste of
eternal life.

401 Thus, when Hezekiah the king heard from the prophet that he would
live longer and that his sickness would be helped, he marveled at such a
work of God and talked with himself, saying, \"What sign is this that I
should go up to the house of the LORD? 2 Kings 20:8, for he had never
had such help and health. So Abraham also speaks to himself: What do I
hear? Shall Sarah bear me a son? 2c. But no one can experience such joy
of the Spirit except through faith.

402\. Now I have also indicated above that one should pay attention to
the fact that nothing of such promises has yet been fulfilled. For
Abraham and Sarah have the word, they hear it, but they do not yet have
the thing, and yet they believe. Sarah herself has not seen any
offspring except Isaac, but Abraham has seen only the two sons of Isaac,
Jacob and Esau. Therefore this bodily promise, as much as it is, points
to the spiritual promise of eternal life. For God makes no promise to
the dead, because they do not believe and are not even able to believe.
But the Promised One is eternal, and whoever believes in Him will also
live eternally in his faith in Him. So the bodily promises fast and
close, if they are not made through our works, or not, as in the law,
with the help of our faith.

dinguug happen, also in itself the promise of eternal life.

The other promises, however, which are not made in vain and by grace,
but on condition of our obedience, works and merit, such as the one God
makes to the people of the land of Canaan, that they may possess it if
they keep the Law of Moses, are only temporal promises; for they involve
our works, and if they are to be obtained, God must give them patience,
so that they may be expected.

404 These are not the promises that God makes to us by grace and free of
charge, which are based solely on God\'s mercy, in which God alone wants
to do and work, and requires nothing from us but faith. Such things,
though they may be bodily, nevertheless include in them that eternal
blessedness which God wants to give us, not because of our merits and
works, but out of His grace, which alone faith sees and grasps. \"But
now,\" says the prophet Habakkuk Cap. 2, v. 4, \"the righteous man of
his faith shall live.\"

405 Paul makes such a distinction of promises in Romans 4:5, when he
says that to him who does not work but believes, his faith is counted
for righteousness. Abraham received promises of grace in the flesh, but
he did not look to the temporal and physical alone. For he died, never
having received such promises, but having regarded them as remote; as
the epistle to the Hebrews says, Cap. 11:10: \"He waited for a city that
had a foundation, whose builder and maker is God.\"

**V. 18. And Abraham said unto God, Oh that Ishmael should live before
thee!**

God promised Abraham a son from the old Sarah, and also added this
promise that He would bless Sarah so that kings and nations would come
from her. When Abraham hears this, he receives many more and greater
things than he could ever have asked from God. Therefore he says here,
\"Oh, that Ishmael should live before you,\" as if to say, \"Oh, Lord,
why do you promise me such great things that I could never have asked
for?

**[1108 L. IV, 146-148. interpretation of Genesis 17, 18-22. W. 1,
1667-I67S. 1109]{.underline}**

For I had been content, and thought that grace and blessing would have
been sufficient for me, if Ishmael had lived before you. Since you want
to give me a proper heir and son from my Sarah, let this son of mine,
Ishmael, also enjoy something and do not reject him. From this it
appears that Ishmael was a dear son to Abraham, because he cared for him
and prayed for him so diligently.

**Sixth part.**

**From the promise of Ishmael; from the conversation of God with
Abraham,**

**and how Abraham circumcised himself and his own.**

**Then God said, \"Yes, Sarah, your wife shall bear you a son, and you
shall call his name Isaac, for with him I will establish my everlasting
covenant, and with his seed after him. For Ishmael also have I heard
thee. Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful and
multiply him almost greatly. He shall beget twelve princes, and I will
make him a great nation. But I will establish my covenant with Isaac,
whom Sarah shall bear to thee at this time in the next year. And he
ceased speaking with him. And God departed from Abraham.**

I remind you often and gladly that such histories should be held in high
esteem and value not only because they speak of excellent things, but
also because they are God\'s word and God speaks so kindly and often to
the holy patriarch. Now we see from this that God always gives more than
we can ask or understand. Therefore, we should learn that those who want
to pray properly should get into the habit of asking joyfully and
confidently, and not let the greatness of the things they ask for or the
unworthiness of their prayer deter them.

408 We know what Paul says to the Ephesians Cap. 3, v. 20: \"He who is
able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or

understand.\" That therefore the right title and name of God is that he
is a hearer of prayer. But our title and name, which we ask, is this,
that we do not know how or what we ask, Matth. 20, 22. For our hearts
are much too weak to be able to grasp or understand such a great thing;
but rather we worry about at what time, in what place and by what means
God will hear us. We imagine such things so narrowly and briefly that we
always have to struggle with our unbelief.

Therefore, we must learn to bring together these two, which are not at
all consistent with each other nor comparable, namely, the measured and
the unmeasured or unfinished. Our sorrowful prayers, sighs and desires
are measured and have their goal; but they are far too small and narrow
compared to the immense and exuberant retribution of God, which He wants
to show us for and for.

And that I say nothing of us, Abraham never understood and much less
could desire or think of such a rich promise. He sighs out of great
desire for an heir, and is content that an Ishmael be born to him from
the maid, and considers this a convenient and the only means for the
blessing of his descendants. God, however, finds another means, which is
much more pleasant to him and of which he is less concerned, and gives
him a son not only from his flesh, but also from his old, barren and
dead Sarah, to whom it would have been impossible to become fertile and
conceive because of her old age. Now he does not let this be enough, but
adds to this promise another one of forgiveness of sins and eternal
life. How could Abraham have thought of this, or how could he have asked
for it?

Therefore we are poor and weak people, and our hearts do not understand
the abundant grace and mercy of God. That is why we whimper and complain
when we feel that in one place the Turk is attacking us, in another
place the enmity of the pope, and such a thirst for our blood that
cannot be quenched nor satisfied. Item, if we mean the Sa-

**[1110 L. IV, I48-1S0. Interpretation of I Genesis 17, 19-22. W. I.
I673-IK7\". 1111]{.underline}**

tan\'s rage, fury and malice, which aims at nothing else than to destroy
the church, to devastate it and to devour us. So that both our need,
which is great, and the help and good we ask for, which is also great,
frighten us.

412 For thus we think: What shall we wretched men do, who have lived in
all our sins against the first and the other table? Shall we sinners,
who will soon come to an end, Ps. 104, 29, and be no more on earth, go
before the eternal and almighty God, who is without end, Ps. 102, 28,
and ask that he will relieve and help us in such distress?

413 In truth, all our hearts are of this mind, and yet we should learn
that even in the deepest distresses, when there seems to be neither help
nor salvation, we should ask and hope for that which goes against all
hope and seems impossible. For this reason, these examples of the holy
patriarchs are held up to us, in which we see that they also had to deal
with many sorrows and temptations, and yet they received more good than
they could understand or ask from God.

414\. For we have such a God who is able to give us over all that we
understand or ask. Even though we do not know what or how to ask, the
Spirit of God, who dwells in the hearts of believers, groans for us and
represents us with inexpressible groaning, Rom. 8:26, and also obtains
inexpressible and incomprehensible things.

Such teaching is useful. For even though we begin to believe and pray,
our hearts are still deterred, and are offended by the greatness of the
things we ask for, as well as by the person of the one who is to hear
and answer, namely God. Therefore, we should let such stories awaken our
hearts and encourage us to open our mouths to God and pray confidently,
and not let ourselves be deterred by the fact that we, who are nothing,
come before Him who is everything.

416\. Jacob and John also pray that one may sit on the left hand of the
Lord Christ, and the other on the right hand; but Christ

says to them: \"You do not know what you are asking\", Matth. 20, 21.
22. And yet their prayer, how foolish it is, will be heard, but much in
a different way than they had meant. For they do not sit on the left or
right in a worldly kingdom, but they will be princes and judges on the
last day of the whole earth.

417 If we therefore want to show thoroughly what our prayer is, it will
be found that in truth it is nothing else than the stammering of a child
standing before the table asking for bread or meat. For we do not know
what to ask. But the things and goods for which we ask are beyond our
reason and understanding, and he who gives them is much greater; so also
the goods and gifts are greater than we can grasp with our narrow
hearts. We read a very beautiful example of this in Monica, St.
Augustine\'s mother, who asked for her son, and desired nothing else
from God, but that he might be rid of the Manichaean nonsensical heresy
and be baptized. And in the meantime, as a careful mother, she thought
of a young maiden that she wanted to trust him, if she could set him
right in such a way. But the more diligently she asked, the more
stiff-necked and stubborn in his behavior the son remained, and as it
could be seen, her prayer became a sin to her. But when the time came
that God would hear her fervent and long prayer (for God is wont to
forgive with help), Augustine was not only converted and baptized, but
gave himself entirely to theology, and became such a teacher that to
this day shines in the Church, teaching and instructing her.

Monica had never asked for such things, but wanted to be satisfied if
her son would be freed from his error and become a Christian. But God
wants to give us much more and greater things than we can ask for, only
that we do not grow tired of praying.

419 For prayer is not, as inexperienced and crude people think, a small
work, but holy men, who have been experienced in spiritual things, have
said that no work can be compared to prayer. For praying

**[1112 k. iv, iso-182. interpretation of I Genesis 17:19-22. W. i,
I67s-i679. 1113]{.underline}**

does not mean reading a number of psalms, or shouting and screaming in
church, as the monks do, but having serious thoughts, so that the heart
may be brought together and compare the person of the one who prays and
the one who hears: and also thus conclude with certainty that although
we are poor sinners, we nevertheless have a gracious God who will have
mercy on us, relieve the punishment, and hear our prayer.

And although such hearts as are instructed and assured by God\'s Spirit
and Word can certainly conclude this, it is also entirely true that no
one is of such a bold mind that he should dare to ask such of God as he
has decided to give: but that he who gives is too great, and we who ask
are unworthy, such hinders our prayer that we do not actually know what
we are asking.

421 The request for daily bread is almost considered the least of the
other requests in the Lord\'s Prayer, but if we knew what a great
request it was, no one would dare open his mouth and say it. But Christ
understood it when he said Luc. 12, 32: \"Fear not, O little host, for
it is your Father\'s good pleasure to give you the kingdom,\" as if to
say: \"Fear not, nor care for this life as the Gentiles do; for it is
your Father\'s good pleasure to give you, not a temporal, but an eternal
kingdom. Therefore seek the kingdom of heaven and how you may overcome
death and sin. These are necessary and important things, and well worth
asking your heavenly Father for and expecting them from him.

In this way, Christ also indicates that no one understands what he is
asking, and that God does not want to give us only the little that we
ask for, but that it is his desire and will to give us much greater and
richer gifts than we ask for. In this we are helped by the Holy Spirit,
who makes for us such groanings as we cannot comprehend, much less
utter.

423 Therefore, we should not despair at all in the wrath of the devil
and the world,

Our churches pray against it and are satisfied even with a small and
insignificant gift. And I hope that God will not only hear our small and
fainthearted prayer and protect and preserve us in this doctrine, but
will also continue to bring and plant it from us, and thereby perform
miracles, so that the papists, as great as they now boast and insist,
must perish. Thus the prayer of the church will also destroy the Turk,
and we will experience that much greater good will be shown to us than
we have been able to ask of him, or even understand.

424 I say all this to awaken you and myself, so that we may not despair
of our unworthiness or of God\'s majesty, whom we address in our
prayers, or that the things we ask of Him, or, as I may say, we do not
understand when we ask, are too great. As Abraham indeed received more
than he asked, as an example to us, that we should not desist from
prayer, or think it to be without profit and fruit. For God sees into
the innermost parts of the heart and understands the inexpressible
groaning that is within us and yet is not understood by us, who are like
children who stammer before the table.

**I.**

425 But this promise, which was made to Ishmael, was undoubtedly
increased by the Saracens, who insisted on it through their teachers
against Moses and the prophets. For it was fulfilled in time and soon,
and was not delayed as long as that which happened to Isaac. And while
it is generally promised to Sarah that kings shall come out of her, here
twelve kings are expressly mentioned.

426 But Isaac surpasses them all in that the covenant of the Lord
remains with him, and although the Ishmaelites are excluded from it,
they are not therefore excluded from the grace and promise of the

**[1114 L IV, 152-154. interpretation of Genesis 17, 19-22. W. 1,
1679-1681. 1115]{.underline}**

Blessedness. For this alone is to be done, that a certain cord,
friendship or lineage be appointed and ordered, in which the church is
to be found and from which Christ is to be born in his time. From this
cord alone Ishmael is cut off and left alone with the house of Abraham
and Isaac.

Therefore this alone is a temporal exclusion and separation, that one
should not seek the church in the house of Ishmael or the children of
Keturah, but by the line and cord of Isaac; just as to us Gentiles
God\'s word and promises have not come to pass, and Christ has not been
born of our blood, and yet we, if we believe in Christ, are not excluded
from the church and promises of eternal life.

Only that we do not boast of our wisdom, but find ourselves where God
intended the church to be for a certain time: there we will find the
cornerstone that unites Jews and Gentiles. Therefore, there is no doubt
that the religion and the knowledge of God remained with several
descendants of Ishmael, such as the priest Midian, item, Potiphar the
Egyptian, who were great people, but so if they joined Isaac\'s church
in faith.

At this time, the descendants of Ishmael are mixed with the Turks and
have fallen into the terrible darkness and blasphemy of Mahomet, as have
the Jews. Therefore, there is nothing to be found in them at this time
that can be compared to this promise.

430 But here we find something worth asking, namely: Why does God in
this text apparently distinguish one covenant from the other? For the
text says of a twofold covenant: the first is the covenant of
circumcision, to which also Ishmael comes, yes, also the servants who
were born in Abraham\'s house or were bought into it. Therefore also
Ishmael\'s descendants, who took and filled almost all the Orient and
all three parts of Arabia, the happy, rocky and desolate, kept the
circumcision and all rejoiced and glorified the name of their father
Abraham.

The other covenant is the one that God makes here with Isaac, from which
Ishmael is clearly excluded. Therefore, this text is clear evidence that
after the covenant of circumcision, there is another covenant that
belongs only to Isaac and not, like the covenant of circumcision, to
Ishmael.

432 What kind of covenant must this be? Nothing else, really, but the
promise of Christ, which Abraham understood very well. And this is what
I have often said, namely, that God always mixes in the physical
promises and includes the spiritual and eternal ones. The physical
covenant has a name, namely, that all Abraham\'s descendants should be
circumcised; but this other covenant has no name, nor is it marked by
any special work, and yet it is a spiritual covenant of Christ, the
future Savior.

433 Thus this text clearly convinces the Jews of the twofold covenant:
the covenant of circumcision, of which they think so great, is only a
covenant of the law and temporal, which Isaac alone does not enjoy, but
also Ishmael with his descendants; but the other covenant, of which God
sets apart Ishmael and establishes with Isaac alone, is spiritual and
eternal. The covenant of circumcision is given to our work before the
Law of Moses and ordained for a certain people, in a certain land and
for a certain time, namely, as long as Abraham\'s descendants shall be.
But Isaac\'s covenant is not given to our work, but comes to us freely,
without name and without time, and yet from Isaac\'s seed, lest anyone
should wait for the blessing from another generation and people.

434 Therefore from this text the holy prophets took their preaching of
the kingdom of Christ, which, as they saw, was turned away and alienated
from the house of Ishmael, who was a fellow member of the circumcision.
And against such a rich treasure they freely rejected circumcision and
the law, as not being sufficient unto salvation: but have added all
things unto the Son of God.

**[1116 L. rv. 1L4-10S. Interpretation of Genesis 17:19-22. \". 1. 1
\"S1-1SS4. 1117]{.underline}**

God, who was to be born of Isaac\'s house.

435 So this text belongs to the promise of Christ, which is above all
the desires and requests of Abraham. And the Jews do evil, because they
cling to the covenant of circumcision alone, and do not much rather
accept the other covenant, and so are like the Ishmaelites, or even
worse. For these have not sought salvation through circumcision, as the
Jews do, but through the promise of Christ, which they have accepted
with faith. For this is certain, that they which have received
circumcision with faith in Christ are saved.

436 Here one should also notice the word moed, which we have otherwise
Germanized, pen, for which the Latin translation has, Tabernaculum
testimonii, that is, the hut of testimony; but here it means a certain
and appointed time; as also Gen. 1, 14. is said of the sun and moon,
\"they shall give\", lemoadim, \"certain times\". Because the moon has a
certain time, in which it goes out, its light increases and decreases,
it is a very convenient sign of the time.

437\. moed is also the name of a certain and special place, where the
tabernacle of the congregation was erected, and where God commanded that
he should be remembered, that is, that his word should be preached, and
that he should be served, Ex. 33, 7. for the memory of God is nothing
other than the preaching of God; to this he wants us men to diligently
look and give heed; as Christ Luc. 22, 19. says: \"This do in
remembrance of me. For where God has His teachers who preach about Him,
He wants to be found, heard and blessed.

For this reason God commands this, so that the Jews will not stray from
time to time into various idolatries and worship: He does not want
people to gather under every tree, but He wants them to gather there,
where He has set up the tabernacle of His name. Such is called moed, a
certain and definite place, as we call it in German, a Stift. So, where
Ps. 74, 8. says: Delea

mus omnes dies festos de terra: \"They burn all the houses of God in the
land\", is in Hebrew: \"We will burn all the moed of the earth\"; and
means not only festivals and full moons, but also synagogues and
schools, where people come together. For it was commanded in the law
that in all the cities the Levites should read and teach on certain
days, and the same places where such reading and teaching took place
were called moadim. A special place was appointed for sacrifices in
Jerusalem, where they not only taught but also sacrificed. In the same
47th Psalm there is also v. 4: (Gloriati sunt, qui te oderunt, in medio
solennitatis tuae, where one should read: \"Your enemies roar in your
houses\", where your word is taught: but here moed means a certain and
certain time.

**II.**

**V. 22. And he stopped talking to him. And God departed from Abraham.**

439\. Moses added this as a conclusion to this history, which he wants
to praise us with, because there was such a long conversation with
Abraham. For this is the noblest thing when God speaks; the next, but
very far from it, is when we do everything as He has commanded us in His
Word.

440\] But this decision indicates that God lowered Himself in a visible
form when He had such a conversation with Abraham. This is what He most
commonly does, that He speaks through the patriarchs and those who are
in the public preaching ministry; moreover, He is wont to appear in
sleep, as He did at Bethel and Ai; at times also in a face, when a man
is enraptured, and He lets himself think that He is outside of his body,
as above Cap. 15, 5. Abraham happened when God led him out and told him
to count the stars. But here he appeared in a visible form and spoke to
Abraham in his own person, not through a man or an angel.

441\. and is this the reason that the Scripture gives this honor to
Abraham and calls him God\'s friend and beloved in Isaiah Cap. 41, 8, as
also Christ Matth.

**[1118 L. IV. 156-158. Interpretation of Genesis 17:22, W. 1,
1684-1687. 1119]{.underline}**

12, 50. He does not call his apostles servants, but friends. Now it is a
great and glorious thing that we have God who speaks and deals with us.

442\. And we also have such a gift. For even though God does not appear
to us in a special form, as he did to Abraham, it is still a common and
very friendly and delightful appearance that he offers himself to us and
shows himself to us in the Word, in the use of the keys, in baptism and
the sacrament of the altar. But we are concerned about it, as it is said
in Proverbs: What is too mean, is despised; item: What is seen before
one\'s eyes, one does not praise; and Solomon Proverbs 20:14: \"Evil,
evil, one speaks when one has it; but when it is gone, one praises it.\"

For there is no one among us who would not have heartfelt desire and
love to see Moses, David, or even Augustine, Ambrose, and such excellent
people; but if they were still around and had been with us for a year or
two, they would certainly be despised by us; indeed, if even angels had
been with us, the same thing would happen to them, not because their
clarity and glory would be diminished among us, but because we are
naturally inclined to disgust and contempt. For this reason we could
boast as much as the patriarch Abraham; indeed, if Abraham had
experienced and seen God acting so kindly toward us, dealing and
speaking with us every day in the ministry of preaching, baptism and the
Lord\'s supper, he would have marveled and rejoiced to death at it.

The monks boast much of the legends of their fathers, as of St.
Benedict, St. Bernard 2c, but truly, to say in general, God goes about
and speaks much more kindly to every Christian than they can boast of
their fathers; indeed, if it were in my power alone, I would not want
God to speak to me from heaven or to appear to me; but this I would, and
to this end goes my daily prayer, that I may keep my dear baptism in
right honor and dignity, and thank God for it, that I may see and hear
my brethren who have the grace and gift of the Holy Spirit, and through
the

Word can comfort, uplift, stop, admonish and teach: for what would we
want for a better and more useful manifestation of God?

But such high things, alas, the proud and sure spirits despise, and with
us even such common manifestations of God through Word, Baptism and
Sacrament are low. For we do not consider them to be what we should
consider them to be: but we considered it praiseworthy when God spoke to
us in a visible form, as Muenzer boasted that God spoke to him; but the
outcome proved what kind of God it was, namely Satan, who always seeks
the honor of the divine majesty.

446 This should often be impressed upon people and is often repeated by
me, not without reason. For if we want to compare Abraham with us, who
live in the New Testament, it will be found, if we only keep one thing
right against the other and want to consider that Abraham is far below
us. The individual gifts are greater in themselves, but God did not
approach him more closely or more kindly than He does us. And let it be
a great glory and honor to have such appearances, but what did Abraham
get out of it that was greater or better than that God spoke to him?
Such things also happen to us, and they happen to us every day, as often
as we want and in whatever place we want. When you are baptized or go to
the holy sacrament, you hear a man, but the word you hear is not the
word of a man, but the word of the living God; He baptizes you, He
absolves you of your sins, He gives you hope in His grace and mercy.

447 Now it is a great ingratitude that one despises such faces of God,
as the Scriptures call them, and seeks other appearances and revelations
besides them. Therefore, it has happened rightly to such people in the
papacy that the devil has tricked and deceived them with such foolish
and clumsy appearances; which the monks still highly praise and adorn,
and the popes themselves have proclaimed and confirmed with their
testimony.

**[1120 \". iv. E-iM. Interpretation of Genesis 17:22. w. i. imr-isso.
1121]{.underline}**

448 But such things should be read with caution, and not soon believe
what another says; but according to the guide and rule of faith one
should examine all appearances, and thereupon ask and see whether they
are also according to faith, or whether they are, as commonly happens,
contrary to the revealed word. For this is also how Moses judged the
prophets, that if they speak against the revealed word, they should not
be heard, whether they perform signs and wonders, Deut. 13, 1. ff.

449 Now I am not opposed to the fact that some phenomena are true, as
those said of Dionysius and others; but I do not respect them: not that
I despise them at all, but that I know that they are nothing against our
baptism and sacrament, yes, also against every Christian conversation
that I can have with every Christian and God-fearing brother; for such
are the common phenomena, and therefore quite certain that no one can
lack them.

So learn this here, that in all of life and in all of one\'s deeds and
actions, one should primarily look to God\'s word. God may have appeared
in a special way to the patriarchs and prophets in their sleep, or in
visions, or through the patriarchs, or in the voice of angels; but we do
not desire such revelations or appearances, but are satisfied with the
appearances and faces of God, which we see in baptism and in all the
ministry of the Church, and thank Him most highly for them. For there
one brother becomes another\'s angel, absolves him of sins, comforts,
instructs, assures, warns, admonishes him 2c.

451 These are our appearances, which we rightly esteem great, for
through them we recognize God and attain eternal life. Therefore, a
distinction should be made among the legends or histories of human life.
For if God does not appear to me in a visible way, as he did to Abraham,
I do not desire it either; and what is more, I would not believe that
there is a God unless I were compelled to do so by the manifest
testimonies of Scripture. For I have enough for eternal life in that I
was baptized.

I am to hear the gospel, to be absolved of my sins by the power of the
keys.

452\. If then God will speak to me in dreams or in sleep, and give me
signs and warnings in temporal things, as He warned the wise men when
they were about to return to Herod, Matth. 2, 12.I am satisfied: but for
eternal life I do not need any other revelations; therefore I do not
desire any, and if they occur to me, they should be suspicious to me
because of Satan\'s deceitfulness and mischievousness, who is used to
disguise himself as an angel of light, 2 Cor. 11, 14. For in baptism and
preaching God shows Himself to me perfectly and abundantly enough.

453 \"Then appeared,\" saith Paul, Titus 3:4 and following, \"the
kindness and brightness of God our Savior, not because of the works of
righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he made us
blessed by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost,
which he poured out upon us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior,
that we through the grace of the same might be justified, and be heirs
of eternal life according to hope.\"

This is a precious and certain word. If, therefore, you read the sacred
histories and find therein miraculous works and miraculous appearances,
read them with good care, and consider it certain that no appearance is
more glorious and rich, or more useful to us, than this most common one,
which Christians have, by which the whole church is sustained, nourished
and preserved. Such is the common and perfect revelation and
manifestation; but the others, which Abraham and the prophets had, are
piecemeal.

I say nothing about the lies of the monks, which are not worth seeing or
thinking about. For many of them are Satan\'s deceptions and illusions,
designed to deceive and seduce people; therefore they should be tested
according to the similarity of faith and holy scripture. St. Gregory\'s
apparitions are very famous, which he himself believed to be true, and
with his example made the church full of error. For

**[1122 L.iv, im-iss. Interpretation of I Genesis 17, 22-27. W. i,
iMo-isss. 1123]{.underline}**

In return, he saw and heard the souls of the saints seeking help and
intercession, not of the Lord Christ, but of the living saints on earth,
as well as the taxation and promotion of good works, such as almsgiving,
masses, fasting, etc.

But hold these things and examine them according to the rule of
Scripture, and you will find that all these things do nothing to the
dead, nor to eternal life. But Gregory abandoned such a rule and
believed it to be true, thus giving an example and instruction to all
the monks to do likewise and to teach such lies in the church: thereby
the honor of oral preaching and of true and wholesome appearances has
been obscured, and such lies, yes, the devil\'s harmful deceit has been
strengthened and promoted.

Now it is a great gift that God, out of His grace and mercy, has again
kindled this light of His Word, so that we know where to seek God and
find Him, not in Rome, nor in Spain at St. James, but in baptism, in the
preaching of the Gospel, in the use of the keys, yes, in every brother
who believes in Christ with me and confesses Him. These are phenomena
that are common to all Christians, and there is nothing greater or more
praiseworthy in this single and special phenomenon that Moses describes
in this text, than that God speaks to Abraham as to his friend. And we
have this, if we will, both and more abundantly than Abraham. If he were
alive, he would undoubtedly be angry with us for holding such glory and
rich treasures of divine grace and mercy so unworthy and grossly
contemptuous.

For this reason Moses praises this blessing: \"Where is there,\" he says
in Deut. 4:7, \"such a glorious people, to whom the gods draw so near as
the LORD our God, so often as I call upon him? Thus Isaiah Cap. 31, 9.
that God has His seat and place of fire in Jerusalem. But actually our
honor and glory in the New Testament is much greater. For we not only
have God who comes close to us, but also dwells in us bodily, even
though we do not see His person face to face.

yet his word and his works appear to us. Now follows how Abraham\'s
obedience is praised and held up to us as an example.

**III.**

V.23-27. **Then Abraham took his son Ishmael, and all the servants that
were born at home, and all that were bought, and all that were man\'s
name in his house, and circumcised the foreskin of their flesh, that
very day, as God had told him. And Abraham was nine and ninety years old
when he circumcised the foreskin in his flesh. Ishmael his son was
thirteen years old when his flesh was circumcised. On the same day they
were all circumcised, Abraham, his son Ishmael, and all the men of his
house, born at home and bought from strangers; all were circumcised with
him.**

459 All these things belong to it, that Abraham\'s obedience may be
glorified by it, which we ought to regard as not having been justified
by it. For works do not make a person righteous, but the person who is
righteous also does righteous works, and yet the works accomplish such
things that faith is exercised and increased by them. For while Abraham
obeyed and was circumcised with his household, faith remembered God, who
made and accepted the promise.

460 St. Peter 2 Ep. 1, 10 tells us that we should make our calling and
election firm and certain through good works. For they are a testimony
that God\'s grace is strong in us and that we are called and chosen. An
idle faith, however, which does not have its exercises, dies and soon
goes out: but if faith has gone out, it is uncertain whether we are
called and chosen. But he that walketh in the constant and daily
exercise of faith may conclude and be sure that he is not in the
multitude that is against Christ, but with Christ and for Christ, and
may say, I deny not the word, neither persecute the church; therefore am
I called and chosen unto the kingdom of God.

461 But where I fall because of weakness,

**[11242- IV, ISS-ISS. Interpretation of Genesis 17:23-27. W. I,
ISSS-IS9S. 1125]{.underline}**

I will rise again, be sorry for my sin and ask for mercy, and thus
understand from the works of repentance and love that I am one of those
who have been saved from the fire of Babylon or from the yeast of the
world, Ostb. 18, 9. That this obedience, although it does not make one
righteous, nevertheless makes faith certain and brings it to light so
that it can be seen. Therefore it is said, Revelation 22:11, \"Let him
that is godly be godly.\" For just as those who practice works of
unbelief increase more and more in unbelief, and sin is strengthened by
such daily practice, so faith increases and improves in those who
practice godliness and Christian works, so that they can conclude with
certainty that they belong to the church.

462 But here we are not presented with a bad or mean example of
obedience, but with a high and excellent one. For what could be more
childish, foolish, inconsistent, even shameful and insolent, than that
Abraham, now almost a hundred years old, was immediately circumcised
with his entire household on the day commanded by God, and did not argue
with himself, nor did he inquire or ask, as we do, why God commanded him
such obedience: but as soon as God goes up from him, he calls together
his people and executes such a command of God. Such obedience is a good
example for us to follow.

In ancient times, the monks discussed obedience in various ways, namely,
that some obedience is something of itself or of its own, while others
have little of themselves. For we are often commanded to do such things,
which we do with pleasure and without any difficulty. As when a monk was
commanded to go out among the people, such obedience was not
particularly respected because they said he had something of himself.
Again, if one was commanded to do unpleasant or burdensome things and
yet accepted them with a willing and cheerful spirit, such was, as they
said, an obedience that had nothing of itself, and was gloriously
praised and commended, even though it was directed toward foolish and
childish works.

But if anyone wants to see a perfect example of obedience, let him look
at the patriarch Abraham, how he practiced his faith in circumcision.
For if he had wanted to act according to his reason and argue with
himself, he would have said, \"What is the use of circumcising this
particular member of the body? For this cannot be touched without shame
and dishonor, especially among adults and old people.

Adam was truly deceived by this one thought, that he was not satisfied
with God\'s commandment, but also sought it and wanted to know what the
cause was, why God had commanded him to abstain from this one tree
alone. For as soon as one has come up with such thoughts, he either lets
God\'s commandment pass by, or he opposes it and does what is contrary
to it. Therefore, this thought and question, \"Why?\" is a harmful
thought and brings certain destruction with it, especially if we go too
high and want to philosophize about the wrongdoing.

Therefore, we should remember Abraham\'s example here, from which we
learn that we must become children again before God, and not argue about
how or why God commands this or that, but only look at the fact that God
has commanded us to be obedient. For would not Abraham also have had
cause to dispute if he had wanted to follow his head? For what is
special or praiseworthy about circumcision? It is not only useless,
unsightly, and disrespectful, but it is also a shameful, disgraceful,
useless, and unskillful thing.

Therefore, reason thinks that God could have commanded something better,
more useful, more convenient and more apparent, in which Abraham could
have better exercised his faith and obedience at the same time, than in
such a mocking and foolish work, which was impossible for Abraham, who
was now a hundred years old, to perform without public disgrace. But the
holy man does not dispute about this, but is content that he knows that
it pleases God that he should do this; therefore he is soon heard.

**[1126 \". iv, 188-IS7. \" Interpretation of Genesis 17:23-27. W. i.
isss-isss. 1127]{.underline}**

and does not turn away from his own or other people\'s thoughts and
judgments. Such obedience is worthy of praise, and we hold it up as an
example, as one who has nothing of his own, but simply clings to God\'s
command.

468\. So too, after we have been justified by God\'s grace and mercy,
and called into the company of the saints, that we should fight under
God, doing what we are commanded without question or argument, and as
Sirach Cap. 3, 22. not to strive beyond our ability: but whoever does
not cease to inquire after higher things than are due to him, and
carefully disputes why God commands this or that, he will be cast out to
paradise by the same questioning, why? as Adam. For the divine majesty
cannot suffer such things at all, and it is impossible for us to
investigate them.

469: When in his last supper the Lord starts to wash the feet of his
disciples and comes to Petro, he does not want to let it happen:
\"Should you,\" he says John 13:6, \"wash my feet?\"But Christ will not
enter into more words with him as to why he does this, but rejects this
question and exhorts him to obedience: \"If I wash thee not,\" he says,
\"thou shalt have no part in my kingdom.\" Then Peter ceases his
disputing, and desires that he should not wash his feet only, but also
his whole body.

We should also have such thoughts, and prepare ourselves so that when
God commands us, we will obey Him without objection or argument: in this
way we will make our profession certain, which otherwise, if we are idle
or disputing, or want to speculate a lot, we will certainly not have,
but rather lose.

But, alas, Satan stands in the way of such obedience and hinders it. For
since he has turned away from God, he would like us to turn away from
God also: therefore he hinders us in such obedience, and deals with it
by punishing us with unjust punishments.

The pope\'s teaching is not only a matter of the pope, but also of the
pope\'s doctrine. Therefore, there has been no end of disputing in the
papacy; therefore, if one wanted to summarize the whole doctrine of the
papists in one word, one would be justified in saying that it is nothing
other than the single question: Why?

472 Therefore, this example should be followed against such challenges,
namely, that Abraham, now that he is a hundred years old, does not
dispute much about this vile and foolish work on a shameful member, but
because he hears that God wants it this way, obeys Him without question
and dispute, and at the same time brings his son and all his household
to such obedience.

God tells Saul that he should slay all the Amalekites and bring all the
conquered goods under himself, 1 Sam. 15, 3. f. Since he now begins to
debate whether it is good to obey God in this command, his reason is
offended by the inconsistency of this command and thinks that one can
let up a little, since God is more pleased with goodness and mercy than
with tyranny; therefore he leaves the king his life and also leaves him
the best part of his booty, so that his service to God would be all the
more apparent. But this glaring disobedience has the consequence that
Saul is rejected with all his descendants: \"For God wants obedience
more than sacrifice\", 1 Sam. 15, 22.

Therefore, let no one add to the commandments of God this harmful and
shameful word, \"Why?\"; but if one knows what God\'s commandment is,
let one obey it immediately, without any objection or dispute, taking it
for granted that God is wiser than we. For whoever disputes why God
commands this or that, truly doubts whether God is wise, just, and good:
but how can one do a more heinous sin, and which God can suffer less,
than to doubt thus? Therefore, we should simply believe that such is our
right, and not argue. For such things are far too high for us to discuss
or speculate about them.

475\. if god follows our advice

**[1128 D. IV, IS7-ISS. Interpretation of Genesis 17:23-27. w. 1,
1398-1761. 1129]{.underline}**

He would not let Satan rage and rage according to all his will, and
everyone would consider such a thing a salutary and good work. But
God\'s wisdom shows that such thoughts are foolish, otherwise he would
let it happen. Therefore, if someone asks why God gives so much room to
the wicked and lets them rage for so long, it is enough from this answer
that it pleases Him and is therefore useful and beneficial to us,
otherwise it would be otherwise. But whoever is not satisfied with this
answer and cause, but wants to investigate further according to God\'s
counsel and opinion, puts himself in the same danger that caused Adam\'s
distress and misfortune in paradise.

Therefore, we should crucify such rash and harmful question \"Why?\" and
say: To God, who alone is wise, be honor, but to us be shame. In
paradise Satan opened our eyes, but now we have to work hard enough all
our lives to close and blind them again. For the fact that Adam\'s eyes
were open was a cause of death and condemnation for all his descendants.

Thus Moses gloriously praises Abraham\'s faith and obedience, that he
removes all obstacles and aversions from his way and obeys God\'s
commandment without all disputation and objection; do not think as we
do. Why does God command me to do this? What is the use of such a vile
and shameful thing? Can I, who now have a hundred years on my neck, not
be saved in any other way, if I let myself be circumcised? but he simply
breaks the neck of such a harmful and cheeky question \"Why?\"and pulls
it out of his heart root and stem, captures his reason, and remains in
the one thing that he who commands such things is just, pious, and wise,
therefore he can command nothing but what is just, good, and wise, even
as reason judges and does not understand.

478\. for God\'s judgments are incomprehensible, and reason, with all
its powers, cannot

It is not possible to reach the goal of prudence. If, for this reason,
she takes it upon herself to argue about it, she will not only fall and
be deceived, but will also fall into blasphemy. Therefore we should be
content to hear the word and understand what God commands us, even if we
do not understand the reason why he does this.

479 Therefore this is a very beautiful example, which is not only to be
wondered at because of Abraham\'s person, but that he had such a
reputation with all his servants, that he moved and persuaded them all,
so that they were not angry at such a vile and shameful work. That
Abraham\'s house, as it seems, was nothing else than a church and
congregation, which was very diligently and holy prepared and accustomed
to the service and obedience of the word. Therefore, it is no wonder
that he did such excellent things with his church and defeated four very
mighty kings.

\(480\) And what should we lack, that, if we had but such a head, we
should not overcome and smite the Turk? For Abraham to be so faithful
and so simple in his faith, and for all his household to obey God as
soon as he commands them, without any opposition, and not to be offended
at the fact that it is a shameful work to look at, is a great thing; but
it follows the example of his pious and God-fearing father and pastor.

481 Therefore we should learn to put all questions out of our hearts and
minds, and to walk simple-mindedly in the name of the Lord, doing what
God commands us to do, be it foolish, annoying, or dangerous. For, if
God\'s command is involved, even a work that is vile and shameful in the
sight of reason is the most beautiful and holy work. For there is no
greater nor better adornment than God\'s word; and because circumcision
had such adornment, it was a holy work pleasing to God.

482 Now I have said above that circumcision was not meant to last
forever, but only for a time, which is why it has ceased in the New
Testament and only its meaning remains, namely the killing of children.

**[1130 \" iv. I6S-17V. Interpretation of Genesis 17:23-27. cap. 18, 1.
w. i, 1701-17.\" HZ1]{.underline}**

The flesh has to deal with many trials and tribulations so that it may
be safe and have cause to practice God\'s word and invocation.

It is indeed an annoying thing that those who are God\'s people alone
and have to rejoice in true and righteous doctrine and religion are
nevertheless put under the cross, choked by the pope and his followers
and tormented in many ways, while the enemies of God and Satan\'s own
servants are triumphant and in great honor.

484 Without adding to this trouble, there are other special afflictions
which the saints must always feel and bear in their hearts and bodies.
But suffer all these things with patience, pray and wait for your
ministry, and think thus: Behold, Abraham allowed himself to be
circumcised without any protest, and the little children, as soon as
they were eight days old, were also subjected to the same cross;
therefore you also suffer your part. So we will learn from Abraham not
only how to be righteous before God, but also how to be righteous before
God.

The first step is to make him an example of right obedience, no matter
how foolish he may have been in the eyes of reason.

485 For the Gentiles of the old patriarch, who could not suffer
circumcision without pain, will undoubtedly have laughed. But Abraham is
not ashamed, but does what he is commanded, and does not let it grieve
him that he has lived so long without circumcision, and that now, for
the first time, when he is a hundred years old, he must accept and
tolerate it. So Ishmael, who is now thirteen years old, is not ashamed
to be circumcised, nor does he refuse the pain. Thus all the servants
who belong to the house and have been bought into it, in a childlike and
simple mind, tolerate such disgrace without any questioning or
complaining. Therefore, they please God and become blessed through faith
in the seed that has been given; and those who do not submit to this
example and accept the word and obey it in simple and childlike
obedience will, like Adam, fall into disobedience, death and
condemnation through their harmful and pernicious questions, \"Why?

**The eighteenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of the appearance of three men, as Abraham receives them, and that
through them the mystery of the Holy Trinity is portrayed.**

V. 1. **And the Lord appeared unto him in the grove of Mamre, as he sat
by the door of his tabernacle, when the day was hottest.**

001 As I have said above, the ninety and ninth year of Abraham is to be
noted above all others for many great things that took place therein.
For in it was first commanded and done circumcision, and the two
promises

After Abraham had gone to Palestine to fight against the four kings and
redeemed his brother Lot, the Sodomites also perished and were destroyed
in that year; and most importantly, God appeared to Abraham several
times and spoke kindly to him.

The sum and content of this next chapter is that God now wants to
confirm and conclude the promise of Isaac. For in the previous chapter
Abraham was promised that he should have an heir from Sarah, and the
name Isaac was attached to him by the Lord Himself, because Abraham had
laughed at it. Now Sarah was not present, and it is evident that she
told Abraham this when he told her,

[**1132 L- IV, I7S-I72.** Interpretation of **Genesis** 18:1-5, **W. I,
170S-I709. 1133**]{.underline}

not believed, therefore the promise is repeated here, so that Sarah may
not hear it from Abraham\'s mouth as before, but from God Himself, of
whom the text here says that Sarah stood behind Him, that is, that He
turned His back on her, to indicate that Sarah did not believe sooner,
because she was harshly spoken to and punished.

3 So Isaac is promised the second time, and this text of the children of
the promise is gloriously and abundantly treated by St. Paul, who
concludes that man is justified by faith and not by law or work: and
with this reason he sets aside all the hopefulness and presumption of
the Jews because of their fleshly birth. For if birth according to the
flesh is to count for something, why is there a difference between
Ishmael and Isaac? Just as Isaac was born according to the promise, but
the promise requires faith, so Abraham\'s children are not counted as
those whose natural father is Abraham, but those who believe according
to the example of the faithful Abraham, that they are of the Gentiles or
circumcised.

\(4\) And this text, because it is the most distinguished, is confirmed
by two testimonies according to the custom of the Scriptures; as Joseph
afterwards sees two dreams of the cows, which signify the same thing.
Perhaps people who are unfamiliar with the divine Scriptures may
consider this to be a bold and unnecessary repetition, but there is a
great reason why one thing has been repeated twice. For thereby the
greatest annoyance is removed, and the disputation is cut off from the
neat honor and privilege of birth according to your flesh and the
presumption of human powers, which otherwise would soon have come to an
end.

\(5\) So that this repetition of the promise belongs to it, so that this
knot is not only untied but also cut in two, so that the Jews who rely
on their fleshly birth and the Gentiles who rely on their own ability
and skill may see at the same time that Abraham\'s right seed is the
seed according to the promise.

\(6\) For though Isaac was born of Abraham\'s flesh, yet he was born
above the ability of the flesh, since both father and mother are almost
dead by reason of their flesh, and by reason of their age are not able
to beget children. For the promise, which they take hold of by faith,
makes the dead flesh as it were alive again, so that you must consider
it that Isaac was born not so much of the flesh as by virtue of the
promise.

This is the most important part of this chapter, which proves the
righteousness of faith against the presumption and righteousness of
works. After this, a very beautiful example of outward discipline and
conduct is given, namely, of hospitality. Thirdly, we should notice from
this this special, powerful testimony to the article of the Holy
Trinity, namely, that three men appeared to Abraham, and Moses always
speaks of them as if they were one man or person. But we will save such
testimony until later, and now speak of the hospitality.

**V.2-5. And when he lifted up his eyes, and looked, behold, three men
stood against him. And when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the
door of his tent, and bowed himself to the ground, and said, Lord, if I
have found grace in thy sight, pass not over before thy servant. Let a
little water be brought unto you, and wash your feet; and lean ye under
the tree. And I will bring you a morsel of bread, that ye may refresh
your hearts: after that ye shall depart. For therefore came ye to your
servant. They said: Do as you have said.**

8 The master of the epistle to the Hebrews looked at this text and took
these words from it to praise hospitality and to exhort Christians to
it, as he says in Cap. 13:2: \"Do not forget to be hospitable, for
through this some have housed angels without their knowledge. Now there
is hospitality in all places where the church is. For the church always
has, that I may say, a common bag and supply, since it has this command,
Matt. 5:42: \"Give to him who is free,

**[1134 L. IV, I7S-I74. Interpretation of Genesis 18:2-5. W. 1,
1709-1711. 1135]{.underline}**

who asks you\"; and we should all serve them and provide them not only
with doctrine, but also with help and welfare, so that both the spirit
and the flesh may find refreshment and comfort in them.

\(9\) But especially the stranger, who is in common need, is to be
helped and helped. For what judgment Christ will pronounce on the last
day against the hard and unhospitable, he has made it clear Matth. 25,
43: \"I have been a guest, and you have not given me shelter,\" he will
say; item v. 40: \"Truly I say to you, whatever you did to one of the
least of these my brethren, you did to me. How could such virtue be
praised more highly and gloriously, than that those who are hospitable
do not receive a man, but God\'s Son Himself? And again, what is more
ugly than to be inhospitable? For you do not expel a man from your
house, but God\'s Son Himself, who suffered and died for you on the
cross; to Him you will grant neither food nor room in your house for
only one day, in which He may sleep. But what do you think will be the
punishment for such cruel mercilessness and coarseness? Therefore, if
anyone wants to be a righteous member of the church, let him remember to
be hospitable; not only this example of the holy patriarch, but also
many excellent testimonies of the Scriptures inspire and admonish us.

**I.**

\(10\) This appearance of the three men is the appearance of the Lord,
and since they receive Abraham, he receives the Lord himself. But it is
as if they appeared in a simple and contemptible form, naked, hungry,
tired and miserable from the journey, as if they had recently been
released from a heavy prison. For that Abraham took them for such, his
words indicate.

\(11\) Now Abraham had learned to be hospitable by two ways and causes:
First, from the discipline and instruction of the patriarchs, and from
the manner and custom of the church. For these have their

Children are taught hospitality as a virtue that the church needs most.
For there can be no lack of it, because the word is taught in it, but
Satan is an enemy of it and a murderer and liar from the beginning:
there must be many dangers, hardships and misfortunes in it.

For where only God speaks, even if it happens in paradise, Satan does
not cease to rage with seducing, deceiving and murdering, until he
brings Adam out of paradise and makes him a stranger and a wretch. For
he has done this to the church from the beginning of the whole world,
even outside of paradise; he has sent hatred and enmity upon the pious
throughout the whole world; and where God, out of his goodness, has not
allowed him to exercise his will and rage upon their souls or bodies, he
has attacked their property and driven them from theirs and brought them
into misery and poverty, as he was only able. The holy patriarchs saw
this, and for this reason they diligently commanded and inculcated in
their children that they should gladly receive poor householders, who
had been driven from their homes with their wives and children, like
little birds from their nests, for lodging, and show them all goodness,
will and friendship.

\(13\) And the church has always been a refuge for the wretched and the
poor. For just as Christ says in Luc. 11, 21 that a strong man keeps his
palace until a stronger one comes over him, so it has happened to the
pious throughout history that when the word has been in circulation,
persecution and misery have been most common. So, since in our time the
word of God\'s abundant goodness has again come to light, the devil also
rages, and through the pope, bishops and godless tyrannical princes,
makes the world full of poor people who wander miserably in misery. They
suffer thirst and hunger, and are oppressed and tormented in many ways.
Therefore there must be some pious Lot and Abraham, and some pious
prince\'s little country, in which such poor and persecuted Christians
are accommodated. For where there is no house, no hospitality can be
shown.

**[1136 L. IV, 174-17\". Interpretation of I Genesis 18:2-5. s 1,
1712-1714. 1137]{.underline}**

14 So Abraham thinks here that he sees such true strangers, wretched and
poor people. (For I call right strangers those who are driven out and
have to wander about for the sake of the word, not such country people,
of whom we had a great many in the papacy, who went into wanton misery
or poverty, either out of presumption and recklessness, or out of the
hope of some righteousness without all need of persecution). For this is
the way of the word, that wherever it goes and resounds, it arouses
Satan to anger; and such anger of the strong-armed does not go off
without harm and insult to the faithful. For they are driven from their
homes and farms, deprived of their possessions, punished in their
bodies, and are, in sum, as Paul says in 1 Cor. 4:13, a curse on the
world and a sacrifice of sweepings.

\(15\) Therefore, the church cannot and should not be idle in such need
and poverty of its brethren. For according to God\'s commandment and the
teaching and instruction of the forefathers, she must practice the works
of mercy: feed and water the hungry and thirsty, shelter the exiled and
strangers, comfort the captives, visit the sick 2c.

\(16\) The devil also has his beggars, but though they have little and
nothing, they have enough and plenty, as we see in the monks and
peasants. But right beggars are those who are beggars because of the
promise of the word, for the world is hostile to them and does not help
or serve them, but Abraham helps them. For this he learned from his
ancestors, that such help and service are very necessary to poor
God-fearing people; therefore he left his house open to everyone and
received the strangers with joy, as we see.

\(17\) Therefore we should remember this example often, because we know
that, as Peter says in 1 Epist 5:9, our brothers in the world suffer
many things. Therefore, if we want to be Christians, let us open our
homes to the poor and the stranger, and feed and refresh them.

18 Secondly, Abraham had learned to be hospitable also from his own
experience. For it had already passed

four and twenty years since he came from Ur in Chaldea, lived in misery,
traveled through the land of Canaan and could not stay in one place:
from Ai he came to Bethel, then to Hebron, to Palestine, Bersaba and
other places.

19 Thus he also had to travel twice to Egypt not without great danger;
often he had to endure all kinds of thunderstorms in the open field, in
addition to suffering hunger and thirst, often also enduring other
dangers: which Moses could not tell everything, but indicates it with
this single word, that he says Abraham was a stranger, so that he then
indicates innumerable troubles and dangers, which Abraham had to
experience in such misery.

\(20\) His own distress and affliction taught him and reminded him to be
kind, helpful and gentle to the poor and the stranger. Therefore he took
these three men, who appeared to him in a simple and poor form, for poor
and exiled brothers, who might have come from the same country of
Chaldea, or from Egypt, or first from Damascus; Therefore he runs to
meet them, as if they were in great need of refreshment, asks them
kindly to stay with him, brings them water to wash their feet, gives
them food so that they may refresh themselves as weary wanderers, and
does not even consider that it should be angels or God himself.

\(21\) Therefore it is a goodly example and image of a mild and
charitable man toward the brethren who are persecuted for the word, for
Abraham regarded these three men as such. Therefore he does not wait
until they knock at the door and ask for lodging, but sits at the door,
and seeing them from afar, he runs to meet them, as if he were worried
that another host might catch such guests on the road. He has such a
willing and inclined heart toward them.

22 For Moses indicates this by saying that he sat at the door. Thus he
describes such a heart, which is willing, inclined and ready to serve
poor brethren according to their need, and shows not only

**[1138 D. IV, 176-179. interpretation of I Moses 18, 2-5. w. 1,
17I4-I7I7. 1139]{.underline}**

He has not only an inclined and willing heart, but also a servant and
gentle hand toward strangers, for which he waits and cares so carefully
at the door: just as Paul praises Philemon, that through him the hearts
of the saints are refreshed, Philem. V. 7. But such virtue, as I have
said, is in the church alone.

23 For look at the papacy and see if you can find such virtue in it. Oh
no, the papists are like the sodomites, as the next chapter will tell
us. For in fact, as Ezekiel says in Cap. 16, 49: \"They have good peace,
and all things in abundance; but they help not the poor and needy\":
against the poor church they rage and rage, shed blood, touch the goods
of Christians and drive them into misery. Such atrocious sins and more
than barbaric mercilessness and cruelty, which they practice against the
servants of the Word, against fathers of households, yes, even against
women and children, they try to cover up with their hypocritical worship
and by building magnificent and splendid hospitals, not only for the
benefit and need of the poor, but for their own glory. Therefore, they
will have to hear a terrible judgment in that day, when Christ will
accuse them of having persecuted him, driven him out of his own and
chased him into misery.

24\. and now, praise God! under our most gracious Lord, the poor and the
exiled have a refuge in his country, where they can safely stay; but I
am worried that another will come who will not want to know Joseph, and
this will happen because of the most unkindness, because of the lack of
hospitality and because of the stinginess of the people; for neither the
nobility, nor the burghers, nor the peasants are helpful to the churches
with a penny, so that they might again prove serviceable and lenient
toward the exiles; but what we have, we have from that which is under
the pabstacy znu25. For now and then no one wants to give anything, but
in the papacy there was no end to giving; since now and then one should
give all the more abundantly and leniently, because of the pious
Christians who are in the

The people are taught the Word of God, and the church servants commonly
suffer hardship, because they are now married and no longer live in the
unrighteous, disgraceful life of the priests. Therefore, poverty and
misery do not affect individuals as in former times, but husband and
wife, children and servants; and it is a grave sin not to counsel or
help them.

And we should not doubt that the holy patriarch will often have to
suffer what we suffer every day; for there is no lack of lazy and idle
hypocrites who are used to begging, and who gamble away and conceal
everything they get, and such are commonly found in churches that have a
little supply to help the poor, and for a while they pretend to be very
pious only so that they will bring and beg for more of it.

27 Thus Paul complains about the lecherous widows, who were fed from the
common caste and were burdensome to the churches, 1 Tim. 5:16. If this
happened at that time, what wonder is it that many also come to us under
the name as if they were in Eleud and driven from their own for the sake
of the word. Of such we have not hospitality, but robbery and
unreasonable vexation, that the churches may be burdened; wherefore we
must take heed and beware of such loiterers.

\(28\) There is no doubt that Abraham was often deceived, that idle
people came to him and took advantage of his goodwill, knowing that
their table would be prepared for them at his house and that everything
would be served willingly. Such people are like the lazy bumblebees, who
eat up the honey of the bees that work and are busy. But this is done
without harm to those who are kind to them; for those who are so simple
and mild and do good do not lose their reward, even though their good
deeds are lost and misused.

29Therefore we should note this history well, that Abraham is described
here as sitting at the door and running to meet the wandering people,
who are to be called for it.

**[1140 L. IV. 17V-IR. Interpretation of Genesis 18:2-5. W. 1,
1717-1720. 1141]{.underline}**

as if they were without fault and in need of charity and service from
others. We should be as benevolent as this, open our doors and
cheerfully accept our poor brothers. But if at times we are deceived
about this, it does us no harm; for God nevertheless pleases our will,
and the good that is lost in a wicked and ungrateful man is not lost in
Christ, in whose name we do good. And as we ought not knowingly to
strengthen the laziness of idle and slothful men, nor to give them any
thing: so also, if we be deceived, we ought not therefore to forbear,
nor to cease to serve others, and to do good. Christ cleansed ten
lepers, knowing that only one would be grateful to him, Luc. 17:12 ff.
It will be the same for us, and yet we should never set our minds on
doing good to anyone.

\(30\) Yea, we ought not only to be kind and helpful to our brethren who
are in misery for the faith\'s sake, but also to other common poor, if
they be not manifestly wicked. As if a Turk or a Tartar were to come to
us, and not for the sake of our doctrine, of which, as a stranger, he
could know nothing, but were otherwise poor: such a one, though he
suffer not for the word\'s sake, yet should we not despise him nor let
him.

\(31\) However, this doctrine of hospitality applies primarily to those
whom Christ calls His least, Matt. 25:40. For where the word is, there
the enemy Satan is also, bringing spiritual and physical adversity. He
could not rest in paradise until he chased Adam and Eve into misery;
therefore we should be ready to comfort the brethren in all kinds of
distress. Those who are afflicted because of spiritual persecution we
are to comfort and lift up with the word, but those who are afflicted in
the flesh we are to feed and refresh with bread and water, that is, with
love and hospitality: to each according to his need. As Abraham does
here: he sees these three strangers, but does not know who they are, but
he knows and sees that they are poor people who are weary and have
traveled, therefore he carries them so.

He soon prepares water, washes their feet, slaughters a calf, orders and
serves bread and drink. Just as he, though ignorant, takes the Lord
himself for an inn, so we, when we do something good for the least of
these in the kingdom of God, receive Christ himself, who comes to us in
his arms.

032 But why the place where Abraham dwelt is called the grove of Mamre,
I have said above. For it is so called according to its owner. For
Mamre, with his two brothers, not only gave this place to Abraham to
dwell in, but also joined himself to him, and he, with his brothers and
theirs, was undoubtedly a holy and pious family, who helped and assisted
Abraham in the war against the four kings. Although some of the Latin
interpreters call this place an oak forest, and some call it a broad or
even a field, it seems to me that it was a small wood or grove in which
he had a small hut in the middle. That is why he tells the guests to sit
down under a tree in the shade.

\(33\) That he says of the time that the day was hottest or in the
middle of the day is also not in vain. For those who travel and have
been up early tend to feel hunger and thirst at that time, especially if
they are poor. That is why Abraham took special care at such times, and
was of the opinion that he would sit at the door, so that if he saw
anyone wandering, he would take him in and feed him. Moses also said
that he had lifted up his eyes, indicating that he had been sitting for
a while in thought, perhaps thinking of the promise, or praying, or
struggling against some challenge. When he suddenly lifted up his eyes,
behold, there were three, as it seemed, pious and poor men, and he ran
to meet them, invited them, and ministered to them.

\(34\) Therefore, we are to regard him not only as a father of faith or
of believers because of his very powerful and great faith, but also as a
father of good works, and as a very beautiful and glorious example of
love, people, and the Lord.

**[1142 L. IV. 181-18\". Interpretation of Genesis 18:2-5. W. 1.
1720-1722. 1143]{.underline}**

The patriarchs were accustomed to be happy, kind, benevolent and of all
virtues. And it seems from Moses\' words that the patriarchs had such a
habit of sitting at the doors, waiting for foreign guests at noon and in
the evening and accepting them, especially at the time when Satan raged
against the pious a little more cruelly; just as the persecutions are
harder at one time and more bearable and lighter at another.

\(35\) If one were to set God and Satan against each other, this history
would become much easier and clearer. Satan is equally hostile to the
teachers and hearers of the Word; therefore one should be primarily
hospitable to those who are of our faith. For this distinction, as the
apostles taught, is to be held for and against, namely, that we first
care for the brethren, that is, those who profess the same doctrine and
faith with us, and suffer persecution for it. And such virtue has a
special name among the Greeks and is called Philadelphia, that is,
heartfelt love for the brethren. Now our brethren are not alone in
poverty and misery, but others much more also, and Christ exhorts us,
according to the example of his heavenly Father, to do good also to our
enemies.

\(36\) So this virtue, that one is hospitable and kind to such strangers
who wander about in misery for the sake of the word and faith, is
especially praised and commanded here. For they shall not only be fed
with bread and water, as Abraham did, but they shall also be treated
with reverence. For thus Moses writes of Abraham that as soon as he sees
the three men coming, he looks and runs to meet them joyfully, and then
bows down to the ground before them as if to worship God himself, and
calls them adonai, that is, LORD.

**II.**

This is almost too great a reverence for him to receive these poor and
miserable brothers, as they were to be seen, who appear to him in the
form of three old or young men (for Moses does not indicate this). But
see how he addresses them so kindly, graciously and humbly, and his
words in front of them.

so sweetly and masterfully to them. He implores them, admonishes them
kindly, and at last compels them to stay with him; and makes himself
believe that he is in heaven, that such guests occur to him, and that he
is considered worthy to accommodate them. \"If I have found grace,\"
saith he, \"in thy sight, pass not over from me.\" What greater thing
could he have said and offered if they had brought him a great lump of
gold? But now they bring him nothing at all, but are to be regarded as
those who are weary and need someone to refresh them; which Abraham does
so heartily and eagerly that he also asks them, and considers it a great
service and treasure that they stay.

\(38\) Therefore this history has no example at all like it, that so
great a patriarch should so reverently and deeply humble himself before
unknown guests, fall down before them, address them by the name of the
divine majesty, and call them adonai, Lord. After that, see how smoothly
and sensibly he boasts of his ability: \"Let them bring you,\" he says,
\"a little water\"; item: \"I will bring you a morsel of bread.\" Such
courtesy, that he does not boast greatly of his good deeds, is also very
sweet. For as Jesus Sirach Cap. 31, 14, those who advance and begrudge
benefits are called evil eyes, so it is not at all fitting that you
should praise or extol your own; for such ostentation and hopefulness
make the benefit unpleasant. So you will find nothing like this history:
and whoever wants to teach others how one should show oneself willingly
and serviceably toward the brethren, let him take an example from this,
and he will find that in these few words there is much more rhetorical
art and mastery than anyone can imitate.

39\. and now this text teaches, according to the simple and historical
understanding, that Abraham showed the works of love, service and
goodwill toward the brothers who were with him of one doctrine and
confession; as Christ also teaches us, when he says John 13:20: \"He who
receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who
received me.

**[1144 \" iv, iW-iW. Interpretation of I Genesis 18:2-5. W. i,
I7S2-I7W. 1145]{.underline}**

has sent.\" This is truly a great and wonderful promise, if one wants to
think about it rightly and diligently, which Abraham never had so
clearly; and yet see how diligently he exhorts these strangers to stay
with him and how kindly he cares for them.

40\. He learned this, as I said above, not only from the instruction of
his ancestors, who taught and accustomed their own to be hospitable,
which virtue the church needs most when God\'s word is flowing and
shining most brightly: But he was also taught by his own example and
experience, after he had also wandered about in misery and had
experienced much unhappiness, since the service and assistance of pious
people had been quite dear and pleasant to him: that he had therefore
learned this rule from experience, that whoever receives a brother who
is miserable for the sake of the Word, receives God Himself in such a
brother. And because this rule was given to us by Christ Himself, and
because He promised that on the last day He would praise us for the good
we had done for the poor, we are still much more indolent and
cold-hearted than the holy patriarchs, who did not have such a promise.

41\. Abraham thought that these three men had been expelled from his
place for the sake of faith and the word, and saw that they were not
respected in Sodom or in the other nearby and surrounding places, nor
were they given shelter: Therefore he takes them to himself, and
considers it as if he accepts God himself among them; as is evidenced by
the fact that he soon calls them adonai, Lord, and also by the gesture
that he bows down to the ground before them, as if to worship them; as
he is not lacking in this, for he accepts God himself as his host.

42 Therefore he is set as an example to all the churches, that they may
learn to receive the ministers of the Word as the Lord Himself in
heaven; as Paul boasts of his Galatians, that they held him as an angel
of God, Gal. 4:14. And though the custom of bowing down before strangers
is not with us, yet we should bow down in our hearts before our own.

Brothers stoop down for the sake of the Lord Christ who dwells in them.
For since he says, \"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me,\" Matt. 25:40, he
addresses this saying to a brotherhood between us and them. But since
there is no one among us who would not bow down before the Lord Christ
and fall down before him when he sees him, why would we not bow down
before our brothers at least in our hearts? As Augustine finely says:
Honor God among yourselves; for the word of the Lord Christ does not
lie: \"You have done to me what you did to one of the least of these.\"

\(43\) Therefore, we are justified in lamenting over our unbelieving
hearts, which have grown cold and frozen like ice and cannot be softened
by such lovely promises. Abraham, as we see, believed, even though he
did not have such a clear word, that he would receive God Himself if he
received these three men: that they were men, he did not doubt; and yet
his knowledge goes higher than he thinks, and looks to the Lord, whom he
worships in these guests.

44 If they had been enemies, he would not have let them go, but would
have fed and watered them first out of the love that does good to all,
and would not have stooped to the ground out of love for his brothers
and fellow believers. For he knows that God dwells in brothers who are
of one faith and right in the temple of God, and not in enemies of the
faith or in those who know nothing of the right religion.

\(45\) Although I do not resent the opinion of those who say that
Abraham learned from his own and his ancestors\' examples and often
experienced that the angels appeared to the saints in human form and
lodged with them, as we will hear later (chap. 19:2 ff.) from Lot in
Sodom. This experience brought them to the point that they kept all
guests and strangers honest and again hoped to deal with the angels.

**[1146 L. IV, 18S-I87. Interpretation of Genesis 18: 25, W. 1,
1725-1728. 1147]{.underline}**

\(46\) And though this is seldom done, yet, knowing that God should be
honored in the brethren, they considered themselves, as it were,
unworthy to receive into lodging weak, poor, and afflicted brethren, who
suffered misery for the Word\'s sake; wherefore they did it with so
great joy, and with a willing and inclined mind.

The world, however, does the opposite; for the king in Canaan does not
receive Abraham, much less the Sodomites Lot: so Abraham, in Egypt,
where a good king reigned, comes into great danger for Sarah\'s sake,
and we will hear hereafter how kindly the Philistines dealt with him.
Therefore, the saints are not received kindly and kept well anywhere
except with Abraham and Lot, that is, with the Church, which considers
itself a servant of the servants of God, and unworthy of such honor,
that since God dwells in the saints, it should receive him as an inn
among the brethren. At the present time, when there are so many
land-grabbers and idle beggars, I do not know whether it would be
necessary to show such bodily reverence and servitude. For the world is
utterly wicked, 1 John 5:19, and there are many who abuse the goodwill
and charity of devout Christians.

48 Washing feet also came from the ancient fathers, and is also part of
the deference that should be paid to strangers.

49\. And is this the historical and simple meaning of this text and a
great glory and praise of hospitality, that we should be sure that we
have God Himself in our house, and that He is fed, reclines and rests
with us, as often as a poor brother, who is in misery for the sake of
the gospel, comes to us and is taken in by us for lodging: And this is
called brotherly or Christian love, which is so much greater than that
common kindness which we show even to strangers and enemies when they
need our help.

50 None of these happen to our adversaries, for they are enemies to us
because of the word and our faith.

they chase us away and kill us. But those who are their enemies in an
outward or worldly way, they are again hostile to them. Therefore, the
hospitality and brotherly love is only with the true Christians and in
the church.

For the fact that the books of the Gentiles boast much about the
friendship of Theseus and Hercules, Pylades and Orestes, who allowed
themselves to be killed for one another, is nothing at all compared to
the brotherhood in the church, which holds together and binds together
the company and fellowship with God, so that Christ, the Son of God,
says that whatever happens to one of the least of these is done to him,
Matt. 25:40. 25, 40. Therefore, Christians pour out their hearts without
hypocrisy in their neighbor\'s need, and there is nothing so precious
and difficult that a Christian does not let pass over him for the sake
of the brethren.

\(52\) But, oh, we poor and blinded people, to whom all these things are
preached without fruit, for very few believe that such things are true.
But if anyone could seriously believe that he would receive God the Lord
Himself when he receives a poor brother, there would be no need for such
diligent, careful and heartfelt exhortations to the works of love; But
then our bags, boxes, kitchens and cellars would be open to our brethren
without all disfavor and burden, and we would run with dear Abraham from
ourselves to meet the poor and needy, invite them to us, precede others,
and run forward in such honor, saying: O Lord JEsu! come to me, and have
need of my bread, wine, silver, and gold; for how well these things are
applied, if I turn them to thee 2c. But because we do not do this, it is
certain that we do not believe such things. Therefore we are deaf to
such examples of the patriarchs. But in fact such examples are
prescribed for our shame, and in due time such obstinate unbelief will
meet its punishment.

\(53\) But what will they answer in the last day who persecute the
church? As the pope does, who boasts that he is a servant of all
servants, lyingly and falsely.

**[1148 \". rv, IS7-I8S. Interpretation of Genesis 18:2-5. W. 1.
1728-1730. 1149]{.underline}**

and spends. Abraham and all believers in Christ have such a title much
more cheaply. But if one wanted to call the pope by the right name, one
should call him a tyrant, or what would be even worse and crueler than a
tyrant; for he persecutes the church of God, drives Christian and
faithful servants of God away from theirs, condemns them to the sword
and fire, not to mention that he should receive them for brothers and
friends. Therefore he is like the sodomites and not Abraham; neither is
he worthy of the land of Canaan like Abraham, but of sulfur and fire
from heaven and eternal hell.

\(54\) That he speaks so modestly of his service and good deeds is, as I
said, very special: \"Let a little water be brought to you,\" he says,
\"but lean under the tree\" and rest. The Hebrew word is very emphatic,
hischaanu, lean, lean on this tree as on a stick; for so do those who
have wandered wearily. Psalm 23:4 says, \"Thy rod and thy staff, they
comfort me,\" for this is the word upon which we lean, rest, and are
strengthened when we are weary with trouble and temptation.

\(55\) To the diminution of his service also belongs that he does not
say that he will prepare a table for them or make beds, but tells them
to lie down under the tree and puts them off for bread. Therefore, this
is an excellent example, and it is described in convenient and
appropriate words, so that someone, if he is not even a stone, must
always wish and desire to be like Abraham in this work of hospitality,
whom we can call a father not only of faith but also of good works. Let
this be enough of history.

**III.**

\(56\) Now we must also say something about the mystery of the Trinity.
For the godless Jews laugh at us that our fathers wanted to prove the
Trinity from this text, that three men appeared to Abraham and yet he
only spoke to one: and indeed, according to the historical
understanding, nothing else is to be concluded from this text than that
Abraham had very great reverence for the Trinity.

He did not yet know that it was the Lord, but he did show kindness,
service and charity to these poor brethren and took good care of them.

\(57\) And because history brings such understanding with it, they
condemn us for making three persons and one divine being: and therefore
boast that nothing of this kind is found either in Moses or in the
prophets, and whoever wants to prove this from this text, he, they say,
must be able to turn the Scriptures as he wills, and prove from them
what he wills.

58 And according to this rule, as from a certain evidence, they condemn
our faith altogether. And that I say the truth, if the Jews read Cyprian
and Hilarius, they may find many things that are not at all convenient
and agreeable to them. But the holy fathers have written these things in
Christian and good opinion, and have well understood and seen that
opponents and enemies of the doctrine are not to be dealt with in this
way, but with such hearers as do not deny the foundation of the faith
and the noblest part. For when a preacher instructs and teaches his
hearers, he does not instigate war or battle, but prepares training and
armor for battle, in which one does not use sharp weapons, spears or
swords, but rather children\'s weapons and spears and swords made of
wood; but when it comes to a meeting, one must be well equipped with
steel and iron, weapons and arms.

So, when we argue against the enemies of the church, we must bring forth
good and certain reasons and strong evidence. For if this is not done,
our enemies not only ridicule us, but are also strengthened in their
error. Thus we have rebuked the Anabaptists and Sacramentarians not only
with many and thorough proofs, so that we have protected our doctrine,
but also by paying attention to what they wrongly attract and falsely
base one thing on another.

Therefore, teaching is another thing, and exhortation is another.
Rhetoric and the art of exhortation are often used in jest, and offer
you a shillelagh that you regard as a sharp sword.

**[1150 L. IV, 18S-191. interpretation of I Genesis 18, 2-5. W. I,
I7SV-I7S. 1151]{.underline}**

But dialectics and right mastery are in the field and do serious things;
therefore they do not show wood or shillelaghs to the adversary, but
sharp and pointed spears and swords. And because the fathers did not do
this everywhere, but at times adduced and used inconvenient, and at
other times weak, evidence to establish and prove the article of the
Trinity among their disciples and hearers, the Jews hold this against us
as a rule, that many sayings of Scripture are evil received and applied
by our teachers, for which reason our whole doctrine of the Trinity is
unjust and false. And we do not deny that the fathers cite some things
from the Scriptures that are unjust and inconvenient; but nevertheless
this is not true either, and is unfounded, that therefore our doctrine
is unjust.

\(61\) For as far as this text is concerned, we admit that the
historical understanding proves nothing against the Jews; but sometimes
the inauthentic and figurative understanding is also admissible. For
this is what Paul does in Gal. 4:22 ff: after he has masterfully proved
the doctrine of faith and, as it were, conquered it with the sword, he
then brings in the allegory of Sarah and Hagar, which, although it is
too weak in the battle, for it deviates from the historical
understanding, nevertheless makes the trade of faith its light and
adorns it.

\(62\) For history does not teach that Abraham was God, Sarah the
church, and Hagar the synagogue; but it teaches that Abraham was the
father of the house, Sarah the mother of the house, and Hagar the
handmaid. But what harm is there, if the foundation has been well laid
beforehand, and if it has been proved from other certain and clear
sayings of Scripture, that the allegory should also be brought, not only
to adorn the matter with it, but also to make it clearer and more lucid.
Thus the natural sons of Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac, signify the two
peoples; Ishmael, the people according to the flesh; Isaac, the people
according to the spirit or the promise.

For this reason, Augustine rightly says that the figure proves nothing,
and that it should also have nothing to do with things when they are
spoken of seriously, because there one must find the reason for them.

Certainly and firmly. If this is established, then it is permissible to
explain and decorate the matter with allegory or figure. Thus Augustine
himself does not prove the Trinity from the fact that he speaks of three
different powers or effects in man, and yet it is a lovely thought that
one looks for footprints and characteristics of the divine Trinity in
man and all other creatures at the same time.

\(64\) As Peter Lombard does when he cites this common saying, that
every thing is ordered and created by weight, size, and number: item,
that in every thing that has a size, consider the length, breadth, and
thickness: item, that in philosophy there is ens verum unum (a true,
unified being), in the sun, its substance, light, and heat. With such
sayings one cannot penetrate the adversaries of the word, but to us they
are lovely similes and characteristics of the article of the Trinity,
which we have otherwise founded and proved and which is known to us. In
this way we also want to answer the Jews here, they may laugh at our and
our teachers, who have used this testimony in the article of the
Trinity, as they want; they have nevertheless never said that they blame
us falsely, that these three men mean three persons of God.

\(65\) In like manner the papists also counterfeit our doctrine and
sayings, that they may adorn their things. For since we say that man is
not justified by his works, they say that we forbid and reject good
works. Such poisonous liars are Cochläus, Witzelius and others, and are
such devilish lies of poisonous and very evil people, who do not hear
what I say, nor do they want to hear; and yet they interpret our words
as they want, much differently than they are meant by us.

66\) Nowhere in the fathers or teachers is it found that Abraham
considered these three men to be three persons of the Godhead; therefore
these are lies of poisonous tongues, which are like a sharp shearer\'s
knife, Psalm 52:4, and speak nothing but rash and hasty words, thereby
seducing, vexing, and bringing down pious hearts.

**[1152 L IV, 191-ISS. Interpretation of Genesis 18:2-5. W. 1,
1753-1736. 1153]{.underline}**

will be. The Jews have ears and hear naturally like other people, but as
people possessed by the devil and his wickedness, they do not hear what
we say; as Isaiah prophesied about them, Cap. 6, 10. For the fathers did
not speak so foolishly about the Trinity that they would have pretended
that these three men, if Abraham had seen them with bodily eyes, would
have been taken by him for three persons of the Godhead.

In the baptism of Christ, Christ stands as a man, the voice of the
Father comes from heaven, and the dove hovers over the head of the Lord
Christ: these are three distinct things; but who would say that humanity
is the Godhead, or that this voice is God the Father, or that the dove
is the Holy Spirit?

68\. But this is rightly said, that in the man Christ is God, in the
dove the Holy Spirit, and in the voice the Father. And are we not so
foolish as to say that an outward image or bodily thing, which is seen
and comprehended with the eyes, is God; for we know that the Trinity is
invisible.

69\) Therefore, the Fathers did not say in other words and so roughly
why God wanted to reveal Himself to Abraham in three persons and not in
four or two, or why God chose three persons in which He appeared,
namely, that Moses wanted to indicate darkly that One God was divided
into three persons, since Abraham sees three of them and worships only
One.

\(70\) And thus the holy fathers have spoken, not as the poisonous
tongues of the Jews blaspheme; for God willed to appear to Abraham in
the Trinity of angels. Since three are seen and one speaks, and Abraham
sees three and worships only one, the holy fathers say that this means
that there is a trinity in God, and not that the same three persons who
are seen are the Trinity. But if we had no other proof of the Trinity
without these three persons alone, I myself would not have believed it.

we have other reasons and strong and powerful proofs, of which we have
said in other places and still want to say.

Therefore, let us defend our teachers against such poisonous tongues,
who say that Abraham saw the Trinity in a secret and hidden mind,
because God did not appear to him in fewer or more persons than in
three. For if he saw the day of Christ (as is clearly attested in the
New Testament, John 8:56), he undoubtedly also saw his divinity: if he
saw his divinity, this could not have happened without knowledge of the
Trinity.

\(72\) That therefore the fathers have rightly guided and used this
text. For to prove a thing, and after it is proved and established, to
adorn and emphasize it, are two different things. The rhetorical colors
and arguments do not always prove, but adorn very much and persuade to
what the dialectic has proved.

\(73\) It is very pleasant and sweet to me that after I know that we are
justified by faith alone (for this is abundantly founded, proved and
explained in the holy Scriptures), Augustine, Hilarius, Cyril and
Ambrose also say this: although they do not do the same and often speak
inconveniently and not at all actually. For I do not attribute this to
them as an error, but am content with the fact that they say the same
thing as us, whether they do not speak so comfortably at all times: and
their testimony strengthens me, whether it is more rhetorical than
dialectical.

For where the foundation is rightly built and laid, the rhetorical
proofs, though they are not so strong and firm, are also useful,
pleasant and fruitful. Therefore, this testimony of the holy fathers is
to be held to be true, that they rightly said that Abraham recognized
the Trinity from this appearance, in which God appeared to him in three
persons. For such is a rhetorical argument and proof, convenient and
useful to teach, where the foundation of the Holy Trinity is built and
laid from other places in Scripture.

**[1154 L IV, 1SL-1SS. Interpretation of I Genesis 18, 5-8. W. I,
17S6-174V. 1155]{.underline}**

**Second part.**

**Of the banquet prepared for Abraham and of the conversation at that
banquet.**

**I.**

V. 5-8. **They said: Do as you have said. And Abraham hasted into the
tabernacle unto Sarah, and said, Make haste, and mix three measures of
fine flour, and knead, and bake cakes. And he ran unto the oxen, and
fetched a goodly calf, and gave it unto the lad, and he made haste, and
prepared it. And he took butter and milk, and of the calf which he had
prepared, and set it before them, and stood before them under the tree,
and they did eat.**

This is the description, not of a glorious, princely or royal, but of a
divine meal and banquet. And whoever would be a good dialectician and
orator, he would have rich matter in this text, in which he could well
practice. For such words are not to be passed over so merely and coldly,
since it is certain that they are not written in vain by the Holy
Spirit, but for our sake.

When Abraham notices that these three guests want to stay with him, he
happily hurries into the hut and prepares a meal, because he is sure
that he receives God Himself in these three guests. Such faith makes him
so joyful and willing.

Because we do not have such faith, we are not at all like Abraham and
are very slow and sluggish in such service and works of love. But if we
did not doubt in our conscience, but were sure that when we receive a
brother, or one who has been driven out because of the word, or the poor
in any other way, we would receive God Himself and have the Son of God
Himself as a witness of such service on the last day, we would truly
rejoice when foreign guests came to stay with us and would not think
that they would weigh us down.

78\) But our physical eyes prevent us from doing so, for they see an
invisible guest, even if they have seen him before.

Because this is so ardent in Abraham, he hastens with such great joy,
and does not walk slowly or in awe, but rejoices that he has received
cause to prove his good will to his brothers. Therefore he does not let
his servants serve him, but steps on his own feet and delivers a calf;
he also tells his Sarah to hurry and bake a cake.

79 All these things are written by Moses so that he may emphasize the
glorious faith of Abraham, so that he may not let his conscience doubt,
but be certain that he has as his guest the God of heaven and earth: not
that he already knew Him then, as he knew Him later, but that he is
certain that God will come to him in these brothers. Such faith
therefore makes him joyful, willing and eager for such good works. But
because we are sluggish and lazy to do such good works of love, and are
angry or grumbling when strange brothers come to us, these are signs of
a sleepy and lazy, if not dead, faith in us.

For this reason, such examples should be held up to the congregations
and diligently impressed upon them, lest we be punished for our
ingratitude, as happened to us in the papacy, when we despised such
sacred histories and were more concerned with the lies of the monks. But
what are Antonius, Franciscus and Dominicus against this patriarch,
whose heart burns with faith like a fiery furnace? That is why he is so
inclined to all kinds of service and willingness.

81 Previously he had said that he would have a little bread brought to
them: here he takes three measures not of common flour, which the
servants used for food, but of choice breadcrumbs. And this is Moses\'
rhetoric, so that he praises Abraham\'s love and hospitality with
mighty, splendid and very rich words, or rather his faith, because it
shines out in such works. How great the measure was, I do not know, but
it is certain that the Jews had small measures, for they were a very
moderate people.

**[1156 L. IV, 1S5-197, interpretation of Genesis 18: 58, W. I,
1740-1743. 1157]{.underline}**

So he measured the flour according to the number of guests, and now
increased his gift, which he had not praised before with many words, but
had offered small and small, with action. As mild people are wont to do.
But the boasters, who make so many words, do not do so; for commonly the
words are greater than the deed: and with such pompous words they puff
up their good deed, and make their service, which is pleasant in itself,
unpleasant in this way. And there is no doubt that from this history of
Abraham Solomon took many sayings and put them among his sayings.

The Latin word panis subcinericius, which we have translated cake, is
actually beautiful and white bread, as with us are rolls or cakes, which
we serve at banquets. In Hebrew it is called ugoth, and is found in the
35th Psalm v. 16. laage that is: \"Those who pretend and mock the pious
for the sake of the belly\", and therefore are invited by the rich and
fed according to pleasure. Paul calls such people servants of the belly
(Phil. 3, 19); like the canons of our time, who neither teach nor pray
nor work in the church, but only eat sweet bread and drink good wine.

84 Therefore the word og is called a baker, and in Moses it is the name
of the king of Bashan, that is, of fatness, because he dwelt in a fat
and fertile land, and had beautiful white and sweet bread. Therefore
Abraham took good care of his guests and did them good by baking cakes
for them. But he hastened to the cattle and delivered a tender and fat
calf.

Where did Moses, who usually does not say much about big things, come up
with such rich and extensive words here? Actually, he wanted to praise
and impress upon us the example of the holy patriarch in this way, so
that we would be so fervent in good works, and as Paul says in Romans
12:10, one would be diligent to precede the other in service and
willingness toward poor and exiled brethren, in whom God Himself comes
to us and seeks shelter with us.

86 Therefore he says that Abraham himself hastens to the cattle, does
not command a servant to do so, and does not bring forth a mangy, snotty
and sick sheep, but a very tender and well-fattened calf; that from this
it can be seen that he was not a meager or exact landlord, but very mild
and hospitable. For precise and frisky people are commonly frightened
when a stranger comes to them, and present him with what they do not
like and is the very least.

But Abraham did not do this, but prepared a rich and precious meal,
because he considered that he had received God in these three guests for
lodging. And this is written only once by Moses, but there is no doubt
that it was Abraham\'s daily way to expect foreign guests at noon and to
take them home. For how could one who believes for certain that in an
exiled brother, who suffers persecution for the sake of the Word, God
Himself is not demonstrating the greatest and highest goodwill to
foreign guests?

Therefore, think of this innkeeper, who makes it his business to satisfy
unknown guests. What must he do to acquaintances and friends! He speaks
kindly to these strangers and asks them highly, as if they were doing
him a great service, if they stay with him and offer lodging, promises
them a morsel of bread, but takes the most beautiful flour and has a
cake baked for them. Next to the bread he puts a fatted calf and butter
and milk with it, and does not sit down at the table himself, as he
should have done as the father of the house, but stands there as a
servant and sees that the guests do not lack anything.

Where does this innkeeper get such diligence, attention, service and
will against strange, unknown guests, whom he does not receive, as
innkeepers do in inns, in order to gain something from them, but feeds
them for free? Actually, this is because he thinks he is serving God
when he serves his neighbor in his need.

\(90\) And Moses would have us diligently remember and observe the faith
of Abraham, and learn to practice it, and not only in them.

**[1158 S- rv. 1S7-1SS. Interpretation of Genesis 18:5-9. W. i,
1743-174\". 1159]{.underline}**

If we owe this to parents, disciplinarians, and the authorities, 2c. but
also to all our fellow believers or brothers. But because few of us have
such faith of Abraham. Few also believe that parents, schoolmasters,
authorities are given to us and ordained by God, therefore obedience and
service to them is all the weaker, indeed none at all.

Therefore Moses holds up Abraham\'s example to us as a mirror in which
right service and all kinds of virtues shine, but especially this
glorious faith, that he recognizes, honors and serves God in these
guests. This faith is the most noble thing, but it is hindered in us in
many ways by our own flesh, which lies before our eyes like a thick
wall, and prevents us from recognizing God in our brothers, as Abraham
did, and showing him such service and honor.

The place where this banquet is held is a tree, and Jerome writes that
it was a terebinth and remained there until the time of Emperor
Constantine. And if you want to compare it with the foolish splendor of
the world, you will see nothing here of engraved and painted carpets,
nor golden or silver drinking vessels as in princely wickedness: but
what is all such splendor compared to the fact that God and the angels
are here?

We could have such guests every day, if we were not hindered by our
unbelief. Therefore, all these things are written for our shame and
disgrace, so that we do not do them in the light of day, and take it for
granted that it is not flesh and blood, but the Son of God Himself with
His angels who lodges with us, as often as we take in exiled brothers
who are in misery and need for the sake of faith.

And if such faith were in us as it was in Abraham, every tree and every
little hut would become a heaven, surpassing all kings\' courts and
palaces; and all the splendor of gold and silver and all the royal glory
would be nothing compared to the adornment of such a poor and little
hut, in which God sits with His angels as guests.

95\. but as I have often said, we are, the

because our hearts do not believe, are lazy and slow to such services
and works of love, run around like swine without all reverence and
willingness, forgetting the admonition of St. Paul Rom. 12, 10: \"One
should precede the other with reverence\"; Phil. 2, 3.By humility one
esteemeth another better than himself\"; item of Augustine\'s saying:
Dear brethren, honor God in yourselves; for if he who is baptized is a
member of the Lord Christ, he who receives a baptized brother receives
Christ himself. But as I have often said, our unbelieving flesh prevents
us from seeing and enjoying such glory. However, such examples are held
up to us, that we may learn to improve such coarseness and hardness of
our nature, and awaken our hearts to hospitality and other Christian and
ministerial works.

**II.**

V. 9 **Then they said to him, \"Where is Sarah your wife? And he
answered, Within the tabernacle.**

After Moses has described the banquet with its glory, the like of which
has never been seen under the sun, since the guests are God Himself with
His angels, he now reports what their conversation or sermon over the
table was, so that there is no lack of this description, and the whole
world will know and be aware that this banquet did not take place as
among the monks, who had to remain silent over the tables.

97 For there is nothing more vexatious, nor more uncomfortable, nor more
unpleasant, than when good friends come together in silence at a
banquet. For words and conversation, if they are sweet and seasoned with
salt, as Paul says in Col. 4:6, are the proper seasoning of food; if one
word brings and sharpens another, and not only the body is nourished,
but also the heart is instructed with doctrine. For Christian
conversation comforts and refreshes the heart, awakens faith, inspires
love, and instructs us in many ways. Therefore

**[1160 D. IV, I9S-20I. Interpretation of Genesis 18, 9. W. I,
1745-1748. 1161]{.underline}**

let me go the peevish and silent monks who take their silence for
holiness and worship.

98\) Now Sarah, it seems, had some doubts about the promise that God
made to her in chapter 17, vv. 16, 19. V. 16, 19, that she should be the
mother of the promised seed; therefore, the Lord asks her here that he
himself strengthen her in faith. For this work God does for and for,
that he instructs, enlightens and strengthens the weak hearts with his
spirit, not that he condemns or rejects them because of weakness.

Therefore he asks here as soon as, where Sarah is, and answers Abraham
with short words: \"She is inside in the hut\". If such a short answer
runs through a lazy and industrious heart, it lets it go, as if nothing
special was attached to it. But the Holy Spirit, with such words, wanted
to set an example for all women to follow: that just as Abraham is
everywhere modeled for us as a rule of faith and good works, so we
should also learn from Sarah what are the highest and most beautiful
virtues of a holy and praiseworthy housemother.

\(100\) For we know that the weakness or inherent levity of all women is
that they are apt to walk about, inquiring and searching providently
after all things, standing at the door, and either seeing what passes by
and happens in the street, or waiting for new rumors. This is why
Solomon says of wicked women, Prov. 7:10, 11, that their footsteps are
inoffensive, because they are shrewd to see and hear things that do not
concern them. For this reason, women\'s manners and behavior are called
evil because of their frivolity, gossip, and presumption.

101 Now these virtues are praised in Sarah, which are contrary to these
vices; and this is done in one word, that Abraham says she is in the
tabernacle. For if she had been forward like other women, she would have
run out and stood at the door, seen what guests had come, listened to
their speech, and fallen for their words, 2c. but she does not do any of
these things.

nes, but waits for their work and housekeeping and cares nothing about
other things.

102 Thus Paul commands Titus 2:5 that a woman should be domestic, that
is, stay at home and wait for her husband. This is how the pagans
painted Venus, that she was standing on a snail. For just as the snail,
wherever it crawls, carries its house with it, so a woman should be busy
with the business of her house and not go far from it. This requires not
only all kinds of housework and ordering, which is primarily due to
women and is their own, but also the needs of the children and the
servants, who need diligent attention.

Therefore this is a great praise of Sarah, that while strangers come
here, she waits for her own, and does not sin with her forwardness, but
remains like a snail in her little hut, and does not take so much time
that she sees a little what guests she gets.

Such discipline, or shamefacedness, as it may be called, far surpasses
all nuns\' works and worship, and these words, \"Sarah is inside the
tabernacle,\" should rightly be made to work upon the veils of all
women. For with this they would have to be reminded of what their office
was, they would have to beware of being forward, treading the pavement
and walking around and gossiping, and they would have to get used to
diligent housekeeping. Thus Moses outlined and described in very short
words all the virtues of a pious housemother, who likes to be at home in
her house, who takes care of the housekeeping, and who handles and
governs what the husband acquires and brings into the house.

\(105\) Our adversaries, the papists, boast much of great and wonderful
works, and laugh at us when they hear that we praise such domestic and
civil works, for they consider such works to be small and unsightly. But
fasting on certain days, wearing special clothes, not eating meat,
making long pilgrimages, etc., such works they praise with a full mouth
and promise heaven and blessedness in return.

106\. although they are not worthy that we should listen to their loose
talk and foolishness.

**[1162 L. IV, 201-SOS. Interpretation of Genesis 18, 9. W. 1,
1748-I7SI. 1163]{.underline}**

work, it is for us to rightly understand and appreciate such civic and
domestic works. To be hospitable is a domestic and outward or common
work, but in truth it may be preferred to all the works of the
Carthusians or hermits, yea, even to the fasting and austere life of
John the Baptist, which after all he undertook according to divine
providence and order.

107\. Such a domestic work is also this discipline and sedateness of
Sarah. But which virgin or widow could be compared to her in this case?
However, those holy people are disgusted with the conjugal life and the
presence of husband and wife, so that they not only consider it a
dishonest life, but also pretend that it prevents holy works and
practices. For this reason the pope imposed and commanded his own to
live a conjugal life. Such a conjugal life is all too common in the
world, therefore it has nothing apparent about it, and is especially
despised by those who want to be the most holy.

For this they should have looked at the one who ordered the worldly and
domestic regiment, and if the pope did this with his group, he would
know how to keep and speak more honestly about the works of both
regiments. \"God created them,\" says the Scripture Genesis 1:27, \"male
and female\"; item v. 28: \"He blessed them.\" Do you then consider this
a small thing?

But if you want to explain why God instituted the marriage state in the
first place, namely, that through it God has prepared a church, and
through it the terrible plague of the flesh is healed, and the way of
sin is blocked so that it cannot deceive us, then you will truly have to
confess that for this benefit the marriage state is to be highly
praised.

\(110\) Therefore let us consider such civil and domestic works to be
the most glorious and godly works, which the papists despise as vain and
lowly. For that I speak of hospitality alone, what work is there among
all the papist services that can be compared to it? So it seems a small

To be a work, when one gives a drink of water to a thirsty man: but hear
thou Christ, how gloriously he extols such work, and what rewards he
promises for it.

\(111\) We can also say this about other works in the household, when
pious parents raise their children rightly and keep them in the fear of
God; when they keep serious discipline over their servants and drive
them to obedience. True, these are common works, without any appearance
of holiness, but they must be judged from God\'s word and not from
reason. Abraham could well have fasted on special days, as he
undoubtedly did, but Moses writes nothing about this, for he described
the righteous works and virtues, not such works as the gospelers can and
are accustomed to do.

But the unholy papists are not worthy to be answered more broadly. Let
us thank God that we, who have been instructed in the Word, can
understand what good works are, namely, to be obedient to our parents
and overlords and to honor them, to govern the servants in the house, to
show friendship, service and goodwill according to each one\'s need 2c.
For we see that Moses, the prophets, Christ himself, and the apostles
held such works in such high esteem that they were not ashamed to teach
and preach about them often.

For they have seen the error of reason itself, and have become so
confused in it that it cannot come to the knowledge of right worship,
since human works or statutes do nothing but lead people away from right
Christian works and practices by their appearance.

For just look at a monk; he evades the obedience of all authorities,
even of his parents, does not raise children, does not work, does no
good to anyone; but toward his own he is full of hatred and envy, fills
himself with the sweat of the poor, and yet is proud and puffed up under
this very name that he has vowed to be poor.

115\. but the pious and God-fearing

**[1164. L.IV,M3-M. Interpretation of Genesis 18:9, 10. W. 1, 1751-1754.
1165]{.underline}**

Abraham, the father of the house, is quite poor. For he follows God, who
directs him into misery, has nowhere to stay, and even though God has
blessed him, he must still be provided for every hour among the
unbelieving heathen among whom he is, that they invade him and do
violence to him and take everything he has. Thus his wife Sarah
willingly follows him into misery, provides for her house and servants,
keeps herself in service to the neighbors, is obedient to her husband
2c.

These are the highest virtues, the like of which are not found in all
the statutes of men. Therefore, let them be highly esteemed and
preferred as God\'s ordinances to all the ordinances and commandments of
men, no matter how seemly and respectable they may be. For they corrupt
the faith and order of God and mix water with wine, as unfaithful and
stingy landlords do.

117\] Therefore let us remember this example, that Moses praises Sarah,
how she waits with care in the house of her office. For if a housemother
wants to serve and please God, she must not, as the women did under the
papacy, run into the churches now and then, fast, pray rosaries, etc.,
but wait on her house and servants, raise and instruct her children, do
her kitchen work, and whatever else needs to be done in the house; and
if she does this in the faith of the Son of God, and hopes to please God
for Christ\'s sake, she is holy and blessed.

118, \"What God has joined together,\" says Christ Matth. 19, 6, \"let
not man put asunder. Therefore, divorce or illegitimate life, as it was
in Pabst, is not from God. On the other hand, the works required by such
divine union are quite holy and good works, however small and mean they
may seem to be and are held to be.

For where there is a right obedience to God in faith, everything that
the profession requires is a holy and pleasing service to God.

120 But if any man love widowhood or virginity more, and be able to
abstain from matrimony without sin, let him do so.

but in such a way that he does not therefore despise or condemn worldly
or domestic estates. For they are estates that God has ordered and
appointed.

Therefore let monks and nuns boast of their works as long as they wish.
But let this work be enough for a husband, if he presides rightly over
his household: let it be enough for a wife, if she cares for and
maintains her children, feeds them, washes and cleans them, puts them to
rest, is obedient to her husband and keeps her house diligently. Such
works are far above all nuns\' works, of which they boast magnificently
and proudly.

For in the statutes of men there is commonly this devilish and
pernicious pestilence, that the hearts become secure thereby, and decay
as if they were holy. But a pious and Christian housemother does not
practice hopefulness, for she is afflicted and humiliated in many ways,
because she has to experience innumerable displeasures: from the
servants, from the husband, from the children, from the neighbors 2c.
Therefore, she has reason to practice her faith and pray everywhere. But
that is enough of Sarah\'s example. Let us see what follows in the text.

V. 10 **Then said he, I will come again unto** thee, **if I live;
behold, Sarah thy wife shall have a son.**

This is the main point of this sermon or most friendly and sweetest
guest talk. Now, without a doubt, God will not have explained Himself in
so few words. For Moses only recently shows the summa of it, does not
tell the whole conversation and trade; as the evangelists also do. For
what Christ says in the last supper Joh. 16, 5. 7.: \"I go to the
Father\", and: \"I will send you the Comforter\", he will undoubtedly
have interpreted and explained with rich and many words and a long
sermon.

124 So Abraham\'s guests first thanked him for feeding them so well, and
then promised that they would return and that Sarah would have a son.
What has

**[1166 L. IV, 205-207. interpretation of I Moses 18, 10. W. I,
1754-1757. 1167]{.underline}**

here greater, happier and more pleasant things can happen to these
spouses?

The words, kaeth chajah, after the time of life, which we have
translated, \"If I live,\" have misled almost all interpreters. The
Hebrews understand them as if Abraham and Sarah were promised a certain
life, and if this is the opinion: When I come again, you shall both
still live. But if this is the opinion, then these words are nothing but
an unnecessary repetition. For when God says to Adam and Eve, \"Grow and
multiply,\" he also indicates that they should live. Thus, since it is
said here, \"Sarah shall have a son,\" she is also promised life at the
same time. - So Abraham cannot beget children when he is dead; because
he is therefore promised to beget a son, it follows irrefutably that he
is promised to live so long.

The others pretend that such words should not be applied to Abraham and
Sarah, but to the promised Son, as if this were the opinion: I will come
again after the time of life, that is, after such a time as a child must
have if it is to live on earth. And is this mind better and more
convenient, if one unwinds it and explains it. For the mind is this: I
declare unto thee that a son shall be born of Sarah, that he shall be a
natural son, and that he shall bear her as a fruit is born of a young
woman; lest any man think that he shall be born of Sarah\'s flesh and
blood alone, without the help of a man, in a natural way. She will
conceive, he says, from the man and bear the fruit in the womb naturally
and ordinarily, so that he will be a true son.

Adam was created from the earth, but therefore he cannot be called a son
of the earth, because being created from the earth and being born from
the earth are two different things. So also Eve was created from the rib
of the man, and yet one may not call her a daughter of the rib. And if
God made a man out of wood, therefore the wood could not be called the
father of the same man.

So also if God had miraculously created a son from the old Sarah, he
would not have been a son after the time of life. Therefore, that he
says: I will come again after the time of life, is just as much as if he
said, according to the natural way, by which a child in the womb is used
to be born and live, Isaac will also be born and live.

The physicians say that the fruit begins to live and move in the fifth
month after it has been conceived, but in the other five months it
becomes perfect and is made to be born. The same will happen, says the
Lord, with Isaac\'s birth. And thus he excludes the strange and
miraculous birth that Sarah, already dead, might have thought of.

And so, that the common course of nature might remain, the Virgin Mary
bore the Lord Christ until the tenth month. All this time he had his
nourishment like other fruits received from the drop of blood of the
Mother, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.

131 Therefore these words about time can be understood in such a way
that no one should look with his mind to a miraculous birth, but
everyone should believe that Isaac is a true son of Sarah, and that he
was also born from Abraham and Sarah in a natural and orderly way, as
people are born. Therefore the epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 11, 11, says
that Sarah received the power to conceive by faith, that is, that she
conceived from Abraham according to the common course of nature, not by
a miracle like the Virgin Mary, who also conceived in the womb, but from
her own seed, after the Holy Spirit had enveloped her, and not from a
man\'s seed.

In our German translation, we have not applied these words to the life
of the child or the parents, but to the person of the angel who speaks
to Abraham. For since the angels are subject to such human works and
actions and carry them out, they also take on the body of a human being,
they also speak, walk, sit, eat and drink, just as the angels do.

**[1168 L. IV, \"7-20S. Interpretation of Genesis 18:10-12. W. 1.
17S7-17K1. 1169]{.underline}**

So that these words, \"after the time of life,\" are as much as, \"if I
live. For this is the way we use to speak of future things, that we
attach this condition to it: If God will grant me my life, if it is
God\'s will 2c.

So this example is part of learning how to speak of God in all fear and
honor. Now everyone is free to follow which opinion he wants. To me, the
middle opinion of the natural way of giving birth seems to be the most
comfortable. But to speak in such and such a way hinders us very much,
that after the Hebrew language is no longer common, its way of speaking
becomes unknown and strange to us. Therefore, if we do not meet
everything in this, a fair and kind-hearted reader will not blame us.

**Third part.**

**Of Sarah and her behavior during this conversation.**

**V. 10-12 Sarah heard this behind him, behind the door of the
tabernacle. And both Abraham and Sarah were old and well advanced in
years, so that Sarah was no longer in the way of women. Therefore she
laughed within herself, and said, Now that I am old, I shall yet cherish
lust, and my lord also is old.**

It can be seen that the table was arranged in such a way that the guests
had their backs turned toward the hut. It was not closed with doors like
ours, but was open, so that Sarah, who was standing at the door waiting
to hear if her husband wanted to give an order, could easily hear what
was being said. But now the text says that she laughed at this promise
and prophecy that she should bear a son. For that it should come to her
still, she could not believe, therefore she was ashamed; and for this
reason follows: \"They were both old and well advanced in years,\" that
is, they had now almost lived out their days, and it was, as we are wont
to say, come to an end with them, they walked all their days on the

pit; therefore, she did not believe it, but laughed.

She was no longer doing things the way women do. The young fellows do
not understand such things. But one should learn that God has given seed
to men and women for fertility, one more, the other less; one stronger,
the other weaker. For there is no other way to be fruitful and bear
children, except by mixing the seed of the man and the woman. For a
woman has her seed and a man also his. And experience shows that women
who do not have their time are barren. Therefore, as long as Sarah was
according to her time and the common ways of women, she was able to
conceive.

136\. But when these things had ceased from her, she said, \"The Lord
hath shut me up, that I should not be able to bear,\" and told Abraham
to lie down with Hagar, that the promise might not be hindered: and by
such thoughts her faith is hindered, that she cannot believe that she
should yet be fruitful and bear. But such sin is not imputed to her, but
forgiven for the sake of these noble and grateful guests. Since
Zacharias did not want to believe the angel, he was punished to be mute
for a while, but nothing like this happened to Sarah, because the Lord
took her weakness into account and forgave her.

Although the very fact that Sarah laughs at herself is a sign of special
discipline and chastity. Nowadays one often finds old and shapeless hags
who are hornier and more forward than the young. Sarah was not such a
woman, but as long as she had hope that she might bear fruit, she kept
her husband and waited for the Lord\'s blessing; but when her old age
took away such hope and spoiled it, she abstained from her husband and
provided herself with an heir from the maidservant. Such chastity is no
small virtue, but those who praise virginity and live illegitimately
burn and are defiled day and night.

138\. but the Sarah chastity has no

**[1170 L. IV, 2M. 210. \' Interpretation of I Moses 18, 10-12. W. 1,
1761-1768. 1171]{.underline}**

She is hidden under a small cover, because she is a wife; which is a
hindrance to all those who live illegitimately, because they cannot see
such a glorious chastity, nor believe that it is true, that she says:
\"Shall I still cultivate pleasure? Now these are also words of an
exceedingly chaste and shameful heart.

\(139\) The Jews speak and speak gloriously of circumcision, but such
examples should be praised and held up to all housemothers, since they
are recorded and described by the Holy Spirit, not without special
counsel.

\(140\) That Sarah also says of her husband so sensibly and with
reverence that he is old, and calls him a gentleman, not a man or
husband, is also not to be respected as if it were written in vain; for
with such words she also praises her husband\'s chastity, and shows how
valuable and honest she holds him.

141 And this text is especially praised by St. Peter in his 1st Epistle
Cap. 3, 6, where he exhorts the housemothers to godliness, discipline
and respectability. For Sarah is a particularly good mirror and example,
not of one or two, but of all praiseworthy and Christian virtues; and
here the Holy Spirit writes of her that she takes care of her house with
diligence, does not run up one alley and down another, and learn new
rumors from her neighbors, cares diligently for her servants, and lives
chastely with her husband, whom she does not consider to be her husband
alone, but honors him and waits for him as for a master.

Now if every housemother behaved in this way, what could a pious and
reasonable man find fault with her? But, alas, few of them care for such
things, nor do they strive to be like Sarah; but are commonly proud,
splendid, quarrelsome, mordant, disobedient, rebellious, pompous, and
pretend to be wise. Therefore they do not want to be taken for women,
but for masters. But how far is this from Sarah\'s example, which Peter
approvingly praises, and from this text?

and understands it better than all nabbins, who pass by such words with
contempt, as if they were unnecessary and useless words.

But St. Peter wants them to be an example and mirror in which all holy
and chosen women should be reflected, hoping in God and pleasing their
husbands with obedience and submission, as Sarah did. And Peter does not
speak of monstrous and ugly works, as the nuns do, who dress themselves
in a special way and avoid the common unpleasantness, misery and
miseries of this life 2c., but says v. 5. 6: \"You women, be subject and
honor your husbands, as Sarah did, who called her husband Lord with the
highest reverence.\" So a housemother could not be praised more highly
if she has the praise of placing her hope in God and honoring her
husband: and no one can sufficiently adorn nor praise such high virtues
and gifts with words.

But why does St. Peter talk about the hope in the Lord among other
virtues of women, which Moses does not mention here? In fact, this
virtue had shone in Sarah throughout her life like a beautiful and
bright star. For consider what Abraham\'s profession was. God called him
to go from his fatherland to the land of Canaan, and he had no place to
stay, but wandered about like a beggar, hiding here for a year and there
for another year among the heathen and his own. What does the pious,
chaste Sarah do in such arduous misery? She not only willingly follows
her husband wherever he goes, but also honors him like a lord. Among
ourselves, one might well find women who would soon tire of such
unwillingness and danger, become unwilling and impatient, and force
their husbands to seek a certain dwelling and permanent place, or would
run away from them. But Sarah holds fast to the hope in God, follows His
word, and although this is a hard stand that she must endure over such a
long and long journey, she nevertheless endures, and with hope in God\'s
help overcomes everything that is hard and burdensome to her about it.

**[1172 L. IV, 210-212. interpretation of I Moses 18, 10-14. W. I,
1763-1766. 117Z]{.underline}**

That is why she is presented as an example to all housemothers. For here
you see and hear from her nothing frivolous, nor unreasonable or
impertinent, but everything is serious and important. Everything is fair
and praiseworthy, everything is directed according to the rule of the
Word of God.

But all these things should be diligently and carefully remembered for
the sake of foolish and foolish teachers, who not only teach works and
services of their own choosing, but also prefer them to the works that
God has commanded. For you have never heard a papist praise such and
such histories, or think them special and excellent. They have all said
that nothing is written in this first book of Moses, except how among
the Jews the men slept with their wives. But are these not coarse sow\'s
eyes, which blindly pass by such great and glorious virtues, and stick
only to what is said about sexual intercourse and fornication?

\(147\) What do such people indicate by this, other than what their
hearts are like? They have too many good days, too much food and too
much drink, so they must be mad with fornication, and yet they never
stop praising the wicked and nasty life of the priests; but such virtue,
which the Holy Spirit himself has prescribed for us, they despise or
even blaspheme. Just as the married state has been infamous, scolded and
desecrated in many ways under the papacy.

Therefore, such domestic virtues should be diligently preached to the
young people. If anyone has this gift, that he may abstain and live
chastely without the marriage state, he may well use such a gift and
abstain from womanhood; but let him beware of it, as of the most harmful
poison, lest, for the sake of such grace as he can abstain from, he
prefer himself to those who are in the marriage state, or despise or
condemn them. For the married state is ordered by God, and the lives of
spouses, if they are and remain in the faith, are favored over those who
work miracles and have a great reputation and clamor because of them.

The scripture always drives this through and through; because according
to the faith you hear nothing more from Abraham than that he sits in his
hut, waits for foreign guests and receives them; but after that he
arranges his house business. Thus Sarah cooks, makes butter and cheese,
feeds the cattle from 2c. I must confess that these are servants and
maidservants, but they are presented to us by the Holy Spirit as an
example.

\(150\) If then the papists despise such works, and choose other costly,
heavy, high, and peculiar exercises, let them remain mad and furious as
they are, and consider such domestic works to be filth; but let us
nevertheless consider that such childish domestic works, if faith be
with them, are to be esteemed more precious than all gold, and far
higher and more excellent than all dishonorable life without faith.

Truly, the Holy Spirit describes the holy woman, Sarah, with such colors
that it is clear that, although she is capable of conjugal life, she
surpasses virgins in chastity. Therefore it is a great sin that the
papists are so hostile to the conjugal life of the holy patriarchs and
blaspheme it, since it is a mirror and practice not only of chastity but
of all other beautiful and glorious virtues. All this should be
diligently noted, so that one may refute the opinion of the enthusiasts.

**Then said the Lord unto Abraham, Why laughest thou at Sarah, saying,
Thinkest thou that it is true that I shall yet be with child, when I am
old? Should anything be impossible for the Lord? At this time I will
come again to thee, and if I live, Sarah shall have a son.**

The Holy Spirit introduces all these things so that the faith of this
holy and chaste matron may be strengthened. For she does not yet
believe, nor can she have the hope, hindered by carnal thoughts, that
she should still conceive and bear a son from her old master, but thinks
that she will be content with this, so that she may be a mother of the
child from the

**[1174 L. IV, 212-214. Interpretation of Genesis 18:13, 14, W. I,
1766-1769. 1175]{.underline}**

Handmaid; but in the hope that she should conceive and bear fruit, she
died altogether.

Therefore, it is necessary that she hears the word, so that she is
awakened to the hope that she will be fruitful and, as it were, made
alive again. For the word is actually a voice that awakens from death.
But this is Sarah\'s death, that she thinks of herself as a dead person.
This thought is changed by the word, and the dead body, as one awakened
from death, begins to live again. All this happens so that faith is
awakened in Sarah.

Now I have often said above that in Sarah there is a very great example
of special patience, that she was able to endure such a long misery and
to follow her husband with the highest will; item, that she was barren
and could suffer that her husband slept with the maid. Because she
therefore consoles herself with hope in such heavy trials, she hears an
incredible word here, by which a new light goes into her heart and is
kindled, and her same weakness, that she does not believe immediately,
is held too good for her heavy cross, which she had overcome in hope and
patience.

She was now in her eighty-ninth year, and had waited so many years for
the Lord\'s blessing; but seeing that all her hope was in vain, she
surrendered all her things to God, and yet did not despair. Hence it
comes that the Lord is patient with her weakness, and her laughter,
which she does out of the thought of impossibility, is not moved to
anger. For what could she hope for as a barren, outdated woman?
Therefore, the Lord brings her back to faith through a very kind and
sweet punishment.

I said above that not only Sarah, but also Abraham himself considered
these guests of theirs to be strange wanderers, and did not think of
angels or prophets. Since they therefore speak of a son, Sarah thinks:
Who should have told them just that? they do not speak it of a son.

Heart\", but\" after favor, dienteil they mean that the women of
\"such\" things gladly hear talk. Sarah undoubtedly had such thoughts in
her laughter. But when she hears him speak who sees all things and has
them before him, new thoughts arise in her heart, so that she no longer
thinks of these three men as simple men, but as men who are full of the
Holy Spirit, who sees and reveals the hidden things of the heart.

Therefore, this is a serious, yet joyful, kind and sweet punishment,
from which Sarah has noticed and learned that her guests are men of God
and prophets, because they see her laughter and thoughts and know that
she is not with them. Also, after they preach to her so earnestly of
God\'s power that with Him no thing is impossible, Luc. 1, 37, she can
no longer despise the prophecy that she shall bear a son. For here her
thoughts are taken captive and closed, since she hears that such a
thing, which is marvelous and even impossible before the world, is very
easy for God, even an ordinary, everyday work, if one looks at other
such works of God, and not marvelous or impossible.

I am very fond of such powerful proofs, which, as it were, at one stroke
destroy all that can be raised against them, and not of the boring
rhetorical proofs, which include many words and colors, which, as we
see, the unlearned papists make use of. When they speak of the sacrament
of the altar, they say that the Church has the power to regulate such
things, namely, that the laity should take only the one form. Such are
dilapidated, weak and loose proofs; as Paul says in 1 Tim. 6:3, 4 of him
who does not abide in the saving words of our Lord Jesus Christ and in
the doctrine of godliness, that he is addicted to questions and wars of
words.

But such reasons and proofs, so that one shuts the mouth of the opponent
at once, and if he wants to raise something, immediately grabs him in
the throat, hold the sting, teach and build. As if I say to a papist:
What do you washer me much of the danger that stands on it, if

**[1176 k. IV, 2I4-2IV. Interpretation of Genesis 18, 13. 14. W. I.
I7SS-I772. 1177]{.underline}**

one gives the chalice to a layman? See the text on the Lord\'s Supper,
and hear Christ who instituted it 2c. This single cause and proof breaks
down like a wall breaker all that the papists can argue and put forward
about this matter.

Therefore it is not enough to be eloquent, but one must also be a
dialectician, and know what well-founded, strong, certain, and true
sayings and proofs are, and not only what seems to resemble truth. And
if then there is the reason of a firm and certain proof, then one does
well after that, that one also brings the rhetoric to it, what is easy
or difficult, useful or unuseful, laudable or unlaudable 2c.

The disputations of the papists all revolve around the questions of what
is proper, useful and necessary; from this they build up not only
dangerous but also blasphemous propositions about the power of the
church, that it is above the Word 2c. But if you hold this reason
against it: Christ is the head of the church; then what the papists have
built up with great effort and labor will soon fall in a heap.

162 In other external or worldly dealings, too, one should look for
certain reasons and proofs. It writes Gellius lib. I, v. 6, that since
Censorius wants to persuade the young journeymen to marry, he does not
press for the common and known ways, so that one can be persuaded, but
looks much further and says: \"If we could live without wives, we would
certainly be relieved of great toil and unpleasantness. There he
confesses that the married state is full of unpleasantness, toil and
work and various and innumerable dangers and hardships. But he puts all
this out of sight and thought, and cuts it off for this reason, that he
says one cannot do without women in this life.

Other causes are all weak and ineffectual, and this one alone is strong
and certain, which the listener gladly and willingly accepts, that we
cannot do without the marriage state. For how would the regiments,
countries and people exist if there were no marriage state? For for the
protection of women and children one needs

Human beings; they are not born of wood or stones, but of women 2c.

164 But we should especially use such firm and certain reasons in
theological matters. If your heart is challenged by unbelief, and you
doubt whether you can be saved, for you know yourself to be a sinner,
then a devout Christian brother who wants to comfort you properly must
not give you pontifical and loose reasons that you should satisfy your
conscience with this or that work; but he must hold up God\'s word to
you and say: God is true, he promises to be merciful to you for the sake
of his Son. But God\'s Son has absolved you from all sins by His word,
has baptized you, has promised you eternal life, if you believe, that
is, if you consider it certain and conclude that His death is your
salvation. Therefore, either God will be true in His word, or you must
be a liar who still doubts the forgiveness of your sin after it has been
assured to you by the Son of God. With such a proof the doubting is
helped and resisted.

We must be especially careful in this matter because of our adversary,
Satan. For he is a cunning disputer and the best speaker. He can blow
your sin out of proportion and make God\'s wrath serious and heavy
beyond all measure: in addition, he brings countless examples of God\'s
wrath, even of those who first believed rightly and finally fell. If you
do not therefore meet him with this true reason, that God\'s Son died
for sinners, and that those who believe in him will live eternally like
himself, then all the other things that can be said or thought of are
rhetorical, weak and feeble proofs. But this is the right reason: \"God
is true, but all men are liars\", Rom. 3, 4.

Therefore, call upon God, take hold of His word, hold on to the only
sacrifice, the Lord Christ, who was sufficient for your sin and took
your death upon Himself and overcame it, and do not let this make you
think that you are a sinner;

**[1478 L. IV, 216-218. interpretation of I Moses 18, 13-15. w. I,
1772-1774. 4479]{.underline}**

But behold the commandment of God, which wills that thou receive his
Son, and calleth thee to believe. Then think and see, and do not ask how
others have fared or will fare: look to yourself, that you will do
enough for God\'s command. 2c. Such comfort restores and strengthens a
sorrowful and sad heart; but the pope\'s trifling and foolish work of
almsgiving, of reading masses, and of invoking the saints, is vain
sophistry and loose reasons, so that one who relies on them may be
deceived.

At one time I heard a jurist by the name of Doctor Henning arguing and
arguing with an eloquent and sharp opponent about a great deal. Since
the adversary had brought a great heap of laws against him, and had
guarded his cause in the best way he could, Doctor Henning answered him
modestly and kindly: He might bring whole books full of laws; but if he
could fly over all mountains and found all waters, he would still have
to agree with him, if he wanted to right and fence with him about this
deal: and besides, he recently showed him what was important in this
whole deal. With these short words, he shut the mouth of the same
eloquent man, his adversary, and with it, as it were, knocked him to the
ground.

Now that I compare the great with the small and the spiritual with the
worldly, Sarah is also hurried and caught here with such a powerful
proof that she does not know where to go out or in. She thinks:
\"Behold, you are a barren old woman, and it is impossible for you to
bear children at such an age.\" But such thoughts are not so deep and
firm, they are wrested from her with these serious words: \"What should
be impossible for the Lord? Should not He, who created man from an
earthen lump, be able to raise and create a fruit also from natural seed
of your husband and wife? Therefore, these words all fall so that
Sarah\'s faith may be started, and she may hear, see and know that such
her guests are not mere human beings, but

men of God and prophets, in whom the Spirit of God dwells: which Sarah
had not known until now.

Finally, the angel repeats the words about the time of life, which are
explained above. This is not an unnecessary repetition of the words
spoken before, as the inexperienced might think, but belongs to the
confirmation of the promise and faith of the listeners: and is as much
as if one hears two of them testifying about one thing.

V. 15. **Then Sarah denied, saying: I laughed not; for she was afraid.
And he said, It is not so; thou hast laughed.**

Because Sarah recognizes the prophet of God by the fact that he knew and
had noticed the hidden things in her heart, she no longer laughs but is
frightened and commits a small sin by saying that she did not laugh when
she had laughed. But such a sin is easily forgiven her, because she
fears God, obeys the prophets and is subject to her husband. For out of
fear of her Lord she is frightened and denies that she laughed, not out
of contempt or hopefulness, and is now seriously sorry that she had
accepted the prophet\'s speech with laughter. She is sorry and afraid,
and in this fear she commits another sin and denies it. She is seriously
contradicted, but with short words: \"It is not so, you have laughed\",
as if he wanted to say: You commit two sins, before you laughed, now you
lie about it.

I have often spoken of household and civic works. For the young people
are to be diligently taught to respect such works as are commanded by
God, and to distinguish and set them apart most wisely from works of
their own choosing or from the statutes of men. For if this does not
happen, and in the most diligent manner, the difference between good and
evil will not only be abolished, but we will also be caught as the most
holy, which is the most harmful and a true abomination in the sight of
God.

172\. Ahaz sacrifices his son to the idol and thinks that he wants to be
like Abraham with

[**1180 k. IV, 218-220.** interpretation of **Genesis** 18:15, **16. w.
i, 1774-1779. 1181**]{.underline}

For since he does not look to God\'s word and commandment, which alone
is the righteous and eternal test and rule of works, he takes death for
life and a harmful and deadly poison for a beneficial medicine.

Therefore, put away appearances from your heart and eyes, and see what
God has commanded you; do the same, and you will not err, even though
your work appears to be a small and mean work. Antonius escapes and sits
down in the desert, Jerome makes pilgrimages to holy lands, and strongly
exhorts that chastity should be cultivated and kept. The world considers
such things to be great and excellent. But Sarah\'s standing by the
hearth, cooking and preparing food for the guests, and being careful,
not only has no appearance or prestige of some good work, but is seen as
a hindrance to other good works. But whoever looks at the word will find
that Sarah has done many a holy work with it, as the works of all monks
and hermits are.

174 And this life will be very much divided into these three states,
namely, into the domestic regiment, the police or secular state, and the
church office. If you are now in whatever state you wish, a husband, a
magistrate, or a church teacher, look around you to see whether you have
done enough for your profession and are not to be punished for
diligence, sullenness, or impatience. If then thou hast waited for thy
office, so that thou mayest not say, Lord, forgive us our trespasses,
then hide thyself in the wilderness, and there labor and toil with
seeming and grievous works.

For in this the whole papacy errs most of all, that it regards the
common works of this life, which God commands us in the Ten
Commandments, as such easy works, which one can fulfill and do
completely. Therefore, they abandon the Ten Commandments, want to climb
higher and think up advice about special works, praise the hermits and
monks 2c.; but Abraham, who sits at the door and waits for guests, they
do not esteem worthy of being called by one word

or to follow his example.

The papists also consider it a small and bad thing that one is baptized
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and think that one
should aim at something more perfect and closer to heaven. That is why
they hide themselves in the monasteries, read Masses 2c. But how does
this agree with God\'s word? Was not Anthony the hermit sent to
Alexandria to a tanner, that he might learn of that which he would have
for a place in heaven? If such is a lie or a poem, I am also satisfied
with it, only that the papists confess that it was invented, preached
and believed in their church. But be that as it may, it is certain that
this baptized Tanner\'s work, which he did in faith, was as pleasing to
God as St. Anthony\'s strict life, fasting and praying.

I have deemed it necessary for the conclusion of this history that the
young people learn to beware of works of their own choosing, and to
apply themselves to them with the utmost diligence, which every
person\'s profession entails and requires. For the same works God has
commanded, and therefore they are true divine works: be a disciple and
learn good arts, or a maid and sweep the house, or a servant and wait on
the horses, or do something else that your profession requires. A monk
may lead an austere life, and therefore go about in bad and ugly
clothes; but that he serves God by it, he will never be able to say with
truth for the rest of his life: as those may well boast of it who serve
the household regiment, the police or the church.

**Fourth Part.**

**How the men turned to Sodom; how the destruction of Sodom and its
causes were made known to Abraham, and how Abraham prayed for Sodom.**

**I.**

V. 16 **Then the men arose from thence, and turned against Sodom: and
Abraham went with them to lead them.**

**[1182 I-:. IV. 220-222. interpretation of I Genesis 18, 16-18. W.. I.
I77S-I78S. 1183]{.underline}**

So we have now heard a very sweet story of how angels were sent to
Abraham, and it was actually and certainly promised to him anew that he
should still have a son from his Sarah; and how kindly Abraham accepted
her and cared for her well, and Sarah was also made to believe that she
herself believed that she would still become a mother and have a son.
And now that such unspeakable love and kindness of God towards Abraham
has been described, there now follows a richer and greater example and
sign of God\'s kindness; from which we are to learn how such a pleasing
service and sacrifice is done to God when one hears His word, accepts it
and holds it in honor. For to such people, as we see here in this text,
God draws near, not as a judge and lord, but as a friend and dear guest.
But how God shows Himself against those who despise His word is also
shown by this sad and frightening history that now follows.

179 And Moses called these three men angels. For Sarah and Abraham
thought that they were prophets of God who had been driven into misery
because of the word. And that Abraham might show reverence to the word,
he not only feeds and drinks such guests well, but having fed them well
out of love for the word and fear of God, he gives them an escort and
brings them on their way to Sodom.

180\. But we are also commanded by way of example to honor the prophets
of God or servants of the Word and to show them all kinds of service and
willingness. But how this is done by the betting and what punishments
follow such ingratitude, we have become well aware in these miserable
times, and the end is not yet here.

**Then the Lord said, \"How can I hide from Abraham what I am doing,
since he will become a great and powerful nation, and all the nations of
the earth will be blessed in him?**

181 This and the previous text must be held against each other. Shortly
before Moses said that these three men arose

Here he says that the Lord (Jehovah) has spoken. He calls them three men
according to Abraham\'s understanding, because he considered them to be
men, but holy men and men of God; but that they should be angels, he did
not think of. But of God he says that he has spoken in a common way, as
the Scriptures speak of it. For the same angels sent by God did not
bring their words to Abraham, but the word of God.

But that the Jews of ours laugh mockingly, that they want to prove the
article of the Trinity from this text, of this I have said above. For we
are not so foolish or unlearned that we say that these three men are God
the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit in their essence. Just
as we do not say that the humanity of Christ is essentially God.
Therefore we want to leave it at that, that in these three men the
Godhead is meant, which Abraham recognized and believed. For here he was
enlightened by the Holy Spirit and full of faith, and saw the day of
Christ, John 8:56. Just as Abraham believed in the Trinity, it was
outwardly presented and shown to him in the form of three men. These
three men are not the three persons of the Godhead, but signs or
appearances of the Godhead in the Trinity. Although Abraham is still in
these thoughts, as if they were holy people who wander around in misery
for the sake of confessing the right religion.

And even though he does not know that they are angels, he believes that
he hears God in these three men, one of whom spoke according to the
opinion of the other, who is in his essence like God, but threefold in
persons. This is my opinion of this text. If anyone wants to argue about
it in a more subtle and subtle way, let him do so, but see to it that he
does not start and go astray. For of such things one should speak
modestly.

First, I follow the common way of Scripture, which says that God speaks
when angels or holy men speak from God\'s command or revelation.
According to this, I do not despise, nor do I want anyone to despise

**[1184 IV. 222-224. interpretation of I Genesis 18, 17-19. W. I.
I782-17W. 1185]{.underline}**

The testimony of the epistle to the Hebrews. It clearly says in Cap. 13,
2, that some have taken angels for lodging and did not know it. And
nothing prevents Abraham from showing them divine honor, for he
recognizes God in them, hears and accepts their words as if God himself
spoke them. For he follows the common rule that one should not see who
speaks, but what is spoken. If it is God\'s word, how could God not be
present Himself? Just as he is present in baptism, in the sacrament, in
the use of the keys, so his word is present. Therefore, even though we
do not see or hear Him, but see and hear the minister, God Himself is
certainly present, baptizing and absolving. And he is especially present
in the sacrament, in that the Son of God himself gives us his body to
eat with the bread and his blood to drink with the wine.

**II.**

And in these first words, which the Lord lets precede as a preface:
\"How can I hide from Abraham what I am doing?\" is a very sweet sign of
a special goodwill and grace, which was also necessary for Abraham to be
comforted and strengthened by it; otherwise the following message of the
angels about the wrath of God against Sodom would have grieved him to
death. Therefore also the repetition of the promise of the seed and the
blessing over all nations on earth belongs. For if Abraham had not heard
such a promise at first, he would have abandoned all hope of his own and
his descendants\' blessedness in such a horrible spectacle of divine
wrath. Therefore this is a sign of a very special love and grace, that
the Lord says he can do nothing to Abraham. And Moses, according to the
way of speaking in the Scriptures, said that God had spoken such things,
when the angel had spoken them. For this is also the way the prophets
speak in their sermons: \"This is what the LORD says.\" But here the
text reports another reason.

**V.19. For I know that he will command his children, and his household
after him, that they shall be of the**

**Keep the way of the LORD, and do that which is right and good; that
the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he promised him.**

In view of this text, it is reasonable to wonder that God would not have
let this terrible judgment on the five cities pass, if he had not first
revealed the whole matter to Abraham. Although one can find examples in
the pagan books of how some cities perished by fire, earthquake or other
causes, we can still see what the worldly people judged. For the same.
attribute almost all such cases to natural causes, as, the location of a
place, carelessness of the people 2c., and reason does not come higher.
But that here the five cities should be consumed with fire, such is
indicated to Abraham beforehand, so that one should understand that such
a special damage and accident is a punishment from God\'s wrath over the
sins of the people.

187 And such knowledge is so important that the Lord wants such an
example to be known among Abraham\'s descendants, and they should speak
of it forever, as a disgust and warning to others, so that they learn to
fear God and beware of such sins, which are followed by such terrible
sorrow and punishment. As God also willed that His examples of grace,
such as the salvation and help at the Red Sea, should be praised and
spoken of at all times. For such warnings and admonitions are necessary
for us in this life.

Pious and God-fearing people, who are oppressed by their cross and have
to experience various miseries and misery, need consolation and promise,
by which they can be lifted up. But those who are stubborn, stiff-necked
and secure should be frightened with examples of God\'s wrath, so that
they may learn to fear God, as is said here.

Now our hearts are naturally inclined not to like to be chastised. We
all accept the promises with joy and are not unwilling to accept them.
But the preaching of the law frightens people and makes them as it were
fierce and angry. For this is why the prophets are er-

**[1186 L. IV, 224-226. interpretation of I Moses 18, 19. w. I.
I7SS-I788. 1187]{.underline}**

They were not preaching the blessing promised to Abraham, but were
punishing ungodly customs and idolatry, keeping and exhorting the people
to discipline and the fear of God.

190\. just as the world is not hostile to us because we teach the gospel
and present the good deeds of the Lord Christ to the people in a pure
and unadulterated way, for everyone gladly accepts and praises these
things, unless he is obviously ungodly, but because of this all
displeasure and misfortune arises from the fact that we hold the
teachings of the adversaries against our own, and say that the pope is
the antichrist, and at the same time punish the teachings and shameful
lives of those who adhere to the pope. So also Christ says John 7:7:
\"The world hopes in me, for I bear witness of it that its works are
evil.\" But teachers and preachers should not turn to such anger and
displeasure of the world. For here we hear God\'s command that such
terrible judgments of God are to be inculcated in people, and especially
in those whose hearts are still weak and inclined to sin.

191\. \"Abraham,\" says God, \"will command these things to his
children,\" that is, such histories are to be praised and kept in the
Church of the saints throughout the ages. St. Paul recounts in 1 Cor. 10
the punishments that God inflicted on the people before they entered the
land of Canaan, and adds in v. 6 that such things happened to them as an
example, but to us they are written as a warning, as if to say: God
punished the sins of the same people in such a way; but the same example
concerns us, and should be a warning to us to beware of such sins. And
Rom. 15:4, \"But the things which were written aforetime are written for
our learning.\" Grace and forgiveness are to be preached, but only to
those whose hearts are troubled and whose consciences are troubled. But
to those who are secure and have completely abandoned the fear of God,
God\'s punishment and wrath should be held up to them, so that they may
let the examples of others be a warning to them and stop sinning. For
this is what Paul means when he says that everything is prescribed for
us to learn.

That is why they are harmful teachers,

who at this time, I do not know for what reasons, pretend and argue that
the law should not be preached in the church. As if you did not want to
teach the law there, where there is a right people of the law, namely,
miserly, hopeful people, adulterers, usurers, idolaters 2c. Do you still
want to strengthen and increase the security of raw and secure people
with the promises of the New Testament? God wants the place of election,
where Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed with fire from heaven, and the
pit of brimstone to stand as a memorial and sign of His wrath, and to be
preached and spoken of at all times, so that only some will be converted
and learn to fear God.

193 St. Paul gives us much better instruction when he teaches us in 2
Timothy 2:15 that we should rightly divide the word. For just as all
kinds of food do not agree with each body at the same time, so we must
have a different teaching to comfort and raise up weak, stupid, broken
and sorrowful hearts, and a different one if we are to convert and
restore stiff-necked, crude, secure and impenitent people. In the person
of the Son of God, the prophet Isaiah Cap. 61, V. 1. says: \"The Spirit
of the LORD is upon me. He has sent me to preach to the wretched, to
bind up the brokenhearted\" 2c.

But such a heart has not the pope and the bishops, who persecute the
word and seek how they may destroy and exterminate our church. Should we
preach the gospel to them and say that they have a gracious God through
Christ? Then they would become much more hardened and sin all the more
surely. Therefore, they should be crushed with the hammer of the law and
the thunder and lightning of Mount Sinai should be painted before their
eyes.

195\. to those who are in the throes of death or other trials and
tribulations, say, \"Be of good cheer and courage, and wait for the
Lord,\" Ps. 27:14. \"Though a thousand fall at your side, and ten
thousand at your right hand, yet it will not befall you; I am with him
in trouble,\" Ps. 91:7. 15. come unto me, all ye that labor.

**[1188 L. IV, 228-228. interpretation of Genesis 18, 19. w. I,
I788-I7S0. 1189]{.underline}**

blessed and burdened, I will give you rest\" 2c. This is a remedy for
grateful hearts, which are not as hard as stone, like the pope and his
sure and obdurate bishops, to whom belongs the hammer and terror of the
law. And says Ezekiel Cap. 34, 4. f. that the prophets sin, who frighten
the heart of the righteous with lies; for they are the smoldering wick,
Isa. 42, 3. which is to be blown out again, not even extinguished: as
they also sin on the other part, that they strengthen the hands of the
wicked, and do not rather accuse and condemn him.

At this time you will find many of them who are offended by the
preaching of the law, even though it is necessary, and flee from it,
because they say that their consciences are troubled when they hear such
preaching of the law. But are not these his Christians? With sinning
they do not stop, lying in hatred, anger and envy, in fornication,
avarice, eating and drinking 2c. When they hear that such sins are
punished, they are angry and do not want their consciences to be
troubled. Shall we then let every man do as he pleases, and still tell
him that he is blessed? By no means; for here you hear that Sodom and
Gomorrah\'s punishment is to be held against all descendants, and indeed
against the Church of God itself, that people may learn to fear God.

197 In the Antinomian doctrine it was written: If one were an adulterer,
he should only believe, then he would have a merciful God. But what kind
of church would this be, in which such terrible words were spoken and
preached? Therefore, a distinction should have been made and taught that
adulterers or sinners are of two kinds: the first, who recognize their
adultery or sin and are terrified of it with all their heart, and begin
to feel anxious remorse and sorrow for it, and not only let themselves
be sorry that they have sinned, but also desire and strive with all
their heart that they may not commit such sin again. Such people, who
are not secure in their sin but are terrified and terrified of God\'s
wrath, if they then adhere to the gospel and trust and rely on the grace
and mercy of God through Christ, will be blessed.

and have forgiveness of sins through faith in Christ.

The other adulterers or sinners, even though they cannot excuse their
sins, do not feel pain and sadness about it, but rather rejoice that
they have received what they desired, seek further causes and
opportunities to sin, and are certainly attached to them: because they
do not have the Holy Spirit, they cannot believe, and such a teacher who
preaches faith to them deceives and deceives them. For this disease must
have another remedy, namely, that you tell them with St. Paul Hebr. 13,
4: \"God will judge the adulterers\"; 1 Cor. 6, 9. 10: \"They will not
see God\'s kingdom\"; Rom. 8, 8: \"Without purity no one can please
God\"; therefore, these same unclean and defiled ones are under God\'s
wrath 2c.

It is necessary to have such a hammer, so that one can crush such hard
stone hearts. And so Abraham does not hang on to his sins, but has been
humbled in spirit long before; therefore the Lord comforts him. For he
is pleased with the smoldering wick; therefore he handles it carefully
and cherishes it, so that it may burn again.

But the Sodomites are hardened like stones and rocks, therefore to them
belongs brimstone, thunder and lightning from heaven. Those foolish and
lying prophets do not know this, who are allowed to pretend that no law
should be taught in the church, and in short, that no one should be
attacked so harshly, or that someone should weigh down his conscience.

201\. But if this is so, why does God want the Sodomite example to be
kept in His church and taught to Abraham? And since he adds, \"that they
fear God and do what is right and good,\" what do such teachers do in
the church, who want to preach only comforting promises, other than to
reject the doctrine of the fear of God altogether from the church?
Therefore, one should beware of such mad spirits, who disgracefully
confuse the whole Christian doctrine.

\(202\) And is not such teaching of the law only for the purpose of
making the people

**[1190 L IV, 2W-2M. Interpretation of Genesis 18:19-21. W. 1,
179Y-I793. 1191]{.underline}**

It also brings another benefit, of which the Lord says here that after
people are thus frightened by God\'s judgment, they also learn to do
what is right and good.

If you want to divide the whole Scripture, you will find these two
parts, promises and threats, or benefits and punishments; and these are
certainly hard hearts, as Bernard says, which can neither be softened by
benefits, nor converted and corrected by punishment. So God\'s works are
also twofold: First, they are works of mercy, as Paul tells Apost. 14,
17, that he gives rain and fruitfulness from heaven 2c.; the others are
works of his wrath, since he sends pestilence, war, and destruction 2c.,
so that he may scare and humble the hard-hearted and godless.

204 In the Lord Christ, salvation and eternal life are promised to all
who are baptized and believe; again, God\'s judgment and eternal death
are threatened to all who do not believe in Christ. If this is so, how
can or should the preaching of the law be expelled from the church? Is
it not true that at the same time the fear of God and the many works of
God are cast out? He does not do this so that they may remain hidden,
but so that we may see them and thereby be provoked to fear God. If we
had no pestilence, disease, fire or water to worry about, and if there
were no sudden death and other accidents and misfortunes in the world,
then I would keep silent about them and preach only about God\'s
kindness and good deeds.

Those who claim that the law should not be preached in the church are
people who do not know Christ and are blinded by their own hope and
naughtiness. Above Moses told many examples of God\'s grace and mercy,
such as (Cap. 12, 2. 3.) when he promised Abraham the blessed seed; when
he gave him such a glorious victory (Cap. 14, 14. ff.); when he came to
him as a guest and ate his bread. Moses tells these things and does
nothing else.

to this: but here is the command of preaching. \"He shall,\" saith he,
\"command his children,\" that is: I will that they shall preach of such
punishment to Sodom, saying. But why this? Because the church is never
entirely pure, but always evil in part; as the parable teaches of the
seed, Luc. 8, 5. ff., yes, the true saints themselves, who are justified
by faith in the Son of God, have a sinful flesh, which must be killed by
daily chastening; as Paul says 1 Cor. 11, 31. f.: \"If we judged
ourselves, we would not be chastened by the Lord.\" Therefore mark this
text well, for one can have enough from it alone if one wants to refute
the antinomian mad doctrine.

V.20. 21. **And the Lord said, There is a cry in Sodom and Gomorrah,
which is great, and their sins are almost grievous. Therefore will I go
down, and see whether they have done all according to the cry that is
come before me; or whether it be not so, that I may know.**

This is a terrible bargain. Fifteen years had not yet passed since the
people of Sodom and their neighbors had been defeated by the four kings
and led away in prison, and then, through Abraham\'s miraculous victory,
they were set free again and reinstated in their land, possessions and
goods: And God revealed Himself to them in two ways, namely, by this,
that He led them away captive, and thereby showed that He was hostile to
sin, and would certainly punish them; and then by the miraculous help
and salvation, so that He showed that He would forgive sin and help
where people repented and converted. But neither the punishment nor the
help and good deeds helped them. For those who had seen it with their
eyes had already forgotten it, and they had fallen back into terrible
and deep sins and had completely cast off the fear of God.

This is actually a wonderful thing, and it clearly illustrates the
hearts of all people who are so corrupted by nature through sin that
they cannot bring themselves to correction with threats,

**[1192 L IV, S3V-2S2. Interpretation of Genesis 18:20, 21. W. I.
17SS-1796. 1193]{.underline}**

nor be softened or moved by benevolence. When the Sodomites were brought
from captivity back to their own, they no doubt thanked the God of
Abraham for having redeemed them; but such devotion did not last long
with them, but they gradually fell into security, pursued their hearts\'
desire, until finally, since they had everything enough and superfluous,
each one of them did what he desired, and they could not be converted at
all. For here also applies what the philosophers say, when the course of
a thing is not far from its end, it is strongest.

The Sodomites had not only forgotten their damage and miraculous
salvation, and not only did they no longer respect any word, house rule
or police, but they had also become worse than the unreasonable cattle
and wild animals. And this is a terrible and horrible example, that this
country, to which God had shown such miraculous help and salvation, had
fallen into such terrible disgrace and desolation within fourteen years.

For Abraham\'s help and good deed was already forgotten by them, and
they did not think that because of him they had been delivered from the
hand of the enemy, but their luck had so arranged it; but the teaching
of Abraham and Lot they blasphemed, because it was hostile and contrary
to their lewd life. And over all these sins they were proud and
presumptuous, as if they alone were wise.

All these things came before their fall; as Solomon says, Proverbs
16:18, that the beginning of the fall is to become proud and fall away
from God. For where there is contempt of the word and ingratitude
against God, there also lies down all discipline and honorableness. For
such virtues and fruits grow only from the seed of the Word of God.
Because the church had fallen among them, the worldly rule, discipline
and all good order had also fallen.

211 Since the fear of God was gone, marital duty and fidelity were also
lost, so that they were not content with their wives, but desired
others, and offered their wives to other husbands and let them follow,
until

they finally subdued themselves, which was against nature and more than
animal. This is Satan\'s trial, when he has turned people away from God
and brought them to ingratitude against Him.

With us, unfortunately, the beginning and prelude of such misery is all
too much in the daytime. For behold the evangelicals in cities, behold
how the authorities, the nobility, citizens and peasants hold
themselves; should they not all together thank God day and night that
they are delivered from the iron furnace of the pope and from such
horrible blindness and darkness? But this does not happen, and the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving is nowhere, but all men\'s thoughts
and intentions are to gather together much money and goods, and to
oppress others with deceit, elevation, advantage and violence, so that
they alone may be rich. But will not the household finally fall into
such a life and corrupt manners? But where this happens, a general decay
must inevitably follow. But we want to start the interpretation of the
present history a little higher and farther for the sake of the youth,
to whom such teaching is still unknown. For even if every heart is
horrified by such a gruesome spectacle of divine wrath, it is still
necessary, since the world is full of Pharaonic and Pharisaic teachings,
that such examples of God\'s wrath be impressed upon the people.

From the beginning of this first book of Moses we have seen that it has
to do with two kinds of people, namely with the pious, who are the right
church, and with the wicked, who are always the school of Satan, in
which people are not only practiced and driven to sins against the other
table, so that they commit death and adultery, but also blaspheme the
word, persecute and strangle the pious. Now God has always interposed
Himself as a judge and killed the wicked and unrighteous. This also
happens here: Abraham\'s house is the right church. For although other
patriarchs lived at the same time, the Church was bound to the house and
descendants of Abraham by the word of God.

**[1194 D. rv, 232-234. interpretation of I Moses 18, 20. 21. w. 1,
17SS-17SS. 1195]{.underline}**

If you compare Abraham\'s house and the house of the Sodomites, you will
find that in Abraham\'s house everything is most lovely and friendly, so
that even the angels of God themselves seem to be joking with Sarah for
a short time, since she laughs and then denies it. Therefore, God\'s
word goes for and for in it, and Abraham\'s house is nothing else but a
kingdom of forgiveness of sin and grace, yes, heaven itself, in which
the angels of God dwell, whom Abraham receives with reverence and in
whom he worships God; for he knows and believes that he is one God in
three persons. In sum, with Abraham there is nothing but grace and life.

Again, in the wicked generation, among the sodomites, there is nothing
but a vile threat. Angels do not come to them, but when they come, they
are not only received with no honor, but they are kept in the most
disgraceful and shameful way, so that the wicked do not give them
lodging or even a morsel of bread, and they want to show them the
greatest dishonor that can be done to a human being; so that it can be
seen that they have sinned not only with fornication, but also with
other malice and wickedness. As Nahash king of Ammon did, when he
besieged Jabesh and the people of Jabesh offered to make a covenant with
him, he would make no other covenant with them except to have each
man\'s right eye gouged out for shame, 1 Sam. 11:2. In this he sought
neither benefit nor pleasure that might come to him, but only to satisfy
his malice against them. For since people are usually tempted to sin for
the sake of gain or pleasure, there was none in this hideous spectacle
that Nahash wanted to create, but only the highest will of courage and
malice.

Just as the Jews killed Christ out of pure wickedness, and just as an
ungodly warrior does many things out of his own will, so that he may
increase displeasure, shame and heartache, not that he may become rich
from it. For what profit can he derive from it, if he cuts off the legs
of the cattle, runs open the doors, and kills the cattle?

and breaks villages on fire 2c.? Therefore these are sins of the
greatest wickedness. Now this is the wicked\'s wickedness, that they are
hostile to the saints, and are not content with inflicting upon them
various plagues, but their highest pleasure is this, that they bring
shame and dishonor upon them, which then is an abominable wickedness,
and well worthy of such judgment. Now it is very surprising that in such
a short time this people could have become so bad and corrupt, so that
not ten men, who fear God and lead discipline and honorability, have
remained.

217 Before the Flood, Moses also wrote in Genesis 6:5 that God had seen
the earth and found that the wickedness of men was great; but here he
says that God heard a cry. From this it seems as if it was more horrible
here than before the Flood. But in both places the safety of men is
depicted with such words. For they lived as if God did not see it, nor
did he hear it, yes, as if there were no God at all; as it is written in
the 14th Psalm v. 1: \"The foolish say in their hearts: It is pure God.
And the pious also suffer such temptations at times, but in a different
way, that they feel as if God were asleep, and as if He neither hears
nor sees. And if this happened in the beginning of the world, it happens
much more now that the world has grown old and has come to an end. How
horrible and cruel blasphemy is practiced by the Turkish Empire and the
Papacy! But God has been silent about this for eight hundred years, and
at the same time lets the Turks and the pope float in all happiness, so
that they both strengthen themselves in goods and power, and live as if
there were no other life after this one and no God.

218 Therefore this was a blessed time when Christ lived on earth. For
then He not only heard and saw, but was also truly present Himself, as
John 1 Epist. 1:1 says: \"That we have beheld, and have touched our
hands\"; but now we cry out from afar, and make ourselves believe that
we are crying out to such a God, who does not hear, but sleeps soundly.
But the devil and the pope

**[1196 L. IV. 23t-23\". Interpretation of I Genesis 18, 2V. 21. w. I,
I79S-isoi. 1197]{.underline}**

and drives away all wills of courage; gangs and sects go along with
heaps.

219 Therefore this is said according to the human way, as the Scriptures
are wont to speak. For what Moses says here about God was in people\'s
minds and unbelief. For GOD does not sleep; from such needs a spirit is
free. But men, when they lie in safety and sin, consider it as if God
were asleep, yes, they even let themselves dream that God takes care of
them and hears them; as the Turk puffs himself up for the sake of his
happiness and considers himself God\'s people, he does not believe that
God is angry, but thinks that hell is destroyed and all judgment is
abolished; for this is seen in his behavior.

Therefore one finds in the Scriptures such sayings: \"God, do not be
silent before me\", Ps. 28, 1. For while God is delaying in listening,
the pious, in their struggle under the flesh, while they are close to
despair, think that God is asleep, is mute, 2c., and thus is to the
sense of faith or spirit in the pious. But I have dealt with this more
extensively in the sixth chapter above: here it is enough that so much
is indicated about it, that the Scriptures direct their way of speaking
according to human manner and habit, not that God is thus minded, but
that such thoughts are found in the hearts of the pious. Therefore
Abraham, Lot and the other patriarchs heard and felt this cry, and well
knew that God was angry and hastened to punish such an unrepentant
people, who had no further counsel.

However, we should not despise the outward and worldly doctrine for the
authorities, nor those who hold court. In the eleventh chapter above,
when the Tower of Babel is being built, the Lord says (v. 5, 7): \"I
will go down and see,\" so that the divine majesty teaches that in
courts of law one should not rush to judgment or hear only the one part,
but that one should fully understand the transaction. For if Scripture
says this of God, who knows everything and from whom nothing is hidden,
that he has descended, how much more is this necessary for us humans,
who are often governed by our courage and anger, who let good friends
persuade us to act in our own way, and who are not in a position to see
what is going on?

after favor, let us be deceived with good words 2c.

222 Here we also discuss the sins that cry out to heaven, and some of
them are four, some five. And even if this is not so great a cause, I do
not want to have punished the diligence of pious teachers who pretend to
be so. But if one really wants to speak of it, the Scripture does not
call the same four or five sins a cry, but in general all sins in which
there is impenitence and wickedness; as Isa. 5:7 says, \"He waits for
righteousness, behold, it is a cry,\" that is, they sin without all
shame and embarrassment, and there is no one to punish; the authorities
neither counsel nor defend, and there is nothing left but that everyone
cries out for shame. Wherever there is still the fear of God, the
authorities do their duty and punish the wicked; from this it follows
that the people do not cry out, but give thanks to God and their
authorities that they can sit securely with their wives, children and
goods, and that no ill will is shown toward them. Again, where the word
is not, and the authorities are tardy in their office, and no discipline
is kept in the homes, but parents are mistreated by their children, the
servants are disobedient to the lord and wife, 2c., such crying must
follow.

How today there is no measure of avarice and usury, but the authorities
see through their fingers and do not punish as they should. What happens
because of this? Do not those cry out to heaven who suffer injustice and
find neither counsel nor help from the authorities? Such are sinners, as
Peter says in 2 Epist. 2, v. 14, who do not allow their sin to be
stopped, but want to go unpunished, and when they are admonished, they
continue in their sins all the more foolishly and heap one sin on top of
another, as Pharaoh did, who became all the more foolish and senseless
the more Aaron and Moses preached to him.

**III.**

The holy fathers saw this and were deeply grieved in their hearts
because of such wickedness of the world. For dying does not hurt like
this,

**[1198 L.IV. 2W-238. Interpretation of Genesis 18, 2V-26. W. 1,
1801-1804. 1199]{.underline}**

than that one must see such exuberant wickedness of the world, if it
does not want to be resisted. Therefore it was fulfilled in the same
holy patriarchs that the text says: \"The cry in Sodom is great\"; and
nevertheless Abraham, regardless of the fact that this cry was great and
the sins were abominable, interposes himself as a mediator and
representative for such evil and godless people, as we will hear. For
this reason, just as Scripture has praised his faith until now, so now
it praises his love for his enemies. For there is no greater love on
earth than to pray to God for bloodthirsty enemies and to represent
them.

**V.22-26. And the men turned their faces, and went to Sodom: but
Abraham stood still before the Lord, and stood before him, and said,
Wilt thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? There may be fifty
righteous in the city: wilt thou destroy them, and not forgive the place
for fifty righteous that are therein? Far be it from thee, that thou
shouldest do this, and slay the righteous with the wicked, that the
righteous should be as the wicked; far be it from thee, who art judge of
all the earth. You will not judge like this. And the LORD said, If I
find fifty righteous men in the city of Sodom, then for their sakes I
will forgive all the places.**

Here is a new question of the appearance of God and the angels. My
opinion is that these angels had human form and were not the Trinity in
their essence. Some give as the names of these three angels that the
first was Michael, who led the word and spoke when the others were
silent; the second, Gabriel, that is, God\'s strength and power, which
they needed to turn Sodom around; the third, Raphael, that is, God\'s
counsel and medicine, who came to redeem and preserve Lot. Be that as it
may, they are thoughts that can be had without sin and do no harm;
however, I do not believe it to be so. And do the Jews say that Raphael
and Gabriel went away, Michael

and that apart from these three, the Lord appeared to Abraham and spoke
to him. But for this I keep my opinion, if it is more simple and agrees
with the scripture.

The third angel remained standing, and Abraham took him for a man, as he
did the other two, but for a man in whom God\'s spirit dwelt. For he saw
that he had the word of God, and he believed that he spoke not the word
of a man, but the word of God: therefore he worshipped him as God
Himself. Now that the text says, \"Abraham stood still before the
Lord,\" is just as much as to say that Abraham heard and looked upon the
same third angel as if he were God, because he knew that he had God\'s
word.

227 Therefore all these things are written in honor of the ministry of
preaching, which the holy fathers so diligently honored, though it was
not yet so clear among them. We, who have such a great light, mock and
revile it, yes, even still strangle the preachers and let them die of
hunger. Now let us hear Abraham\'s prayer, which is a horrible prayer,
but the way it was made is obvious.

228\) Abraham makes this prayer very wisely, naming a small number of
the righteous, and thinking that he would the more easily obtain what he
asked for; but it is a terrible thing that in these five cities there
are found near ten righteous. Of the children I will say nothing here;
for they are obtained in ways of which we know nothing; as is proved by
the text in Jonah, Cap. 4:11, of those who do not know the difference
between right and left: but the old and adult people were all so corrupt
that not ten righteous men were to be found. They had not only defiled
themselves with these common sins, such as drunkenness, theft, adultery,
avarice, 2c., but the main sins were contempt of the word, authorities
and parents, in addition to scorn and dishonor of the saints, and
rejoicing when they had directed it most grievously.

Therefore, consider these three pieces: First, the very short time in
which they are un-

**[1200 iv, As-stt. Interpretation of Genesis 18:22-26. W. i, iNu-1807.
1201]{.underline}**

Secondly, the great multitude of those who had sinned and were still
sinning; and thirdly, that they were such heinous and grievous sins: you
will have to say that God\'s judgment, although it was very heinous, was
nevertheless just and fair. For it is impossible for Abraham to believe
that all were corrupt in the same way; he thought that he would at least
find some honest and pious men among the authorities and kings; for
every city had its king and every king his council. That there should
not be found among such high people ten pious men is incredible. Abraham
asks for this with such great confidence, and even if his proposal fails
once, he still does not give up; he even burns with love even for these
very worst people.

\(230\) Now what kind of church there was at that time, when Sodom
perished, is told us in the eleventh chapter. For at that time there
lived six patriarchs, Shem, Arphachad, Salah, Eber and Serug, and
because Abraham lived almost fifty years with Noah and saw nine
patriarchs, he had excellent teachers. But Noah died almost forty years
before the fall of Sodom; and because he had seen the former world
before the flood, he was also known to the Sodomites, who then saw him
and heard him preach and cry with his descendants of the flood, of the
wrath of God, and yet despised him with his own. So I believe that at
that time there was such a church, the like of which did not exist on
earth until Christ.

Now it is terrible that in this golden time, when so many patriarchs
lived and preached, and not far from Sodom, as in Jerusalem, the
patriarch Shem led the preaching ministry, the Sodomites have become so
godless, and have forgotten all fear and knowledge. Why do we complain
about our times, when so many excellent patriarchs have done the same?
Therefore, let us leave these fires of the world, and ingratitude and
great contempt

We are not to be compared with the holy patriarchs, and yet they had to
see such a terrible and horrible example of God\'s wrath, and their
prayers, as earnest and diligent as they were, could not help.

232 And there is no doubt about it, the patriarchs will have tried all
six to the highest, how they would endure such a crowd, which thus
hurries to its destruction, and would bring it right again. For Lot
dwelt in Sodom, Shem or Melchizedek not far from it in Jerusalem,
Abraham in Mamre, and the others in other places near about. No doubt
these sent preachers to Sodom to exhort the people to repentance and to
punish their sins. But all this was of no avail. For where the word is
despised, Shem and Abraham preach in vain, and nothing else is to be
expected there but punishment, destruction and the Flood.

From this you can see how great God\'s wrath is against sin. For if
these holy and godly people have not been able to avert the punishment
with their advocacy and prayer, what hope do we have in these last times
of the world? Therefore, notice that at the same time, when the church
was doing very well and the most holy and faithful teachers were living,
the world was at its worst. For this is the way Satan uses to bring
disgrace and annoyance to the church, which people of no understanding
attribute to the word and blame it. But if it were true, then Lot,
Abraham and Melchizedek would also have to be blamed for the destruction
of Sodom. For they were the most distinguished teachers at the same
time. But now further from the prayer of Abraham.

This has six parts. For six times he asks with such earnestness and
heartfelt longing that he speaks foolish words, as it were, out of great
fear and desire that he may counsel the poor cities. The word thispeh is
very emphatic and violent, that I speak thus, because it means to take
away completely, so that nothing of it remains. Therefore, if one wants
to reason about the words, it seems to be a foolish prayer, just as if
one knew

**[1202 L. IV, 240-243. interpretation of Genesis 18:22-33. W. I,
1807-ISIS. 1203]{.underline}**

God does not distinguish between the righteous and the unrighteous.
\"Will you then,\" he says, \"take away the righteous with the wicked,\"
and like a murderer slay all without distinction?

This seems to be a hard and dangerous prayer, but it is very precious
when you see how his heart has been. For he sees that God cannot spare
the righteous. Therefore he prays, as David did Ps. 26:9: \"Do not take
away my soul with sinners.\" For this is what tyrants do; they go about
and set fire to houses, villages and cities, asking nothing whether the
righteous or the unrighteous perish. Such tyranny and cruelty, says
Abraham, is not due to God, so I hope he will spare the whole nation for
the sake of fifty righteous people. Such is a deep concern and a strong
emotion that drives him to foolish words. For it goes much deeper to the
heart of the holy man than his heart itself can feel and understand,
that he sees that the whole nation is to be held up and killed.

Therefore, he makes a mighty and tumultuous prayer to force God to
forgive, as it were. It is well known that for the sake of a righteous
man, God at times spares a whole family, city and country, and shows
them good; as the land of Syria prospered as long as Naaman lived, and
all Egypt was blessed for Joseph\'s sake, Laban for Jacob\'s; should God
now forget him so completely that he could not spare something for the
sake of fifty righteous men? Oh, Lord! Oh, dear Lord! Do not do it!
These are words that indicate the greatness of the emotion, under which
the tears will run down his cheeks and his heart will overflow with
inexpressible sighs. His heart overflowed with inexpressible sighing.
\"This,\" he says, \"is far from you\"; as if he wanted to master God
and teach him what he should do; as he says to this: \"You who are the
judge of all the world, you will not judge like this. To judge means to
punish the wicked and to spare the innocent: this, he says, is most
fitting and due to you, who are the judge of all the earth: but what
kind of judgment is this, in which even the

innocent people? This is truly a strong and powerful prayer, so that he
reminds God what his office is and how he should conduct himself,
namely, that he should spare the righteous and not punish the wicked for
their sake. Therefore the Lord answers him and promises: He will spare
if there are fifty righteous people to be found. For this fervent and
ardent prayer, full of faith and love, pleases him; but when Abraham
hears that their fifty are not to be found, he is a little dismayed, and
yet continues to pray.

**V. 27, 28 Abraham answered and said, Behold, I have forbidden myself
to speak unto the LORD, though I be earth and ashes. There may be five
less than fifty righteous within: wilt thou then destroy the whole city
for the sake of the five? And he said, If I find within it five and
forty, I will not destroy it.**

237 A prayer should be courageous, therefore Abraham continues with it
and always prays: but for this he needs a special humility, which should
be with every prayer: \"I am\", he says, \"dust and ashes\", and
nevertheless, because I have begun to pray, I want to continue with it:
will you spare, so that they lack five to the fifty? \"Yes,\" says the
Lord, \"I will spare.\"

**V.29-33. And he continued to speak unto him, saying, There may be
found forty within. But he said: I will not hurt them for forty. And
Abraham said, Be not angry, O LORD, that I speak any more. Perhaps
thirty will be found inside. And he said, If I find thirty within, I
will not hurt them. And he said, Behold, I have refrained from speaking
with the Lord. Perhaps twenty will be found inside. He answered: I will
not destroy them for the sake of the twenty. And he said, Oh be not
angry, O Lord, that I speak but once more. Perhaps ten will be found
inside. But he said: I will not destroy them for the sake of the ten.
And the LORD departed after he had talked with Abraham: and Abraham
returned unto his place.**

**[1204 k. 243-245. interpretation of I Genesis 18:29-33. W. I. IN0-IAS.
1205]{.underline}**

Of the fifty, he comes to ten, and Abraham is sure that his request and
proposal will succeed. How is it possible, he thinks, because Lot is
such a godly, pious preacher in Sodom, that the word should have
produced no fruit at all, that there should not be ten righteous people
in it? Therefore it is a wistful and deep sighing of Abraham, that he
promises to ask only once more and not to trouble the Lord any further.
Look at this example as often as you pray, and learn that you must stop
praying and not let up. Such prayer does not make God unwilling, but
pleases Him.

Without a doubt, Abraham will have taken comfort in the story of the
Flood, in which eight people were preserved: even though he thought that
he could not save the entire people, he was certain, because of his
cousin Lot, that God would take care of him and preserve him. Therefore,
he returns home and brings everything home to the righteous judgment of
God. For he sees that it is necessary - in the face of such great
wickedness of the people - for God to show His wrath against sin, so
that the pious will not be angered and also begin to waver.

240 And this is the reason that the Lord commands Abraham to hold such a
story against his descendants; for God wants to be feared, but He
detests and hates the secure. Isa. 66, 2. He promises to dwell with
those who are of a broken heart and spirit. And Ps. 51 v. 19 says: \"The
victims that please God are a fearful spirit.\" But he does not want
fear alone, but also wants one to hold on to the hope of his mercy in
such anguish and distress of heart.

241\) As he indicates this with flowery words Deut. 24, 6, that one
should not take for a pledge the uppermost and the lowermost millstone.
The uppermost millstone is the fear and judgment of God; the lowest
millstone carries and holds the same, which means the hope and feeling
of divine grace and mercy. Thus, the ministry of preaching should unite
and drive together the following

Law and Gospel, repentance and forgiveness of sins.

The Pope\'s sermons have been nothing but sermons of terror: but our
false prophets and antinomians of this present time pretend that nothing
else should be taught in the church but the gospel and comforting
promises, which error is almost more harmful. Grace and forgiveness of
sins are to be preached, but to those who have sin, that is, who
recognize and feel that they have sin, and heartily desire to be rid of
it: but those who continue safely in sins are as though they were
without all sin, therefore the law is to be preached to such, to
frighten them with this story of Sodom\'s downfall, and thus to bring
them to the fear of God.

243\. And this is called, as I also said above, rightly dividing God\'s
word; that just as it was necessary to keep a special way in the Old
Testament to divide the sacrifices, so it is also necessary to keep a
certain order in the teachings, so that in the end God is known to be
gracious and merciful to the faithful, but angry with the secure, and so
we all learn to fear God together, and to comfort ourselves and rely on
His grace and mercy, which He has shown us in His Son; as the first
commandment reads: \"I am the LORD thy GOD, and do good to them that
love me in a thousand parts: but them that hate me,\" that is, disobey
my word, \"I will punish to the third and fourth part,\" Ex. 20, 2. 5.
6.

The world cannot be persuaded of such wrath, so that it could believe
that God was truly angry. See Micah 1 Kings 22, 24. and Jeremiah Cap.
20:2, when they preached about God\'s wrath and punishment, they were
considered false prophets and were commanded to be silent. But what does
the Holy Spirit say? My words are good to those who walk in my ways.
Thus the Sodomites perished, because they sinned with such certainty,
and God did not notice that there was such a great multitude of people,
and among them many of his own and of good men; neither was he sorry for
the innocent young children, but took

**[1206 \".rv, 242. 246. interpretation of Gen. 18, 29-33. cap. 19, 1.
w. I, I8IS-18I8. 1207]{.underline}**

One thing with another, that his wrath against sin might be revealed.

Therefore I believe that Abraham went home quite sad and spent the same
night without sleep with sighing and weeping, because of the fact that
such a large number of people should perish. But because the holy and
God-fearing Abraham had so

very concerned about those of Sodom, they live in revelry and pleasure,
and deal with how they may mock and disgrace these guests, but do not
think at all about their fall and ruin. This is a picture of the world
and the church; as Christ also says John 16:20: \"Ye shall weep and
wail, but the world shall rejoice.\"

**The nineteenth chapter.**

**First part.**

**How the three men arrived in Sodom and were taken in by Lot.**

**V. 1 The two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting
in Sodom under the gate. And when he saw them, he stood up to meet them,
and bowed himself with his face to the ground.**

In this chapter the punishment of the sins is described, which Moses
thought of in the previous chapter, that the cry of Sodom had come up to
heaven. Now I do not like to deal with this terrible history, like the
one above (Chapter 7) about the Flood, because it is terrible to feel
and experience God\'s wrath, which he lets go over the poor human race
without any measure. That is why it goes through my whole heart when I
read or act about it. For even though I myself am often angry at the
wickedness and impenitence of the people, such a great misery, which
happened here with Sodom, is very close to me, and I also feel
Abraham\'s challenge, which he had, since he took the greatest pains to
avert such a great wrath of God from the impenitent sinners through his
intercession.

\(2\) Our new prophets, the antinomians, pretend to be gentle and soft
with people and not to hurt them with examples of divine wrath; yet

Paul speaks much differently in 2 Tim. 3, 16. 17. when he says that the
Scriptures are also useful for punishment and chastening, so that a man
may be perfect in the sight of God, and may be qualified for all good
works. We also know how he commands in 2 Tim. 2, 15 that one should
rightly divide the word of God; and 1 Cor. 10, 6. after many testimonies
and examples of the wrath of God against sinners, he says that all these
things were written for our sake, so that we would not, like them, be
tempted to sin.

3 Therefore such examples of divine wrath as this are to be acted upon,
that they may serve us for doctrine and instruction; as the Lord
commanded Abraham, who was far holier than we, that he should preach of
them unto his children. For in the world you will always find two kinds
of people: one is proud, stiff-necked, despises God\'s word and all good
admonitions, and is sure beyond all measure; now if you wanted to deal
gently with such people and preach much of God\'s grace and mercy, you
would only make them worse. Such correction is caused by the Antinomian
error, against which I warn you to beware of them, for they are not
satisfied with the loss of body and soul, but also want to take us with
them and burden us with their sins, so that we may be condemned with
them, because they want their sin to go unpunished like the Sodomites.

4\. but now God has established the ministry of preaching in

**[1208 IV, 246-248. Interpretation of Genesis 19, I. W. I, 1818-1820.
1209]{.underline}**

The preachers of the world are not ordained to be silent, but to punish,
teach, comfort, frighten, and thus win and save whom they can. Such
preaching ministry the antinomians completely abolish, because they do
not want to suffer any punishment at all, and call us consenting to
their sins against St. Paul\'s doctrine, which Rom. 2, 1. ff. not only
condemns those who commit sin, but which they also put up with and
consent to. But now they consent to sins which they do not punish; as if
I would keep silent about the sins of the pope, cardinals and bishops,
blasphemy and tyranny. But the Lord says in the prophet Ezekiel Cap. 3,
19: \"You will save your soul from death when you punish the sin of your
people.

\(5\) We ought to be merciful to the worst of men, and to suffer them
with us; but if they would take us away to their destruction, then mercy
must cease; neither should our parents and children be so dear to us,
that we should be condemned with them. For then shall all mercy be
forgotten; as Lot did, when he left his wife, because she went contrary
to the commandment of the Lord. Therefore let such men go, because they
are hardened and obstinate, and will not suffer admonition.

\(6\) But God wants us to show mercy to those who are not so stubborn,
but allow themselves to be guided, as the parable of the Lost Sheep
teaches, Luc. 15:4 ff; for such are not unrepentant Sodomites, on whom
belongs the hammer of God that crushes the rocks. God\'s judgments are
not to be hidden from these; otherwise we will stain ourselves with
their sins if we consent to them. For this reason we Christians are all
placed in this world with one another, to serve our neighbor, not only
as far as the other table is concerned, but much more as far as the
first is concerned; so that all men may learn to fear God and trust in
His goodness and mercy.

7\) But the Audern, who are already humiliated and fainthearted (as
Christ calls them for this reason Luc. 12, 32), are called a small herd,
and are called not to be afraid.

(The first is the \"God of the people\"), though they are weak and
sinful in many ways, yet they are not crude or hardened; against them a
preacher should be wise and faithful, that he may rightly divide the
word to them, and not include anything foreign and contrary to the pure
doctrine; and because they are terrified beforehand by God\'s wrath and
judgments, he should not terrify them further, but comfort and
straighten them out. This is great wisdom and especially necessary in
the ministry of preaching, namely, that one may properly distinguish
between the two kinds of hearers, so that each one may hear the word
that belongs to him: the stiff-necked and hardened, terrible examples of
God\'s wrath, but the weak and stupid, friendly and sweet comfort. For
Christ is set apart for the resurrection of some and the fall of others,
Luc. 2:34.

8 Therefore the miserable and afflicted should be lifted up with
comfort, but those who are puffed up and exalted in security should be
humbled and brought low, as Mary sings in her hymn, Luc. 1:51. This is
the right division. For there can be no lack of it; among the secure
there must also be the stupid and the fearful, and vice versa.
Therefore, a right measure is necessary, so that the hard-hearted and
the secure may understand that when one speaks of horrible examples of
God\'s wrath, this applies to them; but the frightened and the stupid
accept the words of comfort and promises for themselves.

\(9\) And this is the work and ministry of the Holy Spirit, that he may
judge the hearts by word and confession, so that the stupid may take
comfort, but the crude and secure may be either converted or even
condemned by the voice of the law. For all men are not to be condemned
without distinction, but just as the flood and the destruction of Sodom
are like thunderclaps, so that the hearts are frightened: so also with
such temples of wrath is the comfort that Noah and Lot were preserved in
such common great distress. When these things are preached together, so
much is accomplished that the foolish and fearful do not despair.

This is the reason why I write such terrible histories, though very
unwillingly,

**[1210 L. IV, 248-250. interpretation of Genesis 19, I. W. 1,
1821-1823. 1211]{.underline}**

read. For I am frightened by the great wrath of God that one sees in
such sad stories, and yet I see that this teaching is useful and
helpful: not only so that the proud and secure are frightened, but also
so that the pious keep their fear of God and do not sin and perish like
the wicked. In addition, God\'s wrath is presented to us in such
examples, so that God\'s goodness shines out in it, because He
graciously saves and preserves His faithful.

11 Christ says in Isaiah 61:1 ff: \"The Spirit of the Lord is upon me;
therefore the Lord hath anointed me. He has sent me to preach to the
miserable, to bind up the brokenhearted; to preach a release to the
captives, an opening to the bound; to preach a gracious year of the
LORD, and a day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn.
\"2c. Behold, here to the wretched, and to them that are brokenhearted,
to the captives, to them that are shut up, to them that are sad, is
promised a redemption, an opening, and a year or time, wherein God shall
be reconciled. Those who are not therefore miserable and brokenhearted
will have a day of vengeance preached to them, that is, God\'s wrath.

\(12\) Therefore, if Christ himself teaches and preaches the doctrine of
God\'s wrath in addition to God\'s mercy, why would we not follow his
example? Therefore, it is the highest wisdom that these two pieces may
be properly joined and blended together, namely, the mercy of God, which
He demonstrated in preserving Lot, and His wrath in bringing the
Sodomites to ruin. What frightened and fearful hearts are, no doubt,
pleases God well; for He promises that He will not break the bruised
reed, nor quench the smoldering wick, Isa. 42:3.

\(13\) Although such temples of wrath serve to frighten and humiliate
people, they are not to be practiced after the hearts have been made
stupid and broken, but to relieve the pain and heal the wounds. It is
called

The Scriptures call the fear of God a sacrifice and a service of God,
Psalm 51:19. Since the Holy Spirit has described such histories for the
purpose of awakening the Gentiles to the fear of God, to guard against
sin, and to do what is right and good, it is well to hold them up to the
people in the church. For just as the church has two kinds of people, so
it also has two kinds of words, namely, histories and examples of divine
wrath and threats against the hard of heart, the secure and impenitent,
and promises for the troubled consciences and humbled Gentiles. Now it
is the greatest wisdom to handle and distribute them properly.

14 The pope has the power to banish, but against whom does he use the
ban more than against us, who are not safe, but brokenhearted and
humiliated? But he praises people who are of his kind, epicureans, sure
bullfighters, cardinals, bishops and tyrants, as holy people and lifts
them up to heaven. Thus he does justice to his title, that he protects
and strengthens the poor in the church and condemns the rebellious and
disobedient.

\(15\) But this is not new with him. See the 13th chapter of Ezekiel:
\"You have profaned me,\" says God v. 19, \"among my people for the sake
of a handful of barley,\" that is, for the sake of temporal goods you
have falsified my teachings, you have condemned the pious and
strengthened the wicked in their presumption. For this is what he means
by what follows: \"For the sake of a morsel of bread ye have condemned
to death souls that ought not to die, and condemned to life those that
ought not to live, by your lies among my people, who love to hear
lies\": and in another place (v. 22.), \"Ye have grieved the heart of
the righteous, whom I have not grieved.\" So the whole papacy does not
have the wisdom to rightly divide God\'s word; therefore it cannot
build, but tears down and destroys everything with its teaching.

16\. but the Holy Spirit also presents such histories of God\'s wrath
and judgment to us in such a way that He also gives us strong and
powerful consolation, namely that God

**[1212 L. IV, 250-252. interpretation of I Genesis 19, 1. W. I,
I82S-I826. 1213]{.underline}**

wants to save and preserve those who fear him in times of need, as he
proves here to Lot. Therefore, not only do the Sodomites perish, but Lot
is also saved and gives thanks to God. If you are stupid and humiliated,
look at Lot, whom God has rescued, and hope that he will do the same for
you. But you, who whore in safety, that is, you gather money and goods,
take care of yourself and live well, you are an Epicurian sow, you
should look at the Sodomites, how such a terrible punishment has
followed their shameful behavior and desolate life: Remember that five
cities were suddenly consumed with fire from heaven; that the earth was
submerged, and became an abominable pool, wherein no man can dwell, but
the ungodly sinners all perished in a moment, and are lost for ever.

\(17\) Therefore, if you diligently consider all these things, it will
awaken you to also consider your harm and danger, to stop sinning, and
to ask for forgiveness. Our foolish and blind antinomians, Grikel and
Jekel, do not know this; therefore, they suspend this preaching of
God\'s wrath in the church, to its great harm and danger. Therefore I
warn you to beware of them, for they are mad spirits and inexperienced
in spiritual matters, but they puff themselves up and pretend to be
learned and wise, which they are not. But now from the history further.

18 In the previous chapter (v. 2, 16) Moses calls the angels \"men.
These are the same names and are to be understood that the Lord appeared
in them. But why Moses put the same names differently in two places, I
do not know, unless I think that the Holy Spirit wanted to indicate that
they were not natural men.

19 But that Moses says about the evening, I think that he means the
afternoon time first before the evening, because at noon before the
angels had eaten with Abraham. Because Mamre and Sodom are situated a
little further from each other than a man could travel the same way in
so few hours, the text also says here that there are angels.

so that no one would want to take such history for a poem or a fable.

\(20\) But this is where you should draw what I said above about the
freedom of hospitality. For just as you heard about Abraham above, so
you will also hear about Lot here, that he waited for the guests, ran to
meet them, received them with both hands, and almost forced and coerced
them into staying with him. So I also said that the hospitality is not
praised more highly in any place of Scripture than Match. 25:35, where
Christ says, \"I was hungry, and ye fed me.\"

021 That Lot sitteth under the gate of Sodom is spoken otherwise than as
the scripture calleth, Sitting at the gate of the city. For \"the gate
of the city\" is the name of the place where men go to council and sit
in judgment. For the Orientals had their council houses at the gates of
the city, where they had their fortresses, and came together when they
wanted to deliberate about regimental matters; but Lot sits in front at
the entrance of the city.

22 But this is a praise of his hospitality. For it is easy to see why he
does not stay at home but sits there. He waits for the guests, sees that
the people in the city are foolish, angry and wanton, therefore he wants
those who come from foreign places to stay with him in his house,
because they can spend the night safely from the evil and wickedness of
the people. And perhaps at the same time there was a great persecution
in Ur in Chaldea; that is why pious God-fearing people followed Abraham
around in his misery, as they would much rather have been with him in
misery than at home among the wicked. Abraham and Lot considered the
distress and situation of their brothers and sat at the doors of their
houses or at the gates of the city, so that strangers might find a
prepared place to stay.

23 When Lot saw the angels, he bowed down with his face to the earth as
if he were worshipping them. This is not written about Abraham, but he
only bows down or bends a knee; Lot, however, falls on his face to the
ground. He shows such reverence to these guests. And from this

**[1214 rv, 2W-W4. Interpretation of Genesis 19:1-3. W. i. i8se-i8M.
1215]{.underline}**

to see what the holy fathers kept for discipline in their homes and how
they accustomed their descendants, because they received strangers, when
they came, with such reverence as if God Himself were coming, whom they
honored in them.

\(24\) In our time, when the world has come to its end, we experience
such wickedness, cunning, deceit and mischievousness that it is almost
impossible to know whom we should serve or do good. However, we should
do so much that we at least honor and serve those who are known to us.
Now listen to Lot talking to these unknown guests.

**(v. 2, 3) And said, Behold, Lord, come into the house of your servant,
and tarry overnight, and wash your feet, and rise early in the morning,
and go your way. But they said: Nay, but we will tarry in the street
overnight. So he almost urged them, and they came in to him, and entered
into his house. And he made them a feast, and baked unleavened cakes;
and they did eat.**

25 The word \"HErr\" stands here in the Hebrew text, as it is given to
God alone, adonai, and not adonim or adone, which otherwise means
\"Lord\". How this is to be understood, I have dealt extensively enough
above. And this history shows that also Lot was rightly instructed in
the article of the Trinity, whether by Abraham himself or by another
patriarch. Since there are two guests, he does not call them lords, but
\"Lord\", and thus honors in them the right Lord, namely God Himself.
Such examples of hospitality are not found in the books of the Gentiles;
therefore, we shall diligently examine and consider them here.

26 First, he offers them his lodging very willingly, calling himself
their servant, but he calls them masters, as they should have power to
do everything with him and be masters in the house. He also offers them
water for their feet, which was a common service for the strangers at
that time, not only to wash away the dust and filth they had from their
journey, but also to refresh and restore their tired feet.

Christ also performed foot washing, John 13:5, but in a much different
way than monks, bishops, popes, kings and princes do today, who only
keep the same outward splendor and appearance. But Christ teaches us
that we should humble ourselves toward others, serve others, and counsel
and help them in their need. Monks and priests, popes and bishops
despise this and leave it aside, thinking that they are following Christ
when they make a mere spectacle and show. But we all know what kind of
example he has given us with this and how far the same gypsies are from
it.

028 But here the angels do a thing which they did not do to Abraham. For
when Lot offered them his house, and asked them to lodge with him, they
refused it, and would lodge in the gaff: but when Abraham offered them
his lodging, they were soon satisfied, and accepted it. \"Do,\" they
said, \"as you have said.\" Wherefore Lot also doeth a thing which
Abraham did not do, and opposeth them, when they refused him: for he
feared for them of the citizens.

\(29\) The Hebrews say that the angels\' refusal to enter Lot\'s house
was only so that Lot\'s good will and service, which could not be
satisfied with such a refusal, would be all the more evident. But what
is the use or necessity of our diligently considering why this was done
by the angels? In the world, it is common to be hospitable and mild to
all with words, and such words of honor are called when one asks someone
to come as a guest, since one does not want him to come. These are false
pretenses, but the hearts and mouths of the pious fathers and patriarchs
were one thing. Therefore I will not believe that the angels did this to
tempt Lot.

30 Solomon sternly warns, Proverbs 23:6, 7: \"Eat not bread with an
envious man: for he saith, Eat and drink; and his heart is not in thee.
Many such are found who offer themselves up to be respected, as if they
were mild and hospitable, when they are the very poorest, and for the
sake of a helper, they are the very worst.

**[1216 2. iv. \"4-2\". Interpretation of Genesis 19:2, 3. W. i,
1329-1332. 1217]{.underline}**

I will see you thirsty for three days because of them. And such vice is
most prevalent among the rich and powerful. But whoever wants to do
something good for someone should have a righteous heart and be without
deceit, and whoever lets himself be served and benefited should be
reasonable and modest.

\(31\) And this, methinks, was the cause why the angels rejected Lot\'s
good deed. For so they refuse, not wishing to afflict the pious Lot, as
reasonable men are wont to do, not in pretense, but with earnestness of
mind and spirit. But as they sensibly and demurely refuse, Lot again
offers them his lodging with all his will and righteous heart, and is
not one of those who first ask when they want to give something, and try
whether one may also accept it. And it is said in a common verse:
\"Whoever wants to give to another should not ask much: \"Do you want
it? For it is very impolite and unreasonable to ask much and to force
people to beg, as it were.

32\) Modest people, even if they are already needy, have to be forced to
accept service and charity. On the other hand, one finds others all the
more impudent, who do not wait until they are told to take something,
but go themselves, sit down at the table, and demand that one should
give them this and that. Such impudent people are a cheap enemy.

\(33\) That this text, then, belongs primarily to the effect that those
who wish to do good to others should learn to give what they give with a
sincere mind, and those who allow themselves to be given should be
chaste and reasonable. Such an outward teaching can be taken from this
text, but one should not leave it at that; for the Holy Spirit also
indicates something else in this.

34 We see that the holy scripture agrees with him and agrees with each
other. For Abraham, when he enters as a mediator on behalf of the
Sodomites and pleads on their behalf, he hears a terrible answer that he
would never have imagined, namely, that there are not ten righteous
people in all the five cities.

Proof of such an answer belongs to what is written here about the
angels. For they come as wretched and driven out men, who know nothing
of this people\'s ways and condition (for that is how they present
themselves), and think that it is safe to sleep out of the street, as in
other cities where discipline and respectability prevail: but Lot, who
knows all about how things are in the city, urges them all the more
diligently, and they want to be with him. For he knew for certain that
if they stayed in the street overnight, they would not get away
unharmed. For he knew that the Sodomites were not only not hospitable,
but also used to persecute strangers and to exercise all courage and
shame on them.

35 Moses recently wanted to point to this. As also Ezekiel Cap. 16, V.
49. 50. says: \"Behold, this was thy sister Sodom\'s iniquity: Hope, and
all things full, and good peace, which she and her daughters had: but
they helped not the poor and needy, but were proud, and did abominations
before me.\" These are very harsh words. Proud despisers of the word,
that is, of God and man, he calls them, because they had no fear of God,
nor love of man; but had forgotten the good that had been done them by
Abraham, and thought that they alone were those whom God loved, and whom
God could not anger, because he so blessed them.

How the world still allows itself to be deceived by this delusion. For
because it finds that it is well, becomes rich, is fresh and healthy, it
concludes that it has a gracious God, and cries out: Here dwelleth God.
As the Jews say, Zech. 11, 5: \"Praise be to the Lord, we are now
rich.\" Such a thing rhymes like a fist on the eye. For this is why God
does not give you riches, so that you should conclude that he is
gracious to you, but he has shown you another benefit that is greater,
from which you should assume and conclude this. He will try you whether
you will remain in his fear, humble yourself before him and obey him.
For very few people do this, but when they are well off, they exalt
themselves and become proud. Therefore, in German

**[1218 L. IV, 25S-W8. Interpretation of Genesis 19, 2. 3. W. 1,
1832-IS3S. 1219]{.underline}**

says: Good makes courage; item: It must be strong legs, which shall
endure good days.

37 For where hearts are not enlightened and governed by the Holy Spirit,
as David, Abraham and others were, it is impossible for them not to be
overthrown by fortune and prosperity; as it is also said: \"If fortune
is too good for you, it makes you a fool. And David warns Ps. 62:11:
\"If riches come to you, do not set your heart on them.\" The world,
however, does not believe this, but makes a certain conclusion with the
sodomites: \"Behold, we sit in a good, rich land, have a strong and
mighty city, are abundant with gifts and fortune; how could God be
hostile to us, or how could anything unpleasant happen to us?

38 Moreover the Sodomites had bread enough, that they lay in eating and
drinking day and night; as we Germans also use. But what follows eating
and drinking, we also know: and perhaps the Sodomites, during the day,
when they wanted to practice such a deed on these guests, the angels,
until the evening, had a common good life and vessels, in which they
drank themselves full of wine.

\(39\) To this Ezekiel also adds peace or good rest, that they had all
things in good peace and quiet, and felt neither hunger, nor pestilence,
nor other diseases, but, as Moses Deut. 32:15 says of his people, grew
fat and fat as swine. This is followed by this, which refers to the fact
that they did not reach out to the poor and were not hospitable. Just as
many poor priests and church servants are dying of hunger in Germany
today, and the poor Christ is suffering from hunger, and is almost being
tormented and martyred to death. There is no mercy in people everywhere.

040 And when there was no such thing in Sodom, and in the other cities,
such a rumor came from them into the other cities and places round
about. For a city is brought into an uproar and a rumor because of its
life and doings; as at this time some cities in Germany are infamous and
disreputable because of great usury; which also is a sodomite.

This is a real sin, and not only is it not practiced secretly, but it is
even boasted of. In addition, they are also disreputable because of
eating and drinking. If these sins are done publicly and are excused by
people out of habit, so that they are not only considered no disgrace
and sin, but also cause laughter and merriment (as we see that our
nobles and burghers still boast of their fornication and shameful
lives), then they are true sodomitic sins.

\(41\) As Isaiah complains of his people, Cap. 3:9, that they glory in
their sins, as they did in Sodom, and hide them not. For where one is
ashamed of sin and anxious that it will come to pass, sin is still easy;
but if one still boasts of it, and the wicked rejoice in their
wickedness, and rejoice in their wickedness, as Solomon says, Proverbs
2:14, there is nothing more certain to be expected than hellish fire.

\(42\) The fact that the angels want to stay overnight on the gaff and
cut off Lot\'s lodging, but Lot almost forces them, belongs especially
to the fact that the Scriptures bear witness to themselves that the
Sodomites were the very worst and most perverse people, and that in such
a large nation there were not ten righteous people to be found.
Therefore, Lot wants to protect them from evil and violence, and forces
them by force to go into his house. But what happens? What he wants to
avoid and prevent with diligence, happens to him. For just by taking
these guests into his house and protecting them there, he arouses the
Sodomites to commit a very horrible act.

\(43\) And all the circumstances show how unreasonable the Sodomites
have proved themselves here. Therefore the angels go as strangers
wandering with bare heads and feet, as they have traveled wearily: but
there is no one among so many rich citizens who offers them a drink of
water, yes, they still go to them and seek their lives, and to prove
them the highest disgrace and scorn. But the pious Lot not only gives
them lodging, but also prepares a meal for them. He asked some of his
daughters\' husbands for the meal,

**[1220 L. iv, W8-2M. Interpretation of Genesis 19:2, 3. W. i, isss-E.
1221]{.underline}**

The scripture does not remember this. However, it seems from the
circumstances that he was not alone with them, but also required others
for such a good life, which helped him to make his guests happy. After
other meals, he also gives them unleavened bread or cakes, so that
nothing is lacking that belongs to the guests\' need or to show his good
will.

44 But because the text remembers the unleavened bread, here is the
question: whether there was already something of Moses\' laws at that
time? And the Jews say that Sodom was turned back on Easter Day, which
is the most joyous festival of the year, in which the Sodomites
overloaded themselves with eating and drinking. Against such opinion
Lyra strongly contests, but not with any particular benefit. For what
good or evil can come of it? However, this is not without benefit, that
one learns to distinguish the law of Moses from all other laws. But
whether it was Easter or Pentecost at the same time, I can neither say
yes nor no to that.

\(45\) But I think it is true to say that Moses added many things to his
laws that had been kept before by the fathers. When he commanded
sacrifice, he no doubt took from Abel\'s and Cain\'s sacrifices, who
long before him had sacrificed to the Lord from the cattle and fruits of
the land. So Noah had made a distinction between the clean and unclean
animals. And who would doubt that such other things were still more,
which Moses brought afterwards by God\'s command into his laws, since it
had been already observed before by the pious. For he had to establish a
new people and a new government, which he could not have done without a
law and order, well and diligently written.

46 And while the church was in this people and kingdom, it had to have
worship and ceremonies. Because the patriarchs had kept some of these in
their time, Moses also kept them by divine command, as circumcision. Now
he also decreed judicial laws to punish the transgressors. 2c,

which he undoubtedly also took in part from the custom of former times
and the order of the fathers: but as a pious lawgiver he did something
about it with regard to his time, after God commanded him.

47 But whether he took from the statutes and ordinances of the fathers,
or from the custom and usage of other nations round about, and
established it among his people, all this is called the law of Moses.
And does this text here testify that the custom of eating unleavened
bread was before the Law, and that it was used at certain times, as it
was afterwards ordained in the Law, or at other feasts and festive
meals.

48 Because of this, the Jews still praise their laws so highly today and
consider them necessary. For they were bound, as the tribe of Levi and
Judah, to a certain place and time, even until Christ. The place was the
land of Canaan, where twelve tribes dwelt; this was the whole boundary
and goal of the Mosaic reign and kingdom. But because the Jews have lost
the same place and their land, they are obliged to keep the law. For the
time is past, and the place is changed; so the persons, that is, the
royal and priestly tribes, are also mixed together.

\(49\) Now before the law, the custom of eating unleavened bread was
also common in the countries of the east, where it was served at meals,
weddings and festive celebrations. But Moses, by God\'s command,
restricted such a common custom and ordered it to the Paschal feast
alone. Therefore, the Law of Moses must be distinguished from other
laws. In the law the custom was commanded that one should eat unleavened
bread on certain times: before the law however it was free to eat, which
time one wanted; as Moses also meant to sacrifice a lamb on Easter,
since one could sacrifice it before Moses, at which time one wanted.
Therefore, the custom of eating unleavened bread is not Moses\'
business, although he may have set it aside for a special time
afterwards.

**[1222 IV, 260-262. interpretation of Genesis 19:2-5. w. i, 1837-1842.
1223]{.underline}**

has directed and ordered. By chance, for the sake of the Lyra quarrel, I
wanted to indicate such above this text. Now let us look at the history
further.

**Second part.**

**About the shameful enterprise of the Sodomites, how Lot admonishes
them in vain and how they are struck blind about it.**

**V. 4. 5. But before they lay down, the people of the city of Sodom
came and surrounded the house, young and old, all the people from every
quarter; and they demanded of Lot, saying unto him, Where are the men
that came unto thee this night? Bring them out to us, that we may know
them.**

50 Moses continues in the description of this abominable sin. And I do
not like to handle this text, because the ears of the Germans are still
innocent and pure from such abominable and terrible sin. For although
this disgrace, like other sins, was brought to these lands by godless
soldiers and lewd merchants, it must have been done secretly, so that
others do not know much about it: and the Carthusian monks are the first
(whom one should therefore be hostile to) who brought such horrible
disgrace from the Italian monasteries to Germany. So well and
praiseworthily did they study in Rome and were they instructed.

51 There is a necessary and useful lesson in this text. For we see that
as soon as the world makes a habit of sins and people are sure to
indulge in them, God\'s punishment follows. Therefore we should learn to
fear God and prepare ourselves against our flesh and the devil, so that
we do not fall into such disgrace and sins, which God cannot let go
unpunished.

**I.**

52\. it describes Moses the wretchedness and misery of the human race
roughly and clearly enough. After the angels ate,

He will say, and no doubt keep talking to the Estonians about many
things, about the fear of God, about righteousness, about the corrupt
customs of the people and the destruction of all discipline and
respectability (for about all these things St. Lot might have complained
to them; as Peter 2 Epist. 2, 8. It is not in vain that the righteous
man\'s soul was tormented day and night, because he had to hear and see
many shameful things; therefore his mouth overflowed, his heart was
full, and he could not refrain from it out of great sorrow and
heartache, after such convenient and holy guests had come to him,)

53\. When the meal is done and it is bedtime, the people of the city,
the people of Sodom (for this repetition is set to make the sin great),
are so cruel and foolish that they not only do not show friendship or
service to the same foreign guests, but also do not let them rest for an
hour in another man\'s house, no matter how tired they are; they attack
them with iniquity before they go to bed and will not give them their
rest. Is not this inhuman and outrageous cruelty? But even so it is more
atrocious and shameful, so that it is almost impossible to say that they
want to commit fornication with them. And it is the men of the city who
do this, not some careless boys or common day laborers, servants or
housemates, but the noblest citizens, who should have protected others
and punished such misdeeds against others.

54 Therefore it is also necessary to understand that there were not ten
righteous men in the city. For these were the noblest of the citizens,
having wives, children and servants to govern them and keep them in
discipline and honor. But see what they do and what they presume to do
in a free and public place against innocent strangers!

55 And Moses says clearly, \"The people\" or men \"of Sodom\" have done
this, which was the capital of the whole country and therefore should be
a good example to the other cities around. For such-

**[1224 D- IV, WL-W4. Interpretation of Genesis 19:4, 5. W. I,
1842-1844. 1225]{.underline}**

t is common that small cities like to arrange their regiment and order
after the big ones. But what good can have been in the other four small
cities, since so much disgrace and vice was seen in the noblest, which
was to rule the others? For hear what Moses goes on to say:

\(56\) \"They surrounded the house,\" they did not send their city
servants before Lot\'s house to find out what guests were there and
where they had come from; so they come themselves, not to find out, but
they surround the house and threaten it like enemies. The Hebrew word
here is a passive, and its meaning is also known from Jer. 31:22: \"The
woman shall surround the man\"; for it means to surround or to seize, as
the hoop seizes and surrounds a vessel. So they also surrounded Lot\'s
house and came running to it from every corner and alley.

I am moved by such circumstances that I almost have to believe that they
have held a holiday and a good time through the whole city, because the
whole city has been so nonsensical. For even if they did not all want to
commit such a deed, they all helped to do it and took pleasure and joy
in such nonsense of the citizens against these strangers. But it makes
no difference whether they do the deed themselves or, if others do it,
consent to it.

58\) Of all the circumstances described here, the most horrible is the
one that follows, \"young and old\": and the Hebrews commonly use the
word naar, young, when they speak of young servants, menservants and
maidservants. For Moses indicates here that all those who had reached
their twentieth, twenty-fourth and twenty-sixth years, and were now able
to serve at their age and felt the heat of the flesh, joined the
citizens, the king, his rulers, councilors and nobles of the city. There
are also the old people, who should have lost the pleasure of old age,
or at least could have quenched the raging and fury of others with their
gray heads and their prestige. And so that you understand this trade
more clearly, you should not do otherwise.

The people came running from every nook and cranny of the city. Not all
of them were able to perform such a deed, but nevertheless they enjoyed
it and consented to it.

\(59\) What do we think, then, that the pious Lot, whose house alone was
the most important, would have thought of the whole city in the midst of
such senseless raging and fussing? For he alone was the one who feared
God, and in his house kept discipline and chastity most diligently, as
much as was always possible for him: while the others lay free and
without all shame in adultery, impurity, incest, 2c., so that it was no
longer considered sins, but vain amusement. As it is now among the
nobility and the lesser people, fornicating is not considered a sin, but
a pastime, a joke, and a disgrace; therefore there is no punishment for
it.

\(60\) And it has been argued in Germany, first by the Italians, then
also by some canons, that fornication among persons who were free, and
neither was bound to the other, could not be sin, but it was a necessity
of nature, which must have its end. Innocent hearts may give me credit
for this, for I do not like to speak of it, and yet we should see to it
that by such angry speeches the careless youth, who without this are
inclined to sin, are not seduced and corrupted. For where one teaches
and lives in this way, and vices and sins become a daily habit, there,
as Seneca says, there is neither advice nor help. But look at St.
Paul\'s Proverbs and judge from them about such things, which says Heb.
13:4: \"God will judge fornicators and adulterers\"; item 1 Cor. 6:9:
\"Do not be deceived: neither fornicators nor adulterers will inherit
the kingdom of God\"; and Heb. 11:6: \"Without chastity no one can
please God.\"

In Rome I have seen some cardinals who were honored as saints, because
they were content to associate with women. For there they commit
abominable shame, not secretly nor in a corner, but publicly, and in
such a game the chiefs and nobles go first.

**[1226 n IV, 26t-2 \"s. Interpretation of Genesis 19:4-8. W. I,
I8tt-I3t7. 1227]{.underline}**

along with the entire city. What advice or help could be found there
against such sin? Who would dare to punish those who consider sin and
disgrace to be a commendable habit and practice? If you were to compare
others with them, who, even if they sin, do it secretly and are ashamed
of it, you would have to say that they are sinners who should suffer; as
the German proverb says of \"no one\": \"No one, even if he sins, does
it painfully; for he fears and is ashamed, and would not like his sin to
become known. But the Sodomites were not of this mind; therefore no
improvement could be hoped for with them, everything had come to a head
with them and no counsel or help could take place, but God had to come
down from heaven and punish such sinners.

\(62\) Although it is frightening to have to experience and see how
great a power Satan has over man when he has once turned away from the
fear of God and obedience; for he does not rest, but always drives from
one sin to another, it is nevertheless useful and good to consider this
and to let it provoke us to prayer. Yes, it also teaches us that God
takes care of us and cares for us by warning us and, as it were,
restraining us and making us right through his fatherly guidance, which
then becomes sweet and lovely when we realize what a man is wont to do
who is left to himself and continues freely and safely in sin.

The sin of the Sodomites is a very peculiar monstrosity, in that they
depart from the natural desire and lust, which is planted in nature by
God, such as that the man burns against the woman, and desire completely
unnatural things. Where can such a perverse nature come from?
Undoubtedly from the devil, who, once one has departed from the fear of
God, presses and weighs down human nature so powerfully that he also
dries up natural lust and desire, and awakens another that is contrary
to nature.

64\. and Moses makes this sin very great

He also puts these horrible words, which no sensible man can stand in
his ears: \"Bring these men out to us, that we may know them. Such words
do not drive one or two in the heap, but the whole city, the young with
the old, also the authorities themselves. Therefore learn what Isaiah
the prophet means by this, that he says of his people Cap. 3, 9. He
says, \"They glory in their sin, as Sodom.\" They do not let such
shameful words be heard inside the house, but stand outside in the
street and publicly demand in the name and by force of the authorities
that the two angels be brought out to them. That it was not such a sin,
which they would have kept secret, but it seems that it was a common and
public habit, of which no one was ashamed.

\(65\) And this sin makes it more abominable and grievous, that they do
such things against strangers and sojourners. But what will the other
four lesser cities have done, which were, as it were, disciples of
Sodom, if their capital city, according to which they have judged
themselves, has committed such a sin?

Therefore, if the Lord had not come with the well-deserved punishment,
the worldly regime would have gradually fallen and could not have
continued to exist. For where marital duty and discipline are abolished,
and fornication and dishonor are given place, all order, law and
respectability fall. But when such things are gone, there remains no
police, but all disorder follows, and a beastly and wild life. For this
reason, God has had to punish on account of necessity, and to prevent
such wild and senseless life as an example to others.

**II.**

**(v. 6, 7, 8) Lot went out to them at the door, and shut the door
behind him, and said, Oh, brethren, do not be so wicked. Behold, I have
two daughters, which have not yet known a man; and I will put them out
among you, and do unto them as ye please: but do nothing unto these men;
for therefore are they entered under the shadow of my roof.**

**[1228 L. IV, 266-268. interpretation of Genesis 19:6 9. W. I,
1847-1850. 1229]{.underline}**

All this belongs to the description of this horrible and senseless sin,
which could neither be defended nor advised. The pious Lot may have
taken the liberty of countering this foolish behavior of his citizens
with good doctrine and Christian admonition and warning, but he did
nothing about it, because the longer he did so, the more foolish they
became. He calls them brothers and not, as they were worthy of, tyrants
or knaves, and asks them most kindly to desist from their arrogance and
not to commit sacrilege against his guests. But they are much more
embittered by this; what would they have done if he had punished them so
publicly and called them servants of Satan, as they were, and enemies of
God?

68 \"A gentle answer,\" says Solomon, Proverbs 15:1, \"quenches anger\":
but these are so enraged that they are more embittered than quenched by
good words. So Lot does not leave it at that, that he tries the matter
in kind words and ways, but he tries the utmost and offers them his two
daughters only for the reason that he saves his guests from disgrace and
injustice. He does not consider the certain danger in which he puts his
daughters, who have already been entrusted with men.

\(69\) Now you see what a great and abominable sin the Sodomites have,
who had no way to counsel. They have utterly despised the word; so these
two supreme means by which Lot tries it in such danger, namely the very
kindest words, and that he offers his own daughters to such boys who are
mad and senseless with fornication, so that they abuse them as they
wish, not only help nothing with them, but also increase and strengthen
their senselessness. For they answer him nothing to the request of his
daughters, but as mad people do, they despise the female sex; as if they
wanted to say, \"Violating virgins is our daily pastime. Therefore they
turn to Lot and answer him from his sermon.

**V. 9. But they said: Come hither.**

70 Jerome has interpreted it: recede, soften, as if they had called him
the

Clear the city. But it seems more convenient and in accordance with the
truth that they have told him to go into the house and bring out the
guests.

**Then they said: Thou art the only stranger here, and wilt thou reign?
Well, we will plague you, that one. And they pressed hard upon the man
Lot.**

They want to be unmastered and unpunished. They rely on their power and
quantity, that there are so many of them, but they despise Lot as a
stranger and do not want to be judged or admonished by him. As now the
pope does with his own. Because he sits on high, he thinks he has the
power to do what he pleases, and he does not want to suffer any
punishment or contradiction, called the heretics and rebels who go
against his will, just as the Sodomites do here. So where neither
counsel nor help can take place, it must inevitably follow that one will
perish. Moses has so far described the sin that went on in Sodom; now he
continues with the description of the punishment. But first we want to
deal with the questions that one is accustomed to ask about this text.

\(72\) For the first question is, Whether all the people of these five
cities were perverse and wicked; and, What should be thought of women
and virgins? What should be thought of women and virgins, item, of the
little children who had not yet come to their senses? But we will leave
such questions until we come to the end of this chapter, and now
consider those which Lyra and Augustine before him also dealt with.

\(73\) Namely, whether Lot was well pleased, because for the sake of
these guests he gave up his daughters, which were his brides, and caused
them to be dishonored and defiled? For this is an evil thing for a
father to do, that he should give up his daughters, who were already
betrothed, not only to disgrace them, but to commit adultery with them,
even to slay them: and yet we see that Lot, who does this, is such a man
as is worthy to entertain angels; which is a glorious testimony of his
holiness and godliness.

**[1230 L. IV, 268-27\". Interpretation of Genesis 19:9, W. I,
1850-1853. 1231]{.underline}**

\(74\) As such faithfulness to his guests is to be praised and commended
in him, so is such the highest and most abominable unfaithfulness that
he shows to his daughters, whose honor and discipline he should have
protected and saved as a father even at the risk of his life.

This is what drives Augustine to doubt, so that he neither concludes nor
answers anything certain. This seems to be true, that among two evils
and accidents that cannot be avoided, one should let the least of them
pass over him. This, he says, makes up for the misdeed. Because either
the guests or his daughters were exposed to shame, the sin against the
daughters seemed to be the lesser. For to commit sin against men was
against nature. But St. Paul overturns such an opinion by saying in
Romans 3:8 that one should not do evil so that good may come from it,
and Augustine himself directs his interpretation and answer to the
effect that Lot did this out of a particular consternation of his mind;
such consternation, however, is not always for the best, but generally
for the worse, therefore one should not follow it. So Augustine gets rid
of such a question and leaves the reader in doubt.

Lyra, however, speaks a little more freely: although he does not
consider St. Augustine\'s opinion of the universal equation of evil to
be good (as it is neither to be praised nor to be approved), he
nevertheless brings two examples that go along with Augustine\'s opinion
and almost approve of it. First, he says, the Jews were allowed to
divorce in order to avoid a greater sin. Secondly, in large and
populated cities, it is permitted that lewd houses be free, so that the
less defilement and adultery are committed in them. Therefore, in this
case, Lot was allowed to avoid a greater sin by letting go of the one he
considered lesser.

\(77\) But Lyra rightly replies that this is acceptable and permissible
in bodily matters. For he who lets go ten guilders so that he may keep a
hundred does right; just as he who for salvation

of his whole body has a finger or hand cut off. And such teaching, that
to avoid greater harm and evil one should choose the lesser, is true in
outward and bodily things; but in spiritual things it is different, in
which one should not do evil, so that good may result. To kill a woman
is a sin; but if it should happen that she could be saved from death by
adultery, it should certainly not be done; just as Augustine is of the
opinion that one should not consider lying in order to prevent death.

78 As far as Jewish divorce is concerned, Lyra is right in the opinion
of those who say that Moses, as a lawgiver, did not have the power to
permit it, but did it by God\'s command; for God could keep marriage
together or separate it at his pleasure. As the Jews of Egypt took goods
with them and robbed them by God\'s command, and did no sin in doing so.

79 The other example of the lewd houses that are tolerated in large
cities is not worthy of much discussion. For it is obviously contrary to
God\'s law, and those who publicly tolerate such disgrace and allow it
to happen are to be considered heathens. For this is a loose command,
that they pretend that the less dishonor and adultery is done. For a
young journeyman who deals with whores, and has once abandoned his honor
and discipline, will, if he has reason and opportunity, abstain neither
from wives nor virgins. So that in this way fornication is given more
cause than it is prevented, and as a result those often fall into sin
who, if this opportunity and cause were against them, would well
abstain. For God has shown and commanded us many other and better ways
and means to prevent such sin, namely, the marriage state. Therefore,
such authorities who tolerate lewd free houses in cities should be
considered pagan. For a God-fearing authority should not permit
fornication and whoredom in any way, nor give public license to it;
because even against the authority

**[1232 L. IV, 27V-S7\". Interpretation of I Moses 19, 9. W. 1,
185S-I8S6. 1233]{.underline}**

The fact that such a disgraceful being nevertheless has its course, nor
can it be completely abolished, is a matter of will and prohibition.

80 But I come again to the most important point in this question,
namely, whether Lot is to be excused for what he does here? Lyra says
that Lot has committed a mortal sin, but because this happened to him
out of the consternation of his mind, he is not guilty of such a great
sin, even though it is a sin.

But how much better we shall do if we discuss such cases more
rationally! For what cause have we to trouble ourselves so carefully how
to excuse the saints\' sins? There have been men, because of which they
have fallen and erred at times when they have been hurried and entered
with an emergency: and yet, as far as this history is concerned, I hold
Lot excused, and hold it that he made such a charge without sin. For he
did not think that he would put his daughters in danger and disgrace,
knowing full well that they were not to be cared for by the foolish and
raging people, nor did they desire them, but thought that their anger
and foolishness could be appeased and reconciled by such a way and
means. Therefore, this speech is to be regarded as a hyperbole.

\(82\) But be it so, let this rule be observed, that the works of the
saints are not to be taken as examples to be followed. For this does not
follow: Abraham, Augustine, St. Peter 2c. did such things, therefore I
must also do them. But this follows: God says it and says it, therefore
one should do it; for God\'s word is the certain rule that cannot
deceive. Just as the jurists also say that a work is not so soon a
right, just as a right is not so soon a deed. And therefore we cannot
easily judge of such works of the saints, because we only see the mere
work as it is to be seen, but we do not see and understand their heart.

It is certain that Lot was a holy man and dear to God, otherwise he
would have perished with the Sodomites. Now he offers his daughters in
hope,

to defend his guests with them against iniquity and wantonness; but with
what intention he offered them, thou seest not. How if he, as a man full
of faith in God, had thought it certain that God would stand by him for
all danger, and that neither the daughters nor his guests would suffer
any scorn, disgrace, or wantonness? Such a heart, which looks to God\'s
goodness and omnipotence in the most certain distress and danger, can
truly not be condemned so easily. And who would doubt that he did not
also call diligently to God and sigh for the protection of his own? And
yet he was urged to such a means by the present danger, which came upon
him so suddenly and so quickly.

\(84\) Although I do not excuse Lot because of this (for he was a man,
and something human could have happened to him, and we could see the
mere deed, but not his heart), the circumstances force me to conclude
that his work is not to be blamed. And yet it does not follow that one
should accept such a work as an example, or follow it, as if it were
permissible that one might commit a small sin in order to avoid a
greater one. For what is done apart from law and order is not to be
accepted as a law, but is to be regarded as a miracle, from which no one
is to make any rule or law.

\(85\) And let the teachers of the church take special care that they
teach a certain thing; therefore let them teach your people not such
individual examples, but rules. You are not Lot, you are not Abraham;
therefore do not imitate what Lot and Abraham did.

The rebellious spirit of Thomas Muenzer held up to his peasants the
example of David, when he fought against the Syrians, and he ordered
them to fight against the nobility according to the same example. This
means transforming an example into a legal principle and making a rule
out of a deed. This can never be done without danger, because if one
deviates from the common rule prescribed in God\'s Word and builds on a
mere work, one tempts God by it. He who is the-

**[1234 L- IV, 272-274. interpretation of I Moses 19:9. w. I, 1856-18S8.
1235]{.underline}**

hen anyone is not called by a special command of God apart from the rule
of God\'s word, that he should be a miracle man, that I thus speak, who
remains by the rule in God\'s word, he will not fail nor err. But Lot,
Abraham and such special saints are miracle-men, whose spirit is moved
outside the rule, and walks along outside all examples and consequences.
For they have a special profession and high instruction, which you do
not have.

Therefore, we should learn that when such histories are presented to us,
we should not focus on the examples or special works, but on the order
and rule of God\'s Word. What Lot did is none of your business. For
\"who are you to judge a strange servant?\" Rom. 14, 4. But God\'s
commandment concerns you, that you should bring up your wife and
children in the fear of God, and be careful not to give them cause to
sin. If danger befalls you and you can keep them in discipline and
honor, you must not put them in danger yourself and make them
dishonorable, nor excuse yourself with Lot\'s example. For you are not
Lot, and because you depart from the rule of God\'s commandment, you
tempt God. For you are not commanded to depart from the rule and to
follow the examples and miraculous works of others.

Abraham kills the four kings of Egypt and twice puts his wife in danger
of her honor and discipline. Lot gives up his daughters to ravish them.
But why they both do this is none of your business; for God has thus
displayed His wisdom and power through them.

89 Therefore I may be amazed at such works, but I cannot and should not
do them. Just as we marvel at Peter walking on the sea (Matth. 14, 29),
Christ (Matth. 4, 2) and Moses fasting for forty days (Ex. 24, 18), we
do not follow them. For the works of the saints that go against God\'s
commandment and order are miraculous deeds that we cannot imitate. But
if they are such deeds that they cannot be condoned or excused, as when
Lot put his daughters to sleep, then they are sins that cannot be
forgiven by God.

should not happen to us. Now this is not new, nor strange, that the
saints fall and stumble. \"Seven times a day,\" says the Scripture,
Prov. 24:16, \"the righteous may fall.\" For since they have a sinful
flesh as well as we, it is no wonder that they fall at times: but where
they can be excused, we are to praise GOD by it. So I consider Lot to be
a miracle man, in whom God wanted to reveal His wisdom and power.

\(90\) For this reason, since the Scriptures present to us a variety of
works, rights, examples, rules, miracles, and divine commandments or
laws, among all of these one should observe, teach, and practice the
right, rule, and law. When the grammarian sets this rule: All nouns
ending in *a in the* Latin language are feminine gender, the word poema
is as it were a miracle, if it is held against this rule; for it is
neuter gender. If one is to look for a mitigation or alleviation in the
laws, this is like a miracle of the jurists; for it deviates from the
string and rule of law: and yet it remains true that where the law is
most severe, there it is also no law, but the highest injustice. So
physicians also have their rules and canons; but how often does it
happen by chance in illnesses that they have to abandon them and cure an
illness in another way, which is contrary to their rules and right?
Therefore, these are clumsy lawyers and physicians who simply insist on
their rule without any consideration of accidental circumstances: just
as in theology, the saints of works, who put the whole world into such a
strict and rigid regiment, to the great detriment of the body, the good
and the souls\' bliss.

\(91\) One should indeed teach such rules and keep them; but God, to
show His power and wisdom, does much against the rule through specially
gifted people, whom He specially appoints, although there are very few
of them. The others, who are not highly and specially gifted, must keep
the order and rule in God\'s word; for if they do not keep it to high
persons who are from the

**[1236 L. IV, 274-276. interpretation of i Genesis 19, 9I i. W. I,
I858-I86I. 1237]{.underline}**

If they wanted to imitate this rule, they would shamefully run into it
and hit each other. That is why such works are praised, because they are
done by high and wonderful people, but no one can imitate them happily,
but one has to be like a weak and clumsy jumper, who, if he wants to
jump over a ditch or a stream, has to use an advantage and take a stick
to help him, since everyone who is strong and agile crosses over easily
and completely, without any advantage and help. But now let us look at
Moses further.

**III.**

(v. 9, 10, 11) **And when they were come running, and would have broken
out the door, the men took hold, and drew Lot in unto them into the
house, and shut the door. And the men that were at the door of the house
were smitten with blindness, both small and great, until they were
weary, and could not find the door.**

After the frenzied and foolish Sodomites had taken the trouble to break
down the door, it was time for the guests to protect themselves and to
show their help and loyalty to their so willing and faithful host, who
had tried everything that could have served for their salvation. For Lot
did not know that they were angels, but otherwise took them for holy men
who visited the churches around and preached God\'s word from time to
time. Therefore he worshipped God in them and honored them in all
holiness and served them as if they were sent by God. That is why he and
his whole house are rewarded very richly for such honor and service. For
first of all he is protected by them against the senseless people by the
fact that the angels strike them with such blindness, as Lyra also
remarks that they cannot see at all, or since they do see, they still
cannot recognize what they see; like a drunkard who has his eyes open
and sees, but what he sees he cannot recognize nor comprehend.

This is what the Hebrews actually call sanverim. The Sodomites saw the
door, but were mistaken in their reasoning, and

thought it was the wall. Again, they grabbed the wall and thought it was
the door. This is not natural, but unnatural and unusual blindness and
uselessness of heart, like a miracle. Just as it was a miracle that the
Syrians did not see the prophet Elisha with his servant, 2 Kings 6:18
ff, and the Jews did not see Christ in the temple, John 8:59. God often
uses such miracles to visibly save His own, whom He wants to protect, so
that even the enemies have to see it. This is called being blind with
seeing eyes; as it is written in the Gospel Luc. 24, 16: \"Their eyes
were kept from seeing Him. So Mary Magdalene saw Christ as a gardener on
Easter Day, John 20:15, and the Syrians did not see that they were led
to Samaria, 2 Kings 6:19, although they saw all other things. In the
same way, the Sodomites, when they dared to break down the door, were
struck with blindness by the angels, so that the door and the window
disappeared before their eyes. Thus in all lines many pious men were
miraculously delivered and saved, that they escaped from their danger,
and mocked their enemies as it were.

94 But here we must also see the difference. When the Syrians are struck
blind by the prophet and feel the hand of the Lord, they are corrected
and turn to the Lord. But here, when the Sodomites feel the hand of the
Lord, they are not corrected, for they are blind all night long and do
not stop searching for the door until they are tired of groping and
grasping. How do you think Lot will have felt here, sitting up all
night, waiting for such foolish people to come in? Undoubtedly, the
angels would have comforted him, saying that all their efforts would be
in vain. Therefore, no doubt, they spent the whole night watching,
worrying, weeping and crying, especially Lot\'s wife and daughters.
Although the Sodomites feel that they are struck with blindness, they do
not take this as a punishment from God, but rather as a punishment from
God.

**[1238 . D. IV, 276-278. Interpretation of Genesis 19:9 11. W. I,
1861-1864. 1239]{.underline}**

think they are thus charmed and blinded by the devil.

\(95\) For it is always the case that the wicked are the most obdurate
and believe that God has them in His fold. The godly, however, tremble
and fear God\'s wrath, and do not think as if their punishment comes
from the devil, but from God, who is angry with them; therefore they are
frightened by a rustling leaf, and are afraid, since they are also safe
and without any danger; and cannot have such thoughts as the wicked,
namely, that their misfortune and accident comes from the devil, as it
truly comes from him. For God does not afflict and punish His own, but
rather reproaches the devil for doing it; as we have an example of this
in Job: his children are killed by fire, his livestock is killed by
thunderstorms, not because God was angry with him, but because Satan was
an enemy to him, Job 1:12 ff.

\(96\) So also, when pestilence and other calamities come, we should say
that they are the works of Satan, and that Satan is fierce and wicked,
but God is gracious and merciful and favorable to us, because we believe
in His Son.

\(97\) For in this way the holy martyrs overcame death and all their
hardships, believing that God was merciful to them, but that their
torment and torture came from sorcery and the devil, whom God prevented
from trying and testing their faith: therefore, even in the midst of
their hardships, they were joyful and mocked Satan. We should do the
same, but we are usually too weak to do so, as the examples of great
saints testify. For Paul also feels fear and melancholy; but when he
sees the brethren, he regains heart and confidence, Acts 28:15. 28, 15.
The wicked do not feel such trepidation and terror, for they are sure
and believe that God is favorable to them. Even if an accident happens
to them, they blame it on Satan and remain safe.

98 So, since the Sodomites are struck with blindness, they feel well
what they have suffered, but they do not take it as a punishment.

They do not believe in God, but think that they have been bewitched by
Lot. But if we could do this and in that case follow the wicked, we
would be fine; as we are tempted and urged to do so by countless and
very certain promises of God.

\(99\) Therefore, we are to remember and reprove these things
diligently, both to ourselves and to others, lest in temptations we give
too much credit to our flesh or to our reason, and despise the word. For
it is not God who afflicts you, if you believe in Christ, but the devil;
he is your enemy, and seeks cause and opportunity to challenge and
afflict you. But you might say: Yes, I recognize that I am a sinner,
that is why I am not a Christian, and that is why my misfortunes and
accidents are sent to me by God, who is angry with me. But such things
are called evil concluded, and do not follow; for Christians are they
which believe a remission of sins. If you therefore believe in Christ,
gladly hear his word and accept it with faith, you are a true Christian,
and your sins do not hinder you at all. Therefore, if you often
encounter something unpleasant, conclude boldly that it comes from the
devil and that God is not angry with you for it, because as far as he
allows it to happen, your faith will be challenged and tempted for your
good.

Learn this from your and God\'s adversaries and enemies. For while all
threats are aimed at them, they do not recognize them, but catch the
promises and comfort themselves with them. Do the same. For it is a
great shame for you if you do not understand the true doctrine that you
profess. You fear God and believe in God, therefore not the law but the
gospel belongs to you. But now you abandon the gospel and take up the
law, which does not concern you, but the stubborn and the secure.

101 Therefore this is the spiritual weakness of which all the saints
complain. But it is useful for us to ward off the hope in us by not
relying on ourselves, but by humbling ourselves and learning to trust
and rely only on the grace that God offers us in His Son. For this is

[**1240 IV, 278-280. Interpretation of** I **Genesis** 19, 9 13. **W. I,
1864-1868. 1241**]{.underline}

It is certainly true that God is not angry with us, nor is he hostile to
us; otherwise he would not give us such a rich knowledge of his Son. He
would also not give us the Holy Spirit, which first fruits we have
received, Rom. 8, 23. Therefore we also confess the Son of God and do
not blaspheme Him, as the papists do; we also resist sin to some extent,
so that we would wish to be like the sodomites in this case, and would
laugh at and mock Satan\'s fury and wrath according to their example,
but we constantly think that God loves us who believe in Christ and
keeps us under His protection and protection.

102\) What our translation has: \"So that they could not find the
door,\" in Hebrew means: \"They have grown weary, and yet have not found
the door. Leu is a familiar word, and comes from leah, a weak, weary one
who seemed unable to live because of weakness. These words therefore
indicate their obstinate stubbornness, that even then, when they were
struck with blindness, they did not stop racing and raging, but
continued searching and groping for the door until they had to let it go
out of fatigue and, like the tired, their eyes fell shut.

**Third part.**

**Of Lot\'s Children, Servants and Oath Keepers.**

**V.12. 13. And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any more a
husband, and sons, and daughters, and whosoever thou hast in the city,
bring him out of this place. For we will destroy this place, because
their cry is great before the LORD, which hath sent us to destroy it.**

103\) Here it is first discussed whether Lot had more sons and
daughters, because the angels said to him that if he had more of his own
in the city, he should bring them out with him; but afterwards Moses had
no more than two daughters.

remembered. And in this I follow Lyra\'s opinion, namely that here the
angels speak according to human manner and habit, and act as if they do
not know whether Lot has others who belong to his house and family. For
above (Cap. 13, 5. ff.) the text reported that he had cattle and many
shepherds, so that he could not have lived with Abraham.

104 From this another question arises, namely: Where have such his
cattle and shepherds remained? For the history that follows shows
nothing of this. And I myself cannot get involved in such a strange
story, unless it seems that the shepherds with the cattle may have lain
outside the city in a safe place in the field. For the fact that some
consider it as if Lot\'s need and poverty forced him to sell his cattle
and leave his servants behind is not only unbelievable, but also
shameful to him. But as it was in the city at that time, it is
especially terrible that also his servants and his servants, who were in
his house, were against their master, and got into such security, in
which the whole city lived. But we want to leave this undecided, since
the scripture does not even think of this, but afterwards clearly says
that only four souls were preserved. Although his wife finally perishes
on the way, the father alone remains alive with his two daughters.

Now this is a strange example of a special wickedness, that the pious
and God-fearing householder could not keep some shepherd nor some
maidservant in obedience. This so great annoyance, that their lord alone
would have the whole city against him, deceived everyone, so that they
thought: Our lord is a simple and pious man, takes in for lodging
whoever comes, and yet, as is the way of the world, he often receives
little thanks for it: just as he has now, out of his simplicity, brought
such misfortune upon himself by keeping these guests with him against
their will 2c. For such is the common and constant course in the world,
that the

**[1242 L. IV, 280-282. interpretation of I Moses 19:12-14. W. I.
I868-I87I. 1243]{.underline}**

Saints will be considered foolish, and for those who do foolish things.
Since he therefore preached about future punishment and wanted to
preserve his house, they will have ridiculed and despised him as a
foolish and ridiculously superstitious old man. This opinion pleases me
better; and many examples prove that the servants are in the habit of
doing so, especially when there is need and danger, which alone proves
which are true or false friends.

106 But here we should also note the word that means to bring forth or
to bring forth. For it is precisely this word that Moses uses in the
history of Abraham (Cap. 14, 18) of Melchizedek, that he brought forth
bread and wine. Which text the papists falsify and want to base their
sacrifice on, when this word means nothing else than that Melchizedek
brought forth bread and wine, and with such a gift and worship received
Abraham as a conqueror. So that the stiff-necked and godless sacrificers
and patrons of the sacrifice are not only relegated and driven in by a
theologian who deals with the trades in the divine Scriptures, but also
by grammar; since it is so foolish and inconsistent that one wants to
interpret the word for sacrifice in the history of Melchizedek, as if
one wanted to make a big fuss about this text, that the angels had told
Lot that he should sacrifice all his goods.

**V. 14 Then Lot went out, and spake unto his oaths, which should take
his daughters: Arise, and go out of this place; for the LORD will
destroy this city. But it was ridiculous to them.**

107\) After the Sodomites had tired themselves and had fallen asleep,
Lot, at the command of the angels, went out to his wives, to whom he
wanted to give his daughters, and warned them to be careful and to avoid
the danger. But even these do not seem to have overcome the consequences
of the indulgence of the previous day, because they have the good old

Man also laughed at. How did they think the Lord would spoil this place
so suddenly? What a great fool are you to believe these, your guests or
rather land cheats? For if such a thing should happen, there would be
other signs of the impending fall; but now everyone is happy, and all is
well, and you still come here, dreaming how this city will fall.

This is how it always goes. The nearer the world is to its misfortune
and destruction, the more certain it is, and not only laughs at all
threats, but also considers it quite impossible that it should perish so
suddenly. So Noah warns of the future flood and exhorts his fellow
citizens to repentance; but he is laughed at and taken for an old fool.
Just as we preach of the Son of God that he will come to judgment and
cast the wicked into eternal hellish fire: but when the popes and
cardinals read or hear such things, they laugh as at an impossible
thing. What harm, they say, if heaven falls?

The story is told of Pope Leo, who once invited two philosophers to the
table, one of whom argued that the soul was immortal, and the other that
it was mortal. And when they had argued and disputed vehemently against
each other for a long time, and the pope was to conclude which of them
had spoken best of the matter, it is said that he said to the one who
had argued that the soul was immortal: \"It seems that you speak rightly
and truthfully; but your opponent\'s opinion and speech makes a cheerful
face. For this is what the Epicureans are wont to do: what is good for
the flesh and according to reason, they accept contrary to revealed
truth.

\(110\) But we should neither despise such threats nor throw them to the
wind. For Lyra rightly says that Lot\'s oaths mean those who, when they
hear that God\'s judgment is threatened, laugh at it and say that it is
all deceit.

\(111\) But here one would say, If Lot\'s son-in-law was such a man,

**[1244 2!- IV\' 282-284. interpretation of Genesis 19:14. w. 1,
1871-1873. 1245]{.underline}**

Why then did the pious old man marry his daughters to them? Because a
father should see and take care that he and his children make friends
with pious people, and not give his children to godless boys 2c. Answer:
Lot had a church, which he instructed and taught, and in which he
planted the true knowledge of God, and in which, without a doubt, his
son-in-laws had also been. Therefore he considered them to be pious and
holy people, because he could not see into their hearts: but they were
hypocrites who pretended to be pious for a while. But now they are
pretending, because they laugh at the word and are drowning in such
mockery and laughter; for they do not believe that old Lot is in earnest
with such words, but laugh and mock him as a fool.

This is indeed a strange history, which should be preached often in the
church, so that we may always be just, lest we fall into the antinomian
frenzy, which annuls the law in the church; as if those who are in the
church were all holy, and as if there were no need of such examples of
divine wrath. The world likes such teachers, as they say in Jeremiah the
prophet, \"Speak what we like.\" St. Paul, however, does not want the
church to be seduced with sweet words; for sin should be punished and
God\'s wrath held against the people for the sake of the unbelievers who
are in the church, yes, also for the sake of the believers, so that they
do not cling to or give room to the sin that clings to them by nature
and the innate weakness. This is what Christ Himself does: although He
draws sinners to Himself with very kind words, He constantly complains
about the impenitent Pharisees and cries woe to them, Matth. 23:13 ff.

But here I must also say, which I had almost forgotten, about the
angels, who boast, as it were, that they are sent to destroy this place.
\"We will,\" they say, \"destroy this place\"; item: \"The Lord has sent
lins to destroy it.\" Such is as much as if they boasted that they were
executioners and God\'s destroyers and desolators.

But this belongs to the description of the ministry and power of the
angels. For Elijah, Elisha and others, as it says in Hebrews 11:35, also
perform great miracles, but not by their own power or ability, but
prayer and faith must be added as the cause, without which miracles do
not follow. Thus Peter prays and calls the lame man to stand up in faith
in Christ, Acts Hist. 3:6, but the angels are powerful of themselves, so
that they can perform miracles by their own power, which is created for
them.

For this is indeed true, that God rules this visible world not only
through men, but also through angels. He could indeed kill a thief
without the help of the executioner and without the judgment of the
worldly authorities; as he does at times, especially with death-row
thugs. In the same way he could create men without the help and union of
man and woman, as he created Adam and Eve: but it pleased his divine
majesty to use the service and help of men for all these things, that he
might thereby show his marvelous and divine power in his creatures, of
whom he would not have them to be idle. Therefore St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3, 9,
calls us all God\'s co-workers and helpers. For He uses our service for
various works, just as He uses the service of the angels, whom He
created and equipped with such strength and power that they can destroy
the land and the people out of their own acquired wealth, if God is with
them.

Now this is the great glory and honor of the angels, that they are armed
with such strength and power; as we know from the history of Isa. 37:36,
that under King Hezekiah the angel of the Lord slew a hundred and five
and eighty thousand Assyrians in one night and in one go. And Christ
himself boasts of the strength and power of the angels, when he tells
Petro about the twelve legions of angels, since one angel alone would
have been strong enough to chase away and kill the enemies of the Lord
Christ. Yes, the history of Job shows that even the evil angels are
armed with great strength and power, Job 1:13 ff.

**[1246 L. IV, 284-2SS. Interpretation of Genesis 19:14, W. I,
IS7S-I876. 1247]{.underline}**

\(117\) And it is very profitable to know this, that the pious may have
comfort, and the wicked be troubled. For we who believe in Christ may be
sure that the princes of heaven are with us, and not one or two of them,
but a great multitude; as Lucas Cap. 2, 13, that with the shepherds were
the multitude of the heavenly host. And if we were without this guard
and protection of the dear angels, and God did not thereby ward off
Satan\'s fury and rage, we could not live for a moment.

For what Satan\'s power and authority is, and what he most desires and
seeks, we have sufficient instruction and testimony from the history of
Job. For he stirs up storms, makes thunder and lightning, or, as the
Scripture Job 1:13 ff. says, he throws down fire from heaven, drives up
enemies, offends and attacks the body and makes it full of swarms.
Therefore the good angels always have to do with it and prevent that
such a cruel enemy does us no harm; and neither medicine nor anything
else would help against it, if the good angels were not there. And that
at times, when new diseases occur, new remedies and advice are found
against them, is not the skill of man, but the help and service of the
angels, who rule and guide the hearts of the physicians; just as Satan
also rules and drives his own, as Paul says Eph. 2:2.

\(119\) What Moses says here about the good angels destroying and
devastating the sodomite land belongs to this: First, that we learn to
fear God, because we have such a powerful enemy in Satan. Secondly, that
we trust in God\'s goodness, who has ordained for us such excellent high
princes and patrons, through whom He protects His own so mightily. For
everyone knows what the devil does through the Turk, through the Pope of
Rome, and through the spirits of the swarm, in that he is not only
hostile to the body, but also seizes the soul and holds it captive, 2
Tim. 2:26. But we are comforted by the hat of the dear angels, whom God
has made stronger and more powerful than Satan.

So this is a marvelous government of God, which He has appointed with
His creatures, that the whole human race, which stands free and naked
before the lions, wolves, dragons and all the terrible princes of Satan
(who are trained to do harm not only with the sword, pestilence and
other innumerable diseases, but also with all kinds of heresies), is
nevertheless protected by the dear angels who fight for the pious. And
so it pleases God to prove His glory through the creatures, but not in
the same way. For Elijah caused fire to fall from heaven, 2 Kings 1:10,
the same following his word and faith; so he caused the heavens to rain,
1 Kings 18:41, but not from such power as the angels perform such
miracles, namely, from their own power or gift, so that they are
created. But when the saints do such things, they obtain them by faith
and prayer.

\(121\) The question whether Lot also sinned by worshipping the angels
was dealt with above, and the answer to this question is that the angels
say that they were sent by the Lord. Therefore Lot does not speak as
with angels, but as with the Lord. Just as the works done at God\'s
command are rightly called God\'s works. For this reason Christ also
says Luc. 10, 16: \"He who hears you hears me\"; item Matth. 25, 40:
\"Inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you
did it to me. For this is a common rule, and it is absolutely true,
namely, that if something good is done either by men or by angels, it
should be considered as if it had been done by the Lord, and he alone
should be thanked for it.

\(122\) And this rule is necessary, lest we make Moses a heretic and Lot
an idolater, because he speaks of the creature as of its Creator. \"The
Lord,\" he says to his sons in oath, \"will destroy this place,\" when
the angels had said they would destroy the same place. So Lot does not
look at the person of the angels, but at God, who had commanded this.

**[1248 IV, 288-288. interpretation of I Moses 19, 14. w. I, 1876-1879.
1249]{.underline}**

123\. such is that Christ says in the gospel Matth. 19, 4. 5.: \"Have
you not read that he who made man in the beginning made man to be male
and female, saying, \'For this reason shall a man leave his father and
mother, and shall cleave to his wife? 2c. Now how are we to unite Moses
with Christ here? For Moses shows in very clear words that Adam spoke
such words, and yet Christ says that God spoke them.

124 Answer: What Adam says, he says by divine command, therefore it is
not his word but God\'s. And this is our great honor, so that the divine
majesty may adorn us, in that she performs her works through us in such
a way that she calls our word her word and our work her work; so that
one might rightly say that the mouth of a pious Christian teacher is
God\'s mouth, and the hand that you stretch out to serve a poor brother
with it is God\'s hand. Thus, when Adam says to Cain, Genesis 4:6, \"Why
does your heart hide?\" this is rightly called God\'s word, even though
it was spoken through Adam\'s mouth.

\(125\) And the heretics err greatly in this, and join together what
does not follow one another, when they discourse about the oral word and
the sacraments, so that they completely deny God His preaching office;
for he who cancels the word, and does not accept it as if it were spoken
by God, cancels everything. For take away the word of baptism, of
absolution, of the Lord\'s supper, and all these things will be nothing.

Therefore, the sacramentarian argument is not only foolish but also
ungodly, because they say that such outward signs do not help to
salvation, and then draw many examples and sayings from Scripture, such
as John 6:63: \"The flesh is of no use\" 2c. For one must make a
distinction between external things and not reject all external things
in general. But then they are rightly rejected as being of no use for
salvation if they are done out of human discretion, or rather, if they
are done without God\'s word. Otherwise, God will work through the
service of His creatures. Therefore, before all

Consider these things, whether such external things are done according
to the appointment and will of God or not. And if it is found that
God\'s word or appointment is not involved, then you are right in saying
that the external things do nothing for salvation, but also harm it; as
Christ says Matth. 15, 9: \"They serve me in vain, because they teach
such doctrines, which are nothing but the commandment of men.

But if you see that such external things are based on God\'s word and
are done by divine command, then bow your knees and worship such
external things secretly with yourself, saying, \"Such things are not
called me by my pastor, not by St. Peter or Paul, but by my Father in
heaven; therefore I will be obedient to him in all humility, and believe
that such obedience will serve me to my salvation.

This distinction is very necessary, and because the heretics either do
not know it or despise it, they fall into terrible errors. For
Schwenkfeldt\'s conclusion that no external thing helps to salvation,
therefore baptism, the preaching of the gospel, and the Lord\'s supper
as external things are of no use, is not absolutely true, and indeed it
is true, because external things must be distinguished. For some of
these are only human things and invented by men, of which it is rightly
said that they do nothing for salvation. But of those that are ordained
and commanded by God, it cannot rightly be said that they do nothing for
salvation, because they are instituted and ordained for our salvation,
as Christ says of baptism: \"He who believes and is baptized will be
saved\"; and Paul Rom. 10:10: \"With the mouth one confesses to
salvation.\"

Thus, although the verbal word of a man is a word, it is ordained by
divine command and authority for our salvation. For God wills to rule
this world through the angels and men, which are his creatures, as
through their service; as he gives day and light by the sun, by the
moon, even by fire and candles. Therefore, one could also say here: It

**[1250 L.iv, 2M-sso. Interpretation of I Genesis 19, 14. W. i,
i87s-isW. 1251]{.underline}**

no external thing is useful, therefore also the sun, as it is an
external thing, is not useful, that is, it shines, it does not warm 2c.
But who would be satisfied with such a loose and foolish talker?

130\) So that the rule of which I have spoken above remains, namely,
that God no longer wants to act and work without means, or out of order,
and, as the sophists speak, simply according to His mere power and
omnipotence, but through His creatures, of whom He does not want them to
be idle. Thus he gives us food and drink, not as he gave it to the Jews
when he rained down bread from heaven, Ex 16:14, but through work, when
we diligently perform the works of our profession: neither will he make
men of clay any more, as he made Adam, Ex 2:7, but uses for this purpose
the union of man and woman, and gives them his blessing. This is called
God\'s ordinary power and omnipotence, namely, when He uses the ministry
of angels or men; as in the prophet Amos in 3 Cap. V. 7, there is a
clear saying that God does nothing that He does not first declare to His
prophets.

But if something happens at times apart from the service of angels or
men, it may be rightly said: What is above us is none of our business.
For it behooves us to look to the ordained power of God, and to judge
and conclude from it. God can indeed save without baptism; just as we
believe that little children who at times do not receive baptism by
mistake of their parents or by some other chance are not condemned
because of it. But in the church we are to judge and teach according to
the ordained power of God, namely, that without the same outward baptism
no one will be saved 2c. So it is according to the ordained power of God
that water makes wet and fire makes burn. But at Babylon Daniel\'s
companions remained unharmed in the midst of the fire, Dan. 3, 25. Such
was God\'s almighty and direct power, according to which He worked at
that time; but according to the same He does not command us to do
anything, but wants us to judge and do according to His orderly power.

132\. in the schools was before lines ge

my this saying of Dionysius: God works through his omnipotent being, but
we work through \"derived quality\". But who wants to understand what is
meant by this? But he who rightly understands the rule that we have set,
can at the same time judge the pope and the world in all their wisdom,
namely, that GOD directs everything properly through the service of men.
Therefore, no one will attain salvation by spiritual speculations, as
they are called, without the external means, but one should pay
attention to the Word, take baptism, go to the Sacrament and seek
absolution. These are all external things, but they are included in the
Word. Therefore, without them the Holy Spirit works nothing.

Before that time, before God Almighty gave us the light of the dear
Gospel, much was written and taught about the speculative and active
life, that is, how one should lead one\'s life in high thoughts and
speculations, or how one should deal with works. Therefore it followed
that some of them have described all their dreams. They all waited for
special revelations and enlightenments without external means. But what
is this but that one wants to climb heaven without ladders? That is why
they have often been deceived and deceived by the devil\'s deception and
illusion.

Therefore, at one time an old father in the desert did right, when he
saw that his monks were indulging in such secret speculations, and
warned them to refrain from them, saying: \"If you think you are going
up to heaven, and already have one foot in heaven\'s door and on the
threshold, withdraw it again soon and do not follow with the other foot.
This man has quite rejected the secret high thoughts or the speculative
life, which the unlearned and inexperienced people after him have
exalted.

**[1252 \" iv. 2M-2\". Interpretation of Genesis 19:14. W. i, isss-iWt.
1253]{.underline}**

have praised and extolled. For he who wants to make right speculations,
looks at his baptism, reads his Bible, listens to the sermon and God\'s
word, honors his father and mother, helps and lends a hand to his
brother who is poor and in need, and does not hide himself, not hide
himself in a corner, as the unruly monks and nuns do, and kittele
himself there with his devotion, and let himself think that he is thus
sitting with God in his lap, and can deal with him and act without
Christ, without the Word, without the Sacraments 2c.

Such people speak very contemptuously of the common life in everyone\'s
profession and works; and I myself became very angry before God helped
me out of this error. For such thoughts are pleasing to reason, and it
considers them angelic spirituality; as Paul says Col. 2, 18. Georg
Wetzel, the hypocrite and apostate blasphemer, once reproached me that
we teach too many external things, that one should also keep the
spiritual ones 2c.; as reason always wants to float in miraculous works
that are above it.

But beware of such snares of Satan, and learn to speak of the
speculative life differently than it was spoken of in monasteries,
namely, that the right speculative life is to hear the oral word and
believe it, and to desire to know nothing else but Christ crucified, 1
Cor. 2:2. He alone is the one from whom one can speculate usefully and
salutarily; do not depart from him; For those who reject or despise the
humanity or flesh of the Lord Christ, and thus speculate about God, as
the monks of old and now Schwenkfeldt and others also do, are either
driven to despair when the search for God\'s majesty becomes too
difficult for them, or they allow themselves to be deceived by Satan
with his deception, so that they foolishly rejoice and let themselves
dream as if they were sitting up in heaven. And for those who despair
over this, they can still be counselled; but for those who are drunk
with joy, as it were, and think that they are sitting with God in his
lap, there is no help.

137\. gerson has also written from the spe

The word of God, which is the life of a culprit, also adorns it and
praises it very highly; and inexperienced and simple-minded people, when
they read it, take it as if it had been spoken by God Himself: but in
truth, as the saying goes, they take dirt for gold. Therefore, if such
useless speculators call you an external or worldly person, do not
accept it, but thank God for His word and such His external signs, and
let others have their great and splendid speculations.

I have read such books with all diligence, and I also urge you to read
them carefully. And I have no small reason why I urge and impress upon
you that you should look to the ordered power of God, or that which is
revealed in the Word, and to His services. For we do not want to deal
with the mere God, whose ways are unsearchable and judgments are hidden,
as Paul says Rom. 11:33.

139\. but to the ordered power of God, that is, His Son who became man,
we will adhere, in whom are hidden all the treasures of the Godhead,
Col. 2, 3. to the child who lies in His mother Mary\'s womb, and to the
sacrifice that hangs on the cross, we will adhere: there we will look
right at God, yes, look into His heart, that He is gracious and
merciful, Ps. 103, 8. 103, 8, that He does not want the sinner to die,
but to turn and live, Ezk. 33, 11. From such looking or speculating
comes true peace and joy into the heart. Therefore Paul says in 1 Cor.
2, 2: He knows nothing but Christ. We can make use of such speculation
with fruit and benefit. But the thoughts of the union of soul and body,
of which Gerson pretends to be great, are often done with great danger,
and are Satan\'s pure mockery, which causes such devotion in the heart.

One reads a story of a nun who amused herself with her speculations and
diligently refrained from others, so that her thoughts would not be
prevented. At a time when she sits in her devotion and thoughts, and
lets herself think.

**[1254 8. IV, 2W-2St. Interpretation of Genesis 19:14, 15. W. 1,
1884-1889. 1255]{.underline}**

she has a golden skirt on and a golden crown on her head, and there she
sits in joy like a bride at the wedding, the other nuns become aware of
Satan\'s mockery and see that she has a cow dung on her head, which she
took for a golden crown. This may or may not have happened, but it shows
that people have often been shamefully deceived with their speculations.
Whoever therefore wants to be safe from this, let him flee such
speculations, and hold in honor the ministry of preaching, through which
God deals with us and in which He gives Himself to us to look at, as it
were. But now back to history.

**Fourth Part.**

**Of Lot\'s exit from Sodom, of the fourfold command given to him, and
of the request he makes.**

**I.**

**V. 15 When the morning dawned, the angels hurried Lot and said: Arise,
take thy wife, and thy two daughters which are found, lest thou also
perish in the iniquity of this city.**

This is an example of a good love, which Lot proves here in that he
reluctantly leaves the city, not only for his own sake, but also for the
sake of the citizens. For he desired that at least the punishment be
postponed, if he could not avert and abolish it. And is this the cause
of his delaying and delaying; follow therein the example of Abraham, who
also tried all means, whether he might be able to keep his neighbors
alive. For love is of such a nature that even in the danger and distress
of the enemy it is melancholy and sorrowful.

142 As for Lot himself, he does not doubt the angels\' word, but it is
already before his eyes, how the fire will fall from heaven and set the
city on fire. For his faith takes hold of the word and believes it.
After faith comes love, so that he also thinks about how he can help and
save his neighbor,

and forgets all the evil and violence that had befallen him. But since
he is unable to avert the misfortune, he seeks counsel by delaying for a
long time; as an example to us, that we should also care for the
salvation of our adversaries, take care of them, and strive not only for
our own benefit, but also for the benefit of others.

At the present time we see that a great and certain calamity is coming
upon Germany: and the more we cry out and the more diligently we exhort
to repentance, the angrier our adversaries become. When we punish and
rebuke them, as we should, they blaspheme us, exercise all tyranny
against those who are members of our church, and strangle whom they can,
allowing themselves neither to be advised nor to be defended, and hurry
and press themselves by force to their own destruction and that of all
Germany. Faith now does what is due to it, for we believe that it is
impossible for God to suffer such blasphemy and desecration of His
divine Word any longer, and yet, because the accident and the punishment
cannot be averted, we pray that God will forgive them, whether there are
perhaps still some to be converted.

144 Thus Hezekiah, when he hears the prophecy of the Babylonians
ravaging Judea, asks that only peace remain because he lived, 2 Kings
20:19; and in his epistle Jude teaches vv. 22-23 that we should have
mercy on some and come out of the fire. Therefore, let us also call upon
God at this time, so that He will not lead us into temptation, and so
that we may, if not keep His wrath at bay, nevertheless endure it, so
that at least some may be helped out of the future fire, which all of
Germany will certainly have to provide for our sins.

145\) One asks of Lot\'s daughters, \"Were they manned? But there is
nothing in it. That they were engaged, they think it almost all. But we
should rather consider that these holy virgins did not resent the fall
and anger of the men to whom they were betrothed, but rather followed
their father, for they were trusted by him, and they surely despised and
laughed at their old father\'s kind-hearted warning and care for them.

**[1256 IV, 294-296, interpretation of Genesis 19:15, W. I, 1889-1892.
1257]{.underline}**

146\. But here one should also notice the special way of speaking, which
Moses uses here. By divine command and judgment, the angels command Lot
to go out of the city, and make a serious threat, saying, \"Lest thou
also perish in iniquity,\" or for the iniquity of \"this city. So he
explicitly says about the iniquity of this city, not of some people, but
of the whole place. Now these are very harsh words, so that he presents
the sin as so common and widespread that he does not call it the sin or
iniquity of the young people, or of men or women, or of the common
people or of the authorities, but of the whole city. Therefore it must
have been such a sin, which was committed with the consent of the
authorities and all classes of men in the same city, and everyone was
free: and not only the perpetrators of it, but also those who consented
to it, were dragged into it.

147\) The Benjamites also had the same sin, who had defiled a Levite\'s
wife to death, and not only did they not punish those who had committed
such defilement and violence, but they also forced the whole tribe to
defend such sin, Judges 20:13 ff. 20:13 ff. Such sins, which are
defended by the authorities who are to punish, bring punishment quickly;
as the Benjamites were so completely slain and destroyed that only six
hundred men of the whole tribe remained.

For God has ordained three estates, to which He has given orders to
punish sin. The first is the parents, who are responsible for discipline
in the home, and who are to govern children and servants. The second is
the secular authorities, who bear the sword, that they may compel the
disobedient and negligent by discipline and force. The third is the
church or preaching authority, which rules with the word. And with this
threefold rule and power God has kept the human race against the devil,
against our own flesh and against the world, so that offenses should not
get the upper hand, but be cut off. The

Parents are like disciplinarians over the young people: but those who
are grown up and tardy in their duties are punished and chastised by the
authorities through the executioner. In the church, the wanton, secure
and impenitent sinners are banished.

Thus the divine majesty shines and explains itself everywhere, that it
uses the service of men according to its manifold and immeasurable
wisdom. If they despise their profession, and either look through their
fingers and let trouble happen, or do not punish seriously, they bring
foreign sin upon themselves.

\(150\) For if a father does not punish his children\'s sins, they
become his own sins. Adultery, capital murder, usury 2c. are also sins
of those who commit them; but if the authorities do not punish them, as
is almost the case nowadays, such individual sins become common sins and
sins of the whole city, which is always followed by a common accident.
For this rule is right, that the perpetrator and the one who consents to
the deed deserve equal punishment. Thus, if a bishop sees in the church
error, heresy, evil customs, 2c., and does not punish and banish the
impenitent, he makes himself guilty of such sins. How then Lot must hear
such a terrible judgment that if he does not go out to the city, he must
be guilty of the same sin and perish with the unbelieving citizens.

151: So when Gen 16:24 God wanted to punish the rebels, Dathan, Abiram
and Korah, Moses cries out to all the others, \"Depart from the tents of
these wicked men, lest you also perish. And since Ex. 32, 28. the people
of Israel sacrificed to the calf, three thousand men were slain by the
Levites; and if this had not happened, the whole nation would have been
slain and such sin would have been imputed to them. And when the
Reubenites had built an altar, all the congregation, fearing the
punishment, sent their messengers unto them into the land of Gilead,
saying, Whether it had been too little for them in the iniquity of
Balaam, from which they were not yet cleansed, to bring a new sin upon
them. For they see and

**[1258 D. IV, 296-298. Interpretation of Genesis 19:15. W. I,
1892-1894. 1259]{.underline}**

find that Ezekiel\'s saying Cap. 3:18 is true: \"If I say unto the
wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou warn him not, nor tell him, that
the wicked may beware of his wickedness, that he may live: then shall
the wicked die for his sin; but his blood will I require at thine
hand.\"

Now this commandment to punish sins belongs not only to the teachers in
the church and the authorities in the world government, but to every
citizen and householder in particular. Since Joseph\'s brothers had
sinned, he brought it before his father and accused them, Gen 37:2. In
the same way, among citizens, one should not help the other hide his
sin, and in the church, one brother should punish the other, as Christ
commanded, Matt 18:15, so that one does not share in the other\'s sin.
And in the secular government there are not a few temples that show that
common misery and terrible accidents have followed where the authorities
have either tolerated or defended public sin. Therefore, where this is
the case, one must get away from it, where one does not want to become a
party to someone else\'s sin and bring the punishment of someone else\'s
sin upon oneself. Thus we are warned in Revelation 18:4 to depart from
Babylon, that is, to separate ourselves completely from the priest\'s
church, if we do not want to perish with it.

153\) As far as Lot himself is concerned, he is a holy, innocent and
blameless man, and yet he must hear this threat: \"Lest thou also be
taken away,\" not because of thy sin; for therefore are we sent unto
thee, to save thee: but because of the iniquity of the city. Therefore,
in whatever state we are, authorities or commoners, we must unanimously
resist sin, lest God\'s wrath come upon us and we all be swallowed up at
the same time.

In the Greek histories we read an example of a Sibarite named Amiris:
\"When he saw a servant who owed his master a great debt, and entered a
temple behind the altar, where the

The evil-doer used to be safe, had fled, was torn out there, and on the
same citizen\'s father\'s grave had fled again and his master spared him
there: He thought it unfair that a tomb was held more sacred than the
temple and altar, so he sold everything he had and left the Sibarite
city, which was then rich and prosperous, for Peloponnesus, thinking
that some punishment would follow if things went so wrong. The other
citizens laughed at him and thought him foolish, but at last he found
great benefit in his foolishness, for the city of Sibaris was destroyed
not long afterward.

Therefore, remember this rule, that at all times when sins abound,
God\'s wrath must come. Therefore, whoever is a ruler and has an office,
let him see to it that he does his part and does not look through the
fingers of any offense, no matter how small it may be. But if sin and
wickedness gain the upper hand, let him flee from it, lest he become a
party to another\'s sin.

Therefore we are justly against the antinomians, because they pretend
that the threats of the law do not concern the church, when God has
certainly commanded that sins should be punished. For this reason, no
one should consider making an enemy of the truth. He who is an authority
and wields the sword, use his office with seriousness, and punish those
from whom trouble comes, and do not ask whether other people are angry
or not.

157 Let a preacher or teacher in the church do likewise, and freely and
unhesitatingly punish what is offensive, and forbid the sacrament and
other Christian works to the impenitent. For the gospel is not to be
preached to such ungodly despisers, but to the afflicted and miserable;
as it is written in Isaiah Cap. 61, 1: \"The Spirit of the Lord is upon
us only; he hath sent me to preach to the miserable, to bind up the
brokenhearted,\" 2c. not to comfort the proud and stiff-necked
despisers, who always lead the greatest multitude; as Christ Luc. 8, 5.
ff. indicates in the parable of the

**[1260 . L.IV, WS-30O. Interpretation of Genesis 19:15, 16, W. 1:18A-E.
1261]{.underline}**

Seeds. And here we hear a rule that one should not share in the sins of
others. For though Lot was not an authority, but a commoner, and without
vice, yet if he had not fled, the sin of the city would have become his
sin, and he would have perished with others.

**V. 16 And when he was gone, the men took him by the hand, and his
wife, and his two daughters, because the LORD spared him; and they
brought him out, and left him without the city.**

Lot was commanded by God to leave that city and go out: he should have
obeyed the same command. For when God speaks, he speaks earnestly, and
does not play or joke, as we humans are wont to do, who often speak
differently than we think. But the good old man suffers the temptation,
which also troubles us all. For just as Satan in Paradise misled and
disturbed Eve with the question of why or for what purpose God had
forbidden her to eat from the tree, so our reason also hinders and
deceives us, so that we are not content to know that God has commanded
us something, but fall into foolish anxiety, and still want to know the
reason why God has commanded us this or that. God is hostile to such
presumption, and does not want us to ask many questions, but wants us to
obey His commandment straightforwardly, and to be satisfied by this
cause alone, that He has commanded us.

That is why Lot suffers a human and common challenge here, that he
hesitates a little too long out of a good thought, as he thought. For
perhaps he thought that the Lord would not act with such severity and
would spare the innocent children: but God did not want such thoughts,
but wanted him to obey His command and get out of the city. That is why
Moses uses the word mahmah here, which I believe to mean to refrain or
to forgive, so that those who are about to go into a city may be spared.

The first thing you have to do is to get the right answer.

But God cannot suffer such forgiveness; for he who is commanded to go
away and still consults with himself and forgives, considers God either
a liar or a joking God. If he now says to you, Go and immerse yourself
in the Elbe, you shall do so without delay and soon: as Abraham, when
God commands him in Gen. 17:10 to be circumcised with his own, soon goes
and carries out God\'s command; likewise, when he hears in Gen. 22:2
that he should sacrifice his son, he does not argue with himself about
what God has commanded him to do or why, but soon goes to the place that
was shown to him. This is also what Lot should have done: however, he is
distracted, and secretly wishes in his heart that God would be of a
different mind, and waits for his oath-makers and friends, whether they
might still come.

Therefore follows a serious text, that he and his family were taken by
the hand and led out of the house outside the city by force. For God
could not suffer such forgiveness and misgivings, and if His mercy had
not been so great over His saints, as it says in Psalm 103, v. 8, Lot
would have perished with the others over such forgiveness.

162\. whoever has the air to joke, joke with men, with women, with
children, with money 2c.; for God allows us to be happy: but when you
hear God\'s word, see to it that you are obedient without all hesitation
and counsel, and whether you lack the ability, or other obstacles fall
in your way, let at least your will be inclined and ready for it. For
God does not want any delay when He commands something, but wants you to
say with dear David Psalm 108:2: \"God, my heart is ready, and is my
right earnest.\" This was David\'s mind, therefore he was fortunate and
prospered; but Saul, who had much questioning and deliberation in
himself, since he was commanded to destroy and cut off Amalek, was cast
out of the kingdom with his family; and helped him his good

**[1262 HV.MV-Zos. Interpretation of Genesis 19:16, W. 1, 1897-1900.
1263]{.underline}**

He did not intend to give the best part of the spoils to the service of
God, but God wanted obedience to His word, 1 Sam. 15:2 ff. Therefore, if
you are not able to obey Him with your work, let your heart be inclined
and willing to do so, otherwise you will greatly anger God.

In the Song of Solomon, Cap. 5, 2. 5, the bride complains that when she
heard the voice of her boyfriend knocking, she got up to open the door
for him. But her hands were filled with myrrh, and myrrh had run over
her fingers, that is, the cross had made her weary; therefore, when she
had opened the door to her friend, he had gone away and gone elsewhere.
Therefore St. Paul admonishes his Corinthians 2 Epist. 6, 2. not to miss
the pleasant time, and draws on such admonition the saying of Isaiah
Cap. 49, 8: \"I have heard you in the acceptable time\"; and Jn. 12, 36.
Christ says: \"Believe in the light, because you have it\"; as we say in
German: One should buy, because the market is there, so that we do not
think much about it or default, unless we lack the ability.

164 Therefore Lot sinned here, that he delayed and did not go out to the
city immediately: and the heathen also punished such delay in outward
things. As Salust rightly says, when one has needed counsel, one should
set to work promptly. For wise men have seen that in delay and default
there is danger and harm, and have painted the opportunity bare behind,
since once one has let it pass, it cannot be withdrawn again. But how
much more reasonable it is that one should not delay where one has
God\'s clear and obvious commandment, but be inclined and ready to be
obedient to God without any hesitation.

It is good and very praiseworthy that Lot should be prevented from doing
so, for he cares for his sons and their family, and it grieves him that
they should perish; but be that as it may, no cause or concern should be
preferred to the word of God. Abraham also had causes that were
important enough for him to slaughter and sacrifice his son.

But he prefers his thoughts to God\'s word: and such obedience to God is
the most pleasing service of all, and brings with it rich blessings, as
the examples before us show.

Before the gospel came to light, it was considered the most holy state
to become a monk, but we, unfortunately, have spent our lives very
badly, as much as we have lived in monasteries. Now, when the blessed
light of the holy gospel shines, we spend an hour better and do more
good than we did before in monasteries all our lives. For it is the Word
of God alone that makes learned, skilful and valiant people who can do
many things rightly and praiseworthily without much effort and work,
whereas the wicked spend a long time deliberating and still accomplish
nothing rightly.

For this reason, young people should be taught and accustomed to be
obedient to their parents and schoolmasters, and such obedience should
be swift and not slow. For God is hostile to slow or tardy obedience,
but He loves the willing and ready. As we can see, even among ourselves
such service and good deeds are pleasant, which are done out of a
willing will, and according to the old saying, \"A willing and a
diligent gift is a twofold gift.

For this reason Lot sinned, because he disobeyed God\'s command and did
not obey soon; and he would have been punished for such disobedience if
the angels had not forcibly snatched him out of the city. For God spared
him, otherwise he would have been worthy of perishing with other sinners
for the sake of someone else\'s sin. Therefore, this example of mercy is
to be remembered.

Zacharias, the father of St. John the Baptist, must fall silent because
he does not believe the angel, Luc. 1, 20. A man of God is strangled by
a lion because of his disobedience, as it is written in 1 Kings 13, 24.
Thus, 3 Mos. 10, 1. 2. Aaron\'s sons, after they bring a strange fire
before the Lord, which was not commanded to them, are consumed with fire
by the Lord, so that they die. But God does not use such seriousness
against Lot, but spares him.

**[1264 L. IV, A\"-s\". Interpretation of Genesis 19:16, 17. W. I,
ISOO-ISM. 1265]{.underline}**

and forgives his sin, and keeps him almost against his will. And even
though such disobedience angers him, he is pleased with his simplicity,
for Lot had enough reason for his delay and mourning: he hoped that God
would still relieve the punishment and the great misfortune, and at
least would have gladly saved his household, his shepherds and others.

**II.**

V.17. **And when they had brought him forth, he said, Deliver thy soul,
and look not behind thee; neither stand thou in all this region. Out of
the mountain deliver thee, that thou perish not.**

Here the angel gives four commands to Lot and his wife and daughters:
First, that he should save his soul. As if to say, \"If others do not
want to be saved, why do you want to perish with them? Secondly, that he
does not look behind him. Third, that he should not stop in any place of
the same region. Fourth, that he should stay on the nearby mountain. All
these commands of the angel show sufficiently how Lot\'s heart was and
what his thoughts were. Reluctantly he goes out of the city. But when he
came out, he did not want to go far, because the city, which was to
perish and be destroyed, made him very sorry; but the angels commanded
him, \"Save your soul,\" as if to say, \"The Sodomites are unrepentant
people who could neither be helped nor advised, and now their hour has
come: Therefore let them go, because they so miserably despise their
souls or lives, and save your soul, lest you also come into trouble; for
God has surely determined with Himself that He would destroy this city,
therefore get thee away, the farther the better.

Again, this is a necessary lesson. For if thou seest men who have the
word, and despise the same like the Sodomites, and ask neither for
threatenings nor for promises, remember that thou must save thy soul,
that thou perish not with such despisers. For because such are like unto
them, of whom Solomon saith, Prov. 23:35.

says that they say, \"They strike me, but I do not feel it,\" then
disaster and destruction cannot be far from them. Thus the stubborn
Pharaoh perishes in the Red Sea, Ex 14:28, and Samuel weeps in vain over
Saul the king, 1 Sam 16:1. Those who are given to a wrong mind should
beware of them, lest we become partakers of their sins and perish with
them. Therefore, in John\'s Revelation Cap. 18, 4, the church is
commanded to go out from Babylon, that is, it is commanded to separate
itself from the pope\'s ungodly church; and St. Paul commands 2 Cor. 6,
17.\"Come out from among them and separate yourselves,\" so that he
undoubtedly looks here at this command of the angel: \"Save your soul,\"
as if he wanted to say: \"Remember how you may be saved and blessed; for
that you should be concerned about others, how they may be saved, is in
vain. For there is emphasis in the word \"thou.\"

Thus Paul says Titus 3:10, 11: \"Avoid a heretical man, when he has been
admonished once and again, and know that such a one is false\"; and
Romans 12:19: \"Pray space for wrath,\" as if to say: If the unbelievers
want to be damned and perish, let them perish. Our adversaries, the
papists, have nevertheless been brought to the point where they must
confess that our teaching is righteous and true, so that they no longer
sin out of weakness or ignorance, but out of hardened minds and malice.
Therefore let us separate ourselves from them and go out from them, for
they have known the truth and yet persecute it. Who would therefore
doubt their future fall?

The other command, that Lot should not look behind him, also shows how
concerned he was for the salvation of the city. For when good friends
part from one another, they are wont to do so, often looking around for
their own. Therefore, the angel commands him to separate himself so
completely from this city that he should not even dare to look around
for it, and that he should not let its salvation and salvation come to
his mind at all, nor let himself lament its downfall. That this is
therefore a

**[1266 IV, 304-30\". Interpretation of Genesis 19:17-20. W. 1,
1903-1906. 1267]{.underline}**

This is a hard and severe command, which is why Lot\'s wife could not
keep him. For think, if one were to hear a great storm behind him and
the cries of those who would perish in it, especially those who were
dear to him, how he could refrain from looking after them at least once.
But with it the angel points at the same time to Lot\'s disobedience. As
if he wanted to say: You have sinned enough up to now, that you have
delayed with obedience; therefore learn to be obedient to God
afterwards, and be careful that you do not look behind you.

The third command, \"Do not stand in this whole area,\" means that it
tells Lot to hurry and go straight to the place where he will be safe
and not to tarry or look around. And this also belongs to the
description of how Lot\'s thoughts, who thus seeks all kinds of evasion,
were. As Moses in Exodus 2:3, 10 ff. also thinks of and uses various
reasons to refuse his calling, which God demands of him; but finally he
is forced to the point that he is unable to refuse it. For since the
word and commandment of the Lord is there, we must be obedient to it.

175 Seneca says finely that one should not look at who is speaking, but
at what is being spoken. This rule is used with people and in worldly
matters, but it is not valid in the church. For there one should only
look at who is the one who speaks. And since Eve did not do this in
paradise, and wanted to see what was said, and forgot who was speaking,
she fell. For this may well happen with men, that they pretend to be
fools, and say what is not to be said: But God is not such, but is good
and wise, therefore he cannot err. Therefore, in the church, as I have
said, one should primarily consider and look not at what is said, but at
who is the one who says it.

The fourth command, \"Go up to the mountain,\" reminds us of the
location of the same place. For Sodom and the outer cities of it were
situated in a valley on the mountain Abarim toward the east; and the
same valley is highly praised, that it is an excellent

fertile region. Just as a land that lies in a flat field is naturally
more fertile than one that lies on a mountain. So Lot is referred from
the same place to a wild and barren one.

**III.**

**V. 18. 19. 20. But Lot said to them: Oh no, O Lord! Behold, because
thy servant hath found mercy in thine eyes, let thy mercy be magnified,
which thou hast done unto me, in preserving my soul alive. I cannot save
myself on the mountain: an accident may befall me, that I may die.
Behold, there is a city near, whither I may flee, and it is small; there
will I save myself; yet it is small, that my soul may live.**

177 This is a very good example of what prayer can do and accomplish,
because Lot refuses the last command to flee to the mountain, using his
need that he does not dare to save himself on it. For he could have
fallen into a temptation and looked down from the same height into the
valley and thus perished. But this short prayer, as it is to be seen,
has everything in it that is customary in a true prayer. God gives
everything for free, out of pure grace and mercy, but still wants to be
asked for it. For that we should pray, we have a clear command; after
that, with such a command, there is also the promise that God will hear
us; finally, we have to pray in the form and manner that the Son of God
Himself has prescribed for us.

Therefore, let us learn that we need prayer most of all, and not let
ourselves be seduced and deceived by this harmful and evil temptation,
thinking that God will give us everything we need even without our
prayer, which is not necessary because He knows beforehand what is good
and useful for us. For Augustine rightly said: \"He who created you
without you will not help you or save you without you. Therefore we are
ordained to various offices, of which we are to wait, so that we may be
like him.

**[1268 IV, 306-308. Interpretation of Genesis 19:18-20. W. 1,
1906-1903. 1269]{.underline}**

sam are God\'s fellow workers, as Paul calls it 1 Cor. 3, 9. And I have
said above that God could well create a man from the ground, but it
pleases Him in another way, namely, that you should become a husband and
take a wife in a conjugal and proper way. So he might well teach and
enlighten our hearts without the oral ministry, but he will not do it:
therefore he has ordained the outward ministry and instituted the
sacraments. He could also forgive sin without baptism, but he does not
do so, but wants us to participate in his actions. Therefore, it would
be the highest ingratitude to despise this. The same may be inferred
from prayer, for this is the ordained will of God, that he will be
asked, and give to those who ask him the Holy Spirit and all that they
need.

Now let us consider what parts belong to a prayer. The first kind and
virtue of a good prayer is that one gives thanks to God and praises His
good deeds in the heart and in words. Thus, in the Lord\'s Prayer, we
pray for daily bread, but because we call God our Father in the
beginning of the prayer, we confess that we have been nourished and
protected by Him until now, and that we have received all paternal
benefits from Him. This part is called in oratory captatio
benevolentiae, or the application for benevolence, which is best done by
praise and thanksgiving.

The other part of Lot\'s prayer is the lamentation or narration of
distress: \"I,\" he says, \"will be in great danger if I go to the
mountain according to your will and command. Before, I have sinned by
delaying, and now such a case, that I delay too long, may also befall
me; therefore I beseech thee for mercy\'s sake, that thou mayest have
preserved me, that thou wouldest favor me with this, which I ask of
thee.

In the third piece, he expresses what he desires permission for, namely,
that he may flee to the next town, where he can save himself: and he
finely emphasizes this request with circumstances. \"It is small,\" says

he, \"also close to it,\" and there I could be safe from all danger.

This, then, is Lot\'s prayer, according to which God changes His counsel
and decree, which should be diligently remembered. And it is not
necessary here to discuss the secret and hidden change of the divine
will, but rather to learn that of which the 145th Psalm v. 19 also says:
\"The Lord does what the godly desire. So this was the orderly power of
God, that the sun kept its course and its usual course. But when Joshua
called to the Lord in his distress and commanded the sun to stop and
stand still, it stood still at Joshua\'s word, Josh. 10:12, 13. Now what
great miracle this is, ask the astronomers. But what is the cause? No
other, but that God does the will of those who fear him, and brings his
will into our will, only that we always keep ourselves in his fear. Now
the text here says clearly enough that this was God\'s will, that Lot
should not stand in any other place in the same whole boundary, except
on the mountain alone; but God changes his will like this, because Lot
fears him and prays. Such is God\'s ordained and not secret power and
authority; for God will not govern us according to secret counsel and
will, but according to the ordained will revealed in His Word.

183\] So that this history belongs to the fact that we are to be
awakened and stimulated by praying to God in all our needs, because He
will do what we want, if only we fall down before Him in humility and
pray. This is how the Ninivites were preserved, to whom the prophet had
announced and determined the day on which they would perish, Jon. 3, 4.
10. And we have more such testimonies in Scripture, which prove that God
allows Himself to be guided and submits His will to ours. Why are we so
sluggish and lazy to pray? Why are we so devoid of all faith and
fainthearted, as if our prayers were nothing? Let the monks doubt their
prayer, who do not know God and are completely without all faith, and
whose prayer is not a

**[1270 v. iv, M8-sir\>. Interpretation of Genesis 19:18-22. W. i,
isas-ign. 1271]{.underline}**

heartfelt longing and desire, but a hard work, and actually nothing else
but a futile sounding.

When we, who have the knowledge of the Word, come together and fall on
our knees in true humility, we know and are informed, not only from
God\'s gracious promise, but also from examples, that God will not do
His will and will do ours. And this should be diligently impressed upon
the people and upon ourselves, so that we will not be sluggish or cold
in prayer. God does everything, but we should also do that which our
profession entails. He gives bread that feeds and sustains the body, but
not before you work, sow, reap 2c. And thou shalt not think that when
thou sowest the land nothing shall follow thy labor, because it is
God\'s commandment that thou shouldest do thy work and labor, and that
he should work through thee.

Therefore, you shall continue to work in your profession with all your
ability and all the diligence that you can demonstrate, and command the
rest to God. Thus, if you are to fight against the Turk, God\'s
commandment that you protect your subjects drives you away first.
Therefore, you should prepare for war with weapons and other necessary
things, saying, \"I have done all I can, but what is lacking in me and
in my ability, you, O Lord, will supply and fulfill for me, so that your
will may be done. For this reason Paul also admonishes us, Rom. 13:11,
that we should not be sluggish in what we ought to do, or become
discouraged. For those who are slothful and, like that servant in the
Gospel, do not carry out their ministry diligently, will have to hear
that the same servant had to hear, \"From your words I judge you,\" Luc.
19:22. But those who are diligent and godly in their ministry, God will
make rich. For he does the will of those who fear him. No doubt David
wrote many psalms from such examples first and then from his own
experience.

V. 21. 22. **Then said he** unto **him, Behold, I have looked upon thee
also in this piece, that I turn not back the city which thou hast spoken
of.**

**Make haste and save yourself there, for I can do nothing until you
enter. That is why this city is called Zoar.**

How wonderful this is, and a history that is well worth keeping. God\'s
will and opinion had been that the city of Zoar should also perish with
the others; but because Lot intervened, God withdrew His will and did
what Lot wanted. Thus, for the sake of Paul, as many of them as are in
the ship with him are preserved in the shipwreck, Acts Hist. 27. 22. ff.
But that follows: \"I can do nothing until you come in,\" so that you
may be sure that someone may ask and say, \"Therefore can he resist God,
so that he does not do what he wants so soon? Moses answered, \"Lot\'s
prayer does this; it forces God not to do his angry will, but to break
it, and to do the will of those who fear him.

187 These things are said very much and are almost unbelievable: but we
should remember them diligently for our learning and comfort, that we
may pray gladly and \"without murmuring and without doubting,\" as Paul
says in Philippians 2:14. But this is called \"murmuring\" when we let
the cross anger us and want to know from God why he does this or that?
But as I said, we should not always ask God, \"Why do you do this?\" but
we should submit to His will and be obedient, and if something in His
works annoys us, we should pray. But the wavering that Paul calls
\"doubt\" is to be completely excluded from prayer. For it is by this
alone that prayer is falsified and corrupted.

That is why St. Bernard exhorts his brothers not to despise their
prayer, but to know that it is already written in heaven above before
they have uttered it. The holy man saw how fainthearted we all are when
it comes to praying. For because there is great weakness in us, and we
see that St. Paul, Peter and others have greater gifts than we do, we
step back when we should pray, and let

**[1272 Interpretation of Genesis 19:21-25. W. 1, 1911-19IS.
1273]{.underline}**

our unworthiness frightens us, that we do not consider ourselves worthy
to ask anything from God. From such thoughts, faith not only becomes
weak, and the earnest and ardent desire to pray diminishes, but also
completely dies away, and in its place is found the shameful and harmful
doubting and vexatious murmuring. Why do we not rather think that Lot
was also unworthy? For who is worthy to speak with God? Therefore, let
us be satisfied with the fact that we are called to faith through the
Word and are instructed in God\'s Word, and therefore are members of the
Church, which has a certain and clear command to pray. Therefore you
shall not consider your unworthiness, but God\'s commandment, nor
dispute whether you are worthy or not; but keep the promise that the
Lord will do the will of those who fear Him.

So we should make ourselves bold and courageous for prayer, of which
people who have been experienced in spiritual things have said that it
is a work above all work. But why? Because he who prays must fight with
force against the doubts and murmurs which our pusillanimity and
unworthiness, which we feel about ourselves, arouse. Therefore we are to
learn against such deceitfulness of the devil, and look to the promise
and example that is written here about Lot, which is not written for
Lot\'s sake, but for ours, that we should learn how to hinder God\'s
angry will and, when he gives us the rod from afar, meet him and fall
into his hands; as in the prophet Ezekiel Cap. 32:30, the Lord himself
says, \"I sought among them if any man would make himself a wall, and
stand against the breach against me for the land, that I should not
destroy it: but I found none.\" So he also attacks harshly and scolds
the prophets and priests who preached to the people. \"They tread not,\"
saith he Ezek. 13:5, \"before the breaches, neither make themselves a
stumblingblock for the house of Israel, neither stand in the controversy
in the day of the LORD.\"

190\. Thus God is provoked to anger if only prayer is omitted, for in so
doing His commandment is despised. Therefore we should pray

pray joyfully and confidently. For if what we ask for is not given to
us, something better will follow in return; since prayer cannot be in
vain and without fruit, as Jacobus Cap. 5, 16. also says: \"The
righteous prayer is able to do much, if it is earnest.\" For God cannot
despise the righteous and all his works, but even though the world
persecutes him, God honors all his words and works, even his suffering
and affliction. Yes, \"the death of His saints is also held worthy
before the Lord,\" Ps. 116:15.

191\] The fact that Moses finally reports that the name of the same
city, which was previously called Bela, was changed and called Zoar, is
because God wanted to give the descendants a new name as an example, so
that they would also learn to fear God, who brings and exercises such
judgment on the wicked, hope in His mercy and ask for help. For history
understands both of these things. The destruction of Sodom serves to
frighten the wicked, but the fact that Lot is so graciously and
abundantly heard and saved is part of the consolation of the pious, so
that they may pray in times of need and seek such salvation and help
from God.

**Fifth part.**

**Of Sodom\'s downfall, and of Lot\'s wife\'s disobedience and
punishment.**

**I.**

V.23-25. **And the sun had risen on the earth when Lot entered Zoar.
Then the LORD rained down brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven
upon Sodom and Gomorrah. And he turned back the cities, and all the
country, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and all that grew in the
country.**

19\'2 That Moses says here that the sun has risen on earth is a peculiar
way of speaking, which he never used before. But he indicates with it
that Lot and the his got up, since the dawn has come out and driven to
go.

**[1274 L. IV, 312-314. interpretation of I Moses 19, 23-25. W. 1,
19IS-1S18. 1275]{.underline}**

and that they wandered there with their goods, bread, drink and other
necessities, and came to Zoar, which was perhaps not a quarter of a mile
away from Sodom. That therefore Moses said that the sun had risen, he
may have wanted to indicate the redemption of the human race through the
Son of God. But we want to save talking about this until we have the
secret interpretation.

The following, how fire rained down from heaven and burned the cities,
is briefly spoken, but it contains such great things that cannot be
described in any human words. For who would not be frightened by such a
horrible spectacle, that five very rich cities in their best condition
with all their inhabitants, animals, cattle, gardens, fields, etc., go
up in a heap in a thunderstorm? What will have been the weeping and
wailing, the miserable screaming of men and animals, all devoured at the
same time? Therefore, this is quite a gruesome and terrifying example
that surpasses all histories of all pagans. Troy was devastated with
war; but all this is nothing compared to the fact that so many cities
were devoured by the earth in one moment, in which so many thousands of
people had been, who for half an age did not know what was good or evil:
all of them perished and not one remained; at the same time all the
cattle and all the fruits and plants of the earth perished, so that not
even a grain remained standing.

19\'4 These are terrifying things, and yet they do not go to the heart
of the wicked. For when St. Peter speaks of the last evil of the world
through the Holy Spirit, 2 Epist. 2, 5. ff, he sets this example against
the papists. \"God,\" he says, \"did not spare the five cities that were
in Paradise and in the best place of the whole world, which could have
been God\'s resting place; neither did he spare the former world, and
both parts perished by the flood and water, and the latter by fire that
came down from heaven.

and are corrupt. But why did God do it? Because he wanted to present a
terrible example to all the wicked. And all these things are described
by the Holy Spirit, not for the sake of those who have thus perished,
but for the sake of the world to come, even for the sake of the Papists,
who will be a plague on the world in the last days, as Peter says.

But it always happens that those who are to be frightened are the most
secure, but those who need comfort are frightened and despair. As the
pope and his cardinals do not ask about such a horrible example, they do
not think that it concerns them. For they do not believe that there is a
God, nor are they afraid of His wrath until they feel it. Therefore we
should separate ourselves from them and flee from them, so that we do
not fall into the same punishment with them. Christ also refers to this
history several times, tells us in Luc. 17:32 that we should remember
Lot\'s wife, and says in Matth. 10:15 that at the last judgment the land
of the Sodomites and Gomorites will suffer more than such cities that
have heard the gospel without fruit. If then they that despise the word
shall be punished more severely than Sodom, what shall we conclude of
them that persecute the word? Therefore let the word of the Lord Christ
be well considered. If he does not want the word to be despised, he much
less wants it to be trampled underfoot and people to be strangled
because of it. And yet the pope does nothing else with his own, except
to make the world full of murder and strangulation.

Therefore, we, like Lot and Abraham, must be spectators of such misery,
which cannot be sufficiently said, and by which the hearts of the pious
are grievously tormented and distressed; as St. Peter also says of Lot,
2 Epist. 2:8, that his eyes and ears were tormented daily. But let us
wait in patience until God overthrows these sodomites of ours, and make
every effort to ensure that we are not found in the sins and vices of
the papal church.

197 For though we also have sins and vices, and that I say nothing
greater,

**[1276 \". IV. 314-sis. Interpretation of I Genesis 19:23-25. W. I,
ISIS-I92I. 1277]{.underline}**

If we are lazy and sleepy to the word, greater suffering and misfortune
could not happen to us than if the word were suppressed and taken from
us. But the world considers it a small sin to fall away from the word,
and also considers the lack of it a small harm: but we want to keep it
with Saint Peter\'s and the Lord Christ\'s terrible judgment, which
pronounces the Sodomites holy and righteous against the Roman church,
which not only despises the gospel, but also persecutes it and strangles
the devout Christians. Therefore Peter says right 2 Epist. 2, 6: God has
set this as an example to the wicked who would come after; and Christ
says Matth. 10, 15: There will be a deceptive judgment on the Sodomites
in that day, because on such despisers.

198 Let us therefore hold fast to this comfort. For this history shows
us both these things, namely, that the enemies of the church will
receive their punishment, and the pious will be preserved for eternity,
if we alone are like Lot and Abraham, that is, if we hold fast to the
word and faith. The Lord knows, says St. Peter 2 Epist. 2, 9, both these
things, to redeem the pious and godly, and to keep the ungodly to
torment them in the day of judgment. Although the wicked do not believe
this, and when they hear that such examples are pointed out to them,
they pityingly laugh at such a thing, which is not at all ridiculous,
but cannot be sufficiently mourned and grieved, nor can it be explained
in words.

For think for yourself what a terrible and terrifying sorrow this must
have been, when five cities were destroyed and devoured in one storm,
with all the men, women, children, servants, maids, cattle and animals
at the same time, so that not even a straw of the whole land remained.
And what clearer example could be given that God is seriously angry with
the wicked? And yet Christ and St. Peter say that it is still a small
punishment, if one compares it with that which is still to befall our
papists, who are not only unrepentant, but also obdurate, and retain and
defend public errors.

The reason Moses uses the word \"rain\" is to indicate that such weather
was caused by the ministry of angels. But what is commonly found in a
weather and tempest, as, great storm winds, thunder, lightning, weather
rays, earthquakes 2c., reason knows well. So he also remembers the
sulfur. For the fire that is aroused in a weather is always sulphurous;
whatever is touched by such weather fire smells of sulphur: therefore
the fire that fell from heaven with a great crash and thunder consumed
these cities. But note that this is the work of angels and does not
happen by chance, as the pagans think.

And from the beginning of the world there have always been many examples
of the wrath of God, which are not described, but which are described
are very strange, so that we should learn from them to flee sin, because
God punishes sinners so horribly and terribly. As this year in the
Neapolitan field near Puteole a large piece of land was submerged by an
earthquake and water, not by chance, as the papists think, but for the
sake of the people\'s sin, which has no end nor cessation.

202 Christ very kindly and graciously says: \"Whoever speaks against the
Son of Man will be forgiven\"; but to sin against the Holy Spirit, as
the papists do, who sin unrepentantly, knowingly, and with willful
malice, when they could by natural gift and without grace refrain and
abstain from such sins, that is a sin that cannot be forgiven. For who
compels them to kill our people? Who forces them to be so bitterly
hostile to the known truth and to dispute it? Are they not forced by
their own will, which the devil also promotes and drives.

David also sinned, and very grossly, in breaking marriage and
instigating unrighteous murder: but this was a sin of weakness, which,
when he knew it and asked pardon in faith, was forgiven him. But to
persecute the gospel and persist in public idolatry against so much

**[12788 . IV. 31S-31S. Interpretation of Genesis 19:23-25. W. I.
I92I-I924. 1279]{.underline}**

Warnings of the Holy Spirit as a mockery (because that is what I may
call it) of the divine majesty are sins against the first tablet,
followed by certain condemnation.

Therefore, I have no doubt that by this light of the good gospel, God
will take His elect out of Sodom, and gather the devourers into His
barn, Matt. 13:30, and if the blasphemers, the papists, do not cease
their raging, the end will follow, that is, either the last day will
come, or else a noticeable destruction of the entire papacy will take
place. For Peter, when he calls Sodom an example of the wicked in 2
Epist. 2, 6, is not lying: and is by nature so wrought for sin that God
cannot always be silent about it. Therefore let us give thanks to God
that He has redeemed us from the wrath to come through His Son, and has
protected us through His angels so that we do not perish with the
present Sodomites.

But we must not overlook the way Moses speaks: \"The Lord made it rain
from the Lord,\" which way of speaking particularly annoys the Jews, and
which they interpret from time to time and grind in various ways. But
these are clear words, that the LORD sendeth rain, and sendeth rain from
the LORD. For here both names of God are put, which they call
Tetragrammaton, and in Hebrew the article is added very emphatically.
Because he puts the name \"HErr\" twice, he indicates two persons in the
Godhead, as one is wont to speak, and One HErrn. And St. Hilarius
insists on this text rightly and masterfully, that there is One God, God
the Father, who begets, God the Son, who is begotten, and God the Holy
Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and the Son.

The Jews, being bold and bold men, interpret it thus: The Lord let rain
from him, the Lord himself. But who told them to practice such boldness
in God\'s book? If it were possible to joke with the holy Scriptures and
interpret them wherever one wanted, no article of faith could remain
pure and unadulterated. Therefore, it is only the unbelieving Jews and
godless papists who are to blame.

Work, be the master of the Holy Spirit, and teach him what or how he
should write. But let us be and remain disciples, and let us not change
God\'s word, but become different ourselves through it.

But the Jews invented this gloss out of their usual iniquity and pride,
so that they might circumvent the three persons in the Godhead. But we
know from the Gospel that Christ holds this way of speaking everywhere,
for he points to the Father with all his works and words. \"My
doctrine,\" says John 7:16, \"is not mine, but the Father\'s;\" John
14:9: \"Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father;\" v. 10: \"The Father
abideth in me, and I in him;\" John 5:19: \"Whatsoever the Father doeth,
that doeth the Son also.\" But what is this other than what Moses says?
Christ teaches, Christ works, but from or out of the Father. John took
special delight in this kind of speaking, so that he could show that
everything the Scriptures say Christ does and says is to be understood
as if it were done and said by the true God, namely, by God the Father,
who is not begotten, but begets His Son.

Therefore, we must not allow ourselves to be challenged by the false
beliefs of the Jews, who have nothing more for themselves than this
reason, which they do not understand correctly, that there is only one
God, and who therefore falsify the Scriptures in the places where they
speak of more than one person in the Godhead. But you answer them thus:
There is indeed only One God, but the Holy Spirit has revealed Him
through the Word in such a way that in one Divine Being there are three
Persons. This we hold and teach, and not only do we stand on the fact
that it is thus revealed in Scripture, but we also have testimony to it
in the New Testament. For this is the most real way of speaking in the
gospel: Christ does all things, speaks all things, but of the Father.
Item Matth. 28, 18: \"All authority in heaven and on earth has been
given to me,\" that is, I am the true God, and there is no difference
between me and the Father without this, that I am begotten of the
Father, but the Father is not begotten. Therefore, Hilarius and
Augustine of this text

**[1280 2 IV, 319-221. interpretation of Genesis 19:23-26. W. 1,
1424-ISA. 1281]{.underline}**

and testimony to protect the article of our faith in the divinity of the
Lord Christ.

**II.**

**V. 26 And his wife looked behind him and became a pillar of salt.**

209\) Lot\'s wife, who goes out of the city with him, was undoubtedly a
faithful and holy woman. Otherwise she would not have followed her
husband in such misfortune, nor would she have been seized by the angels
themselves and brought out of the city. Therefore we leave aside the
fables of the Jews, which lie as if she had been an inhospitable and
unworthy woman, and had denied the angels the salt to salt their food
with: therefore she had become a pillar of salt as punishment for such
sin. All the books of the Jews are full of such silly and childish
fables. Why do they not rather look at the history itself and diligently
summarize the circumstances, from which one can clearly prove that she
was not inhospitable, but a pious and holy woman full of fine faith;
because she follows her husband without delay, and yet suffers this
human weakness and temptation, that she looks behind her and thus
changes her mind.

And it seems from the text that she came with Lot into the city of Zoar:
because she either forgot (as women are weak by nature) the command of
the angels, or thought there was no more danger after she had come from
the country into a city: but disobedience has its punishment and she
must become a pillar of salt.

But why God sent it in this way, no cause can be shown; and perhaps from
this pillar the Dead Sea or Salted Sea got its name. But this pillar did
not remain standing for long, but was smashed and crushed by thunder at
the same time as the city. So it can also be that Moses calls it a
pillar of salt, not that it was salt in itself, but that it looked like
salt, because salt is white. Augustine, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Gregory

rius all pass by this text in silence: some Lyra, who follows the
rabbis, rabbis here with them in a foolish way, as he often does; and
perhaps this is done out of God\'s special providence, so that we should
read the Scriptures always and diligently, and not rely on men\'s
interpretations and commentaries, which often investigate things too
forwardly and thus sin.

212\) Therefore, we should let go of the other things that do not serve
the purpose and be satisfied with the fact that Lot\'s wife is set as an
example for us, as Christ indicates, since he points to her in Luc. 9,
62: \"He who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is not fit for the
kingdom of God\"; item, since he says in the powerful sermon of the last
day Luc. 17, 32: \"Remember Lot\'s wife. From this we can easily
understand what it means to look behind, that is, to renounce God\'s
commandment and to concern oneself with other things besides one\'s
profession, as the one did who, when Christ told him to follow Him,
first wanted to bury his dead, Luc. 9, 59.

Therefore this is prescribed for us as a sign, a lesson or a warning,
that we do not let ourselves be hindered in our profession; as Peter,
John 21:21, looked around for John with his thoughts, but was punished
by the Lord because of it. For let every man keep his profession, and
not look about, nor inquire what others do.

At the present time, the papists are harassing us with the example of
the previous time, when everything was in darkness. Your doctrine, they
say, is new, and our forefathers knew nothing of it; therefore, if it
should be right, all our forefathers should be damned. These also look
behind them, and thus despise and neglect the word that is now going
forth. For what is it to us what judgment God holds over those who have
long since departed from this life. God\'s word is preached to us now,
which we should hear and accept without any doubts or disputes; we
should not question much why God has given the pure teaching at this
time and not before this time.

**[1282 n iv, S2I-3A. Interpretation of Genesis 19:26. W. i. isss-igss.
1283]{.underline}**

\(215\) That therefore this history is for us to learn from, and to
persevere in. For he that would be a Christian must not change his
purpose, must not look to any other way, or to any other gospel. In this
one way alone is salvation: but if thou goest out another way, thou art
already lost, and art as Lot\'s wife.

But as far as she is concerned, this example is rather our doctrine than
her damnation, of which I certainly think that she was a holy woman and
became blessed. For one should not judge otherwise of God\'s grace and
mercy, especially since her past life gives her glorious testimony that
she is led out of the city by the angels themselves and willingly
follows her husband.

Why then, someone might say, did she perish? Answer: She was affected by
human weakness and temptation, so that when she heard such a terrible
crash and storm behind her, she looked around against the angels\'
command. She must bear a temporal punishment for this disobedience, but
her soul will be saved, as Paul says in 1 Cor. 5:5 about the man who
slept with his stepmother. Therefore this teaching should be kept, for
the sake of which, that it may be passed on to all descendants, this
holy woman must bear such punishment; as Christ says Luc. 17, 32:
\"Remember Lot\'s wife.\"

218\. But it is to be held completely that she is not condemned for this
reason. For there are many such examples in holy scripture, that God
sends temporal punishment to His saints, so that they will not be
condemned with this world; as Paul says 1 Cor. 11, 32: \"When we are
judged, we are chastened by the Lord, so that we will not be condemned
with the world. Therefore Lot\'s wife was chastened, not condemned: just
as Aaron\'s sons, Deut. 10:1 ff, because they sacrificed with strange
fire, were punished as a sign to others, but not condemned. In the same
way I think of the prophet who was killed by the lion, 1 Kings 13:24,
namely, that the body was a punishment for disobedience to the lion.

But nothing has happened to the soul, so that we may be admonished to
fear God and keep God\'s commandment with earnestness.

So that this pillar is a proper seasoning and salt for prudence, by
which we are admonished not to look around, but to wait for the calling,
and as Paul says in Phil. 3:13, to look for that which is before us. And
this is truly a necessary commandment for the sake of the cruel enemy we
have, who pursues and persecutes us day and night. For this reason the
evangelist John 1 Epist. 2, 27. so diligently admonishes us that we
should remain with this teaching that we first received; and tells us
Jude, Epist. V. 3, that we should fight for the faith that was once
given to the saints. For this is the church\'s greatest challenge and
greatest ruin, when we seek new doctrine and turn aside from the way
which the Word points out to us. Therefore Paul warns the Galatians to
beware of such teachers who cause trouble and lead them astray, Gal. 1,
6.

But there is no other way to do such harm than by becoming tired of the
word, which Satan is a master at doing. Thus, in our time, Thomas
Muenzer stepped away from the word and caused indignation and turmoil.
And after this was hardly quieted, Carlstadt and the Sacramentarians
made the church restless. Since they also almost perished, the
Anabaptists rose up, so that the church is never without challenge.

For the world does not remain right and steadfast in its calling, but
looks behind it like Lot\'s wife, who was punished temporally for this
reason, so that the wicked, who were to come afterward, might have an
example of her, that where they did not hold fast to the word, they
would fall into eternal punishment. But the fact that she looked behind
her may have been because she heard the terrible crash of the thunder
and the cities that were overrun and was frightened by it. Therefore it
is not at all a joke or a small challenge to let oneself be led away
from the word by new and strange thoughts. At the time when Arius

**[1284 L. IV, 323-325. interpretation of Genesis 19, 2628 . w. I,
1929-1932. 1285]{.underline}**

he was accepted with great joy, because he brought something new that
had not been heard in the world before. As it has happened with almost
all errors and heresies, the world has accepted them with both hands and
kept so much of them, as if the previous teachers had never been pure.

Now Lot\'s wife teaches us with her own example that we should beware of
such poison and remain steadfast in the faith that was once given to us.
But the world does not obey this teaching, but some go after the new
teaching according to their vanity, some seek its fame and benefit, as
Paul says 1 Tim 6:5, 20, and thus almost all men let themselves be kept
from the right course.

How difficult it must have been for the holy man Lot to lose his most
beloved wife, with whom he had lived for so many years and who had
followed him so willingly in such a long misery, for such a cause and
for such a sin, may everyone assume and judge from his own heart if such
a thing happened to him. Since he therefore let himself think that he
would not be safe in Zoar either, for this horrible fall with his
dearest wife did not frighten him unreasonably, he fled to the next
mountain and hid there with his daughters in a cleft, so that he would
not perish with them in the same accident.

V. 27, 28: **And Abraham rose up early in the morning unto the place
where he stood before the Lord, and turned his face toward Sodom and
Gomorrah, and all the country round about, and looked, and, behold,
there went up a smoke out of the country, as a smoke out of a furnace.**

In order that everyone may see how great the severity of God\'s wrath
was, it is reported here to the horror of the wicked, how the holy
patriarch Abraham, the father of the promise, also regarded this
terrible punishment, by which five cities perished. For this same most
holy man had taken on the role of mediator and intercessor for this
land, saying that God would spare his land and

not spoil. But here he must not only weep for the sin of others and eat
it up, but also see with his eyes that so many thousands of people
perish at once. And what a great challenge this was, Moses recently
wanted to indicate with this text. No doubt he will have thought, as it
is written in the 89th Psalm v. 48: \"Why will you, God, have created
all men in vain?\" Shall I then believe that I alone am the one of the
children of God who is preserved, since God consumes such a multitude of
people with fire from heaven at the same time?

\(225\) And such a thought and discussion of the incomprehensible
judgments of God actually causes a grumbling and impatience against God
in the hearts, and gives rise to terrible challenges and doubts. For
think, if you were in a city besieged by enemies, and knew from God\'s
word or a special revelation that all the citizens and inhabitants of
that city were to be slain, but you were to remain alone, and then had
to see for yourself how the enemy murdered and killed everything that
came before him: how long would you retain such confidence in such
danger and distress that you would be preserved. Abraham also felt this
kind of challenge, but he held fast to his faith, and rejected all such
obstacles and cases that could have weakened his faith.

226 And his heartache also made it greater to him, that he remembered
how God had so wonderfully delivered the whole country from the hand and
power of the enemy about six or seven years ago. Therefore, not only did
it grieve him that those who had been preserved by him from the enemy
should perish so miserably, but he also took to heart the danger and
need of the entire human race and thought, \"If the people in whom God
has performed miraculous signs and whom he has saved by my hand have
been struck down in such a short time and have fallen so horribly, what
shall we do with the entire human race?

**[1286 \". IV, 325. 326. interpretation of Genesis 19, 27. 28. W.I,
I93S-ISS5. 1287]{.underline}**

227 Therefore, as it says in the following chapter, when he goes to
Gerar, he is very much afraid, because he doubts whether there are
people who fear God in that place; as he answers the king who confronts
him, \"I thought that perhaps there is no fear of God in those places,
and they will kill me for the sake of my wife. But whence thinkest thou
that such thoughts came? Is it not true that they came from such a heart
that thought thus? If the fear of God was not with the very first man in
Paradise, how will it be here in this land?

And this was the first challenge of Abraham, which is described in great
detail by Moses, and in such words that carnal men do not understand. As
soon as the morning dawned,\" he says, \"Abraham set out with great
anxiety, not only for the five cities in general, but also for his
cousin Lot, his wife and daughters, whom he knew were living in Sodom,
but did not know whether they had perished with the Sodomites. Therefore
he must weep in trembling and fear for the sins of others, and fear all
manner of calamities. For this we are to believe, that Abraham was not a
block or stone without all human sense and compassion, but was as godly
and compassionate a man as any: therefore he was concerned for the
salvation of the five cities and especially for his kinsmen. Therefore,
he could not stay in bed, but got up before daylight, hoping that God
would perhaps take a more lenient approach.

229 In such hope, worry, fear and trembling, he immediately turns his
eyes to the known region to see if it is still standing. For we are well
acquainted with the worry about absent friends, as Mitio in Terence is
worried about his son, who has stayed a little long; as I am now
especially worried about my pious lord Philip outside Frankfurt and have
various thoughts about him. And is it actually true that such hearts,
which are thus

feel nothing but crosses and sorrows. Oh! what will they think, my dear
friend, my dear grandson, my dear children, my citizens 2c. For it was
the same with Abraham at that time, who felt nothing but sighing and
longing. All this is described in short words by Moses, but we must not
look at it with carnal eyes, but rather think about it as if it were
happening to us, and then ask our heart what it would think or do if it
had come there with us.

But what happens? As the holy man anxiously contemplates this, behold,
\"he sees,\" says Moses, \"a smoke rising, like smoke from the furnace.
At first he mourned and was afraid, because until now he had hoped that
God would deal more mercifully with these poor people: but here he finds
the contradiction, sees that a luminous smoke rises without fire. For a
thick smoke appears at night, as if it were a vain fire; but this smoke
has been thin and bright, as it is wont to be when a fire is now almost
extinguished, or yet does not burn so strongly. For when we see a thick
smoke rising from afar, we can soon think that there is a fire there,
but have this hope that it can be extinguished. But when we see such a
light and thin smoke, we no longer think that a fire or conflagration is
present, but conclude that everything has already been consumed and
devastated by the fire. Therefore, when Abraham saw such a thin smoke,
he soon understood that the whole region had been devastated by fire.

But what shall we think now, what sighing, weeping and crying will have
followed such a sad spectacle? Oh, where is my Lot now! he will have
thought. Alas! how will he fare! Alas! is he still alive! Will his wife
and daughters still be alive! Therefore, there is no doubt that he will
have wept and wailed, and with fear and terror he will have lamented
such great misery.

**[1288 L. I V, 327. 328. interpretation of I Genesis 19, 27 29. w. I,
1938-I9S9. 1289]{.underline}**

232\. But all these things are written for the sake of the wicked, that
they may see how great is the wrath of God against sin, whether some may
be converted, repent, and cease from sin. The Jews, however, joke about
such serious things, but the papists usually look at them with carnal
eyes; for they see that Abraham, Lot and other saints have their wives,
and are burdened with housekeeping and toil, which they consider all
worldly things, so that holy people should not worry. They allow
themselves to be annoyed by such outward appearances, but they do not
see and understand that God exercises and terrifies His saints daily
with the fear of death and hell, since the Scriptures make this clear
enough to them, if they were not so blinded in their airs, and without
all mercy and compassion; as St. Peter prophesied of them in 2 Ep. 3, 3:
indeed, they laugh at it. But the Sodomites also laughed, and yet such a
terrible sorrow came upon them. Let us also beware of our adversaries,
though we shall mourn for them when the punishment shall come upon them,
and we shall be grieved at their calamity and destruction. And I have no
doubt that those who come after us will often wish for their own deaths,
for in such great misery one is frozen and cannot weep, as we are wont
to do in lesser distresses.

**Sixth part.**

**How Lot left Zoar, fled to the mountains and was taken by his
daughters to the heavy**

**Fall is brought.**

**V.29. For when God destroyed the cities of the region, He remembered
Abraham and led Lot out of the cities, which He turned back, where Lot
dwelt.**

All that Moses introduces here from Abraham belongs to it, so that the
prayer is praised and glorified. For he clearly says that God did not
raise up Lot for his righteousness alone (for Lot was not the only one).

had already come into danger because of his disobedience and delay,
therefore the angels admonish him severely and say, \"lest you also
perish\"; but his wife had sinned even more dangerously, therefore she
had also been punished more severely): but because of the believing
Abraham\'s prayer. As if Moses wanted to say: God so loved Abraham that
he preserved Lot for his sake. For he did not want the holy man\'s heart
to be grieved beyond measure and without end, but left him this comfort,
so that he would not always have one sorrow after another.

234\. Thus, in all the histories of the saints, one sees that God always
takes such turns with them, sending them the cross now and helping them
away from it soon after: sending them temptation and consolation,
sadness and joy: And in truth they resemble Atlas; for it is they who
carry the whole heavenly edifice on their backs, that is, they endure
and bear the heavy wrath of God, and yet in such great sorrow hold fast
to the trust in God\'s grace and mercy, although they see before their
eyes the contradiction, and thus first experience what power is of a
believing prayer.

**I.**

Now follows the text of Lot and his daughters, which is full of
confusion and questions, both of the Jews and of ours. Our fathers and
church teachers almost all pass by it, perhaps because they have been
burdened and prevented with other thoughts and business, or God has so
provided and sent it, so that the church would not be overloaded with
too many books. For I myself am hostile to my books for this reason, and
often wish that they would perish, so that I worry that they would
hinder and prevent the reader from reading the Scriptures themselves,
which alone are the fountain and source of all wisdom. And I am often
frightened by the example of former times under the papacy; for after
those who have studied the holy Scriptures have fallen into men\'s books
and commentaries, they have not only spent a lot of good time reading

**[1290 rv, 328-331. interpretation of Genesis 19:29-33. W. 1,
1939-1941. 1291]{.underline}**

The first two theologians were Aristotle, Averrhoes, and others, who
later became strange and monstrous theologians, like Thomas, Scotus, and
others.

236 Therefore let there be a measure of books, among which only those
are to be read and praised which give the reader guidance to rightly
understand the Scriptures themselves, and let us not accept in the
fathers themselves anything that does not agree with the holy
Scriptures. For that alone shall remain judge and master among all
books. It is indeed good and useful to hear the confessors of the right
doctrine, whether they are dead and teach in the Scriptures, or whether
they are alive and preach the word orally; but all this must be measured
out, and the rule must be kept for and against, namely, that we read
those who interpret the Scriptures for us. We want to act on this text
as faithfully and correctly as we can, because we have no teaching or
instruction from the fathers.

V.30. **And Lot went out of Zoar, and abode in the mount with his two
daughters; for he feared to tarry in Zoar: so he abode in a cave with
his two daughters.**

237 Lot was not afraid to stay in Zoar without a reason, because four
cities had already been devoured and destroyed by fire from heaven. He
lost much more in the city where he thought he would be safe than he had
lost in the city where he should have perished; for in Sodom only his
house, household, cattle and servants had perished and perished; here he
lost half his life, that is, his holy, chaste and honorable wife.
Therefore he thought, \"If my wife could not be preserved in the safe
city, perhaps tomorrow I and my daughters will also have to face the
same danger; therefore let us, you dear daughters, escape to a safe
place, where we may be safe from this temptation in which your dear
mother perished. So he departs from Zoar, which soon after is devoured
and consumed by fire like the other cities. For the text

clearly says that God wants to destroy the whole region. That is why
Zoar perished and was the fifth among these cities.

**238 So it has now gone** out with **these cities. It is,** alas, a
terrible lament, and it is necessary that the godless despisers, mockers
and persecutors of the Word are often reproached and inculcated with it
to frighten them. Otherwise we would have enough and all too many of the
other sins in which we are all born and live, if the majority, as
unfortunately happens, did not add to this devilish wickedness by
ridiculing, blaspheming and persecuting the Word. Therefore the contempt
of the word is such a sin, which is surely followed by brimstone and
fire, which destroys everything, so that the pious can hardly see and
bear such a terrible judgment.

For this reason Lot flees, because his wife\'s accident had frightened
him severely; and if such misfortune could not have touched him more
closely, he would have attacked his own body. But still he is not
through all the misfortune; but when he thought he was safe, he falls
into a much greater danger and distress; as they say in the common
proverb: It is not misfortune alone. He hid himself in a cave, so that
he would not be able to look at the land, which had already been
destroyed by fire, but also at the people, cattle and the earth itself,
so that he would have no reason to sin. How do we therefore think that
he would have been afraid? No doubt he was in the greatest anxiety and
fear. But look how a new accident hastened him, for this is what
follows.

**II.**

**V.31-33. Then the eldest said to the youngest, \"Our father is old,
and there is no longer a man on earth to make us sleep after all the
world\'s fashion; so come, let us give our father wine to drink and
sleep with him, that we may receive seed from our father. So they gave
their father wine to drink that night. And the first went in, and lay
with her father; and he knew it not when she lay, nor when she arose.**

**[1292 IV, 331-333. interpretation of Genesis 19, 31-33. W. I.
1942-1944. 1293]{.underline}**

\(240\) It is true that this conduct of Lot\'s daughters was unwise and
foolish, therefore carnal people, who look at the holy scriptures
superficially when they read this, think of their own lusts and consider
that these virgins were mad and foolish with fornication, but they do
not see the terrible seriousness of God\'s wrath, and how here these
people almost fell into despair because of mourning and heartache. Just
as presumptuous are the Jews, who argue that this, as Moses describes
here, is an impossible thing, namely, that Lot did not feel the sexual
intercourse with his daughters, nor did he become aware of it.

241 Therefore we must defend Moses above all things, lest he be
suspected of having written lies. First of all, then, we say that this
is certain and undoubted, that Lot and his daughters were in the
greatest fear, trembling and anxiety, not only because of this sad
spectacle, that they saw so many thousands of people perish so suddenly,
but also because of their own sorrow, that their father Lot had lost his
dearest wife and his daughters their dearest mother. If such an accident
could not go to someone\'s heart, he would have to be harder than a
diamond.

242 This is also true, that people, who are most distressed and upset,
become of a strange mind and spirit, and at the same time do and speak
such things, which they afterwards forget. For a heart that is so
utterly dismayed, and is precipitated with so great an accident, knows
not of itself. That Lot therefore slept with his daughters, he
undoubtedly felt; for such sleeping moves the whole body, and encourages
body and soul. Why then does Moses say that Lot was not aware of it?

243 Answer: Because he wanted to indicate with this, in how great
sadness and consternation Lot had been, which had taken him so
completely that he did not know what he was doing. For we experience
such things in much lesser dealings with melancholic, melancholy people
and lovers, whose senses and thoughts are violent, so that they say and
do much that they soon forget. For

People in love are foolish, and as the poet says, they soon let
themselves dream this or that. Therefore this is not new, that one, who
is in great consternation and knows almost nothing about himself, does
something, which he does not remember afterwards. This is why the Jews
are evil dialecticians; for the Scripture does not say that Lot did not
feel such sleeping, but it says that he got up and did not know that he
had slept with his daughters. For Moses describes the great and high
affliction of Lot, and not, as the insolent swine, the Jews, speak of
it, the lust and stimulation of the flesh.

244 And this also belongs to the excuse of this holy man, that he was
not only in the greatest distress, but was also made drunk by his
daughters: that thus two inconvenient things come together, namely the
very highest consternation in the greatest distress, and the
drunkenness, which can easily harm a distressed and distressed person.
What wonder is it, then, if in the morning he did not know what he had
done during the night? Often a drunkard speaks something, and knows
quite well that he is speaking, and yet when he has slept it off he does
not remember what he spoke.

These are my thoughts from this text. For I cannot stand that those dogs
pretend that Moses writes impossible things. After all, even in minor
emotions and movements of the mind, such as in melancholy and melancholy
or in love, it is not always possible to remember what one has done; and
it is not at all impossible, but is very common and happens every day,
that a person gets so deeply into love, hatred, sadness, happiness,
etc., that he does not know from anger or joy what he is saying or
doing, even though he feels that he is saying or doing something.

246 But whether Lot is therefore to be completely excused, I do not say,
and this belongs to another disputation. This alone I say, that this is
not an impossible thing, which the text says here about Lot. For he has
two kinds of drunkenness: his body is full of wine and his heart is full
of sorrow.

**[1294 \". IV, 333-33-i. Interpretation of Genesis 19:31-33. W. I,
IS44-IS47. 1295]{.underline}**

knows what he has committed while drunk. And it is also necessary that
we learn how to look at the histories of the Holy Scriptures, and not
fall upon them like swine inflamed with hatred or evil desire.

Lyra does not understand the text well, that he accuses the holy father
Lot of such a great sin, because he was sitting in his monastery and did
not see how Sodom perished by fire; which spectacle did not give Lot
cause to think of fornication, but sunk his heart into the most intense
grief and sorrow. And because Lyra does not see this, he thinks that Lot
was drunk and had danced around in the cave and thus followed this. But
he does not really understand it and does not look at the history as it
should be, so that he thinks about all the circumstances.

If a young boy sets fire to a house out of foolishness, he is not
considered a murderer as soon as he does so, and in your case the law
also spares him. So, when a quarrel arises and people fall into each
other\'s hair out of anger, some things that have happened are politely
excused, that they were sinned against out of ignorance and not out of
intent or with will. So Lot was in such anguish that he did not know
what he was doing. The pious have very soft and tender hearts and are,
as the Scripture says of them, the most tender woodworms; but the
secure, stiff-necked and proud despise everything. Now one should judge
not by the inexperienced and secure hearts, but by the stupid and timid
ones that feel God\'s wrath, especially at the time of such a great
affliction as Lot felt.

Therefore Moses writes not of impossible, but natural things and which
agree with the experience. And this circumstance also belongs here, that
he writes that Lot went up the mountain and hid himself there in a cave.
For if his heart had not been so troubled and distressed, he would
rather have gone to Hebron to Abraham than to the mountain; but he is so
troubled and distressed that he cannot do a thing with deliberation.

250\. in the same way, one shall be

tern also hold. We know how weak the female race all is, but the danger
they had been in and the sudden accident to their mother, which they had
seen with their eyes, had saddened and distressed their hearts very
much: therefore, not out of fornication, but out of compassion for the
whole human race, they undertake this with their father. For only think
their words a little more diligently: \"There is,\" they say, \"no man
left on earth\"; item: \"That we may have seed from our father. These
are words that come from despair, and not from fornication or pleasure,
and yet they stand on a very apparent foundation. For this is how they
thought: God does not want to destroy the human race, but to preserve
it; but now there is no one left who could beget children and preserve
the human race, except our Father; therefore we must lie down with him.
The virgins, then, were concerned about nothing else, and were troubled
by nothing else but worrying about how the human race would be
preserved: this concern that there was no longer a man on earth troubled
them greatly; therefore their heart, which had been so distraught,
advised them to sleep with the Father, and not lust or fornication.

251 But I do not tell you this to excuse them, but to show how their
deed was actually caused; for if one thinks about this properly, then
the annoyance that must follow if one does not recognize these causes
will be less. The father Lot is a holy man and his daughters holy
virgins, but nevertheless they both sin: however, they do not sin out of
evil intent or fornication, but out of great distress and consternation;
therefore no one should try to cover up and protect his lust by their
example. For if they had been without such distress and with themselves,
they would have refrained from such shame and consoled themselves, as
Abraham does afterwards, with God\'s omnipotence, as he could also make
men out of stones or raise the dead to life again. But from their
consternation they conclude, as they see before their eyes

**[1296 L. iv. SS5-S37. Interpretation of Genesis 19:31-33. W. 1.
1947-isso. 1297]{.underline}**

and feel: If there is no man left but our father alone, we will have
seed from him: but now he is old and will be ashamed of such work,
therefore we must make him drunk, that he may forget the present woe,
and that his old body may be warmed by wine; for sober he would never do
this 2c.

252 And Moses describes this shameful deed not without cause with so
many words. For the fact that such a multitude of godless people had
perished is in itself abominable; but that Lot had looked upon such
punishment, and yet he and his daughters had fallen into so great a sin,
is still more abominable. But these things are written to terrify all
the wicked, even the saints themselves, so that they may not become
secure, but may recognize their weakness after such terrible examples
have been given, and may persevere and watch all the more diligently
with prayer.

253 And as it is, it behooves us at the same time to excuse the father
and his daughters and not to accuse them too harshly, for they do not
sin out of fornication, idleness, security or malice like the wicked,
but out of great sorrow. Now such a fall, which happens out of sorrow
and dismay, is not at all to be compared to that which is done with
intent and deliberation: indeed, Lot would not have become drunk so
easily, if he had not been so highly distressed in his heart beforehand.
That is why he sinned, but God forgave him the same sin out of mercy.
For if he had been sober and in his right mind and spirit, he would
certainly never have done this.

But you might say, \"Why does God let His own fall like this? We are not
supposed to be so forward in our search for what God is doing, and yet
it is easy to answer. God wants us to recognize our weakness so that we
do not fall into security; that is why Lot and his holy servants saw the
sins of the Sodomites and cursed them. But what happens to them now? The
so holy people stain themselves with an abominable shame, which is
probably the case with the Sodomites.

domiten may not have happened or, if it did happen, may not have been
mean.

The reason is clear: God wants us all to be humbled and to boast of His
grace and mercy alone. For as much as we are all concerned, none of us
is better or holier than the other, and if none of us sins so
grievously, you too can fall into such grievous sins when God removes
His hand. Therefore, this terrible case teaches us both of these things,
namely, that you humble yourself before God and pray to God for and for
that He may govern you with His Holy Spirit.

The lies of the Jews, that the daughters of Lot prepared the wine in
such a way that he became drunk on it as soon as it ignited his lust
against them, are to be rejected: for it was a natural wine, as it grew
in the same country, without doubt of a very delicious and lovely taste.
For Moses praised the fertility of the land by calling it a paradise of
God. This is why Lot became drunk, not because he drank the wine so
intemperately and irrationally, but because his distressed and upset
mind could not tolerate such a noble and delicious wine.

How long Lot stayed on the mountain, Moses does not tell, but it is
believable, if one thinks about the circumstances, that he was searched
for by Abraham, brought into his house and was fed there with his
daughters. For how could he have left his cousin, who was so wonderfully
preserved in such great misery, and not receive him most kindly, after
he had been stripped of all his goods, which he had had before, and had
also been robbed of his wife, and finally had been stained with such a
blood disgrace? Abraham, as was right, no doubt was very sorry about
this, for he was a very kind man.

258\. all this is enforced by the circumstances, which the rabbis, or,
as I call them, the asses of the Jews, do not consider, but judge and
judge the Scriptures solely from their impure thoughts and affects: and
let those who are thus minded

**[1298 IV, 337-33S. Interpretation of Genesis 19:31-38. W. I, ISSO-IM.
1299]{.underline}**

For this, read Ovid, Martial and such shameful and impudent poets. For
here only the greatest temptations of the most holy people are dealt
with, and the most fierce disputes and struggles of faith. For behold,
how Abraham is always beset by one temptation and hardship after
another, and how one wave on your waters drives another. For the fact
that he could not save the five cities with his prayer was a great
sorrow and grief to him. After that, he is troubled and distressed that
he must take care of his cousin Lot, and now that he has learned that he
is still alive, he also learns what sin and disgrace he and his
daughters have fallen into, which are all severe blows.

Now what thoughts would have tormented Lot\'s heart when he found that
his daughters had become pregnant by him? Without a doubt, he would have
died of grief and heartache if he had not received daily and constant
comfort from Abraham. For what such a tremendous affliction can do is
proven by the examples that people often die quickly in such severe
distresses. This is all more credible than what Lyra brings from the
Jews\' thoughts: that Lot was sitting under a fig tree in Abraham\'s
house and was in good spirits with his daughters. Yes, that they all
died at the same time from sorrow is more believable.

\(260\) Likewise, this also is an unskillful thing that Lyra pretends
from the name Moab, saying that the eldest daughter of Lot was insolent;
for she had added a mark to her son by that name, that he was begotten
of such incest. For moab means out of or from the father. The youngest
daughter, he says, was more chaste, giving her son a common and not
infamous name, calling him ammi, that is, a son of my people.

261 Now, let these names be as it may, history testifies that these two
peoples have been blessed gloriously before others, without it being
forbidden that they should not be brought into the public domain.

offices. But how much more glorious and praiseworthy is it that the
grandmother of the Lord Christ, Ruth, was a Moabitess. God also rejected
the rebellious Korah, but the many great gifts with which his sons were
adorned are shown by the most beautiful psalms in David\'s Psalter. That
such is a comfort for the descendants and children\'s children, so that
they do not despair of the blessing, even though their ancestors
incurred God\'s wrath and curse because of sin.

Why then, someone might ask, did the eldest daughter call her son Moab?
Answer: She did this not at all in the opinion that she wanted to
disgrace her son with it, but that she would avert the annoyance and
indicate that this was not done out of pleasure or fornication, but out
of great sorrow and dismay that she had slept with her father.
Therefore, she excuses and saves her discipline, and indicates that she
would have completely abstained from such disgrace, if she had been in
her right mind and reason; but out of great sorrow and on no evil
intent, she dared such a deed, because she thought that the preservation
of the human race could not be advised in any other way.

V.34-38. In **the morning the eldest said to the youngest, Behold, I lay
with my father yesterday. Let us also give him wine to drink this night,
that thou mayest go in, and lie with him, that we may receive seed of
our father. So they also gave their father wine to drink that night. And
the youngest also arose, and lay with him; and he knew it not when she
lay, nor when she arose. So Lot\'s two daughters conceived by their
father. And the eldest bare a son, and called his name Moab. From him
came the Moabites to this day. And the youngest also bare a son, and
called his name the child Ammi. From him come the children of Ammon unto
this day.**

263 The youngest daughter also gives her son a name out of special
concern. For just as the eldest has named her sin

**[1300 D.IV, 339. 340. V, 3. interpretation of Genesis 19, 34-38. cap.
20, 1. W. 1, 1SW-1SV9. 1301]{.underline}**

The youngest also confesses with the name of her son, and nevertheless
rejects the reproach that she has sinned not out of fornication, but out
of great heartache and sorrow: thus the youngest consoles herself with
this name the ammi, that even though he was conceived and born of
incest, God will not cast him out altogether, as he also belongs to His
people.

But it seems to me much more believable that they have put such names on
their sons and have taken them from the sermons of comfort, so that
Abraham has raised them up and comforted them. For we do not doubt that
they will have needed comfort daily, and that Abraham, as a supreme
bishop, will have done his part diligently and faithfully. Dear
daughters, he will have said, you have indeed sinned greatly, but
nevertheless you should not despair: God sees and knows your heart that
you have not sinned out of fornication or lust, but that in such great
distress and fear you did not know what you were doing and were not in
your right mind. And this is one part of the consolation, which the
eldest daughter with the name Moab indicated. In addition Abra

Then they also gave this other consolation, namely: You must not be
afraid that God will repay your sin to your sons or will impute it to
them, but He will bestow on them rich blessings as members and members
of His people; He will not cast them out. 2c.

And this is also the interpretation of this chapter, but not as evenly
and diligently as it should be. For what can I do diligently and
thoughtfully enough among so much business? However, it is the right and
simple interpretation, from which you should especially learn that in
public sermons these histories should often be inculcated in the people
for the sake of the ungodly and the secure, which group is always the
largest; so that we do not become like the antinomians, who indeed
remove the law from the church, and keep and strengthen their listeners
for security, which condemnation is quite right. Now Moses buries the
patriarch Lot, that is, he no longer remembers him, and it is to be
believed that his sorrow and grief will have so distressed and tormented
him that he will not have lived long after this time.

**The twentieth chapter.**

**First part.**

**Abraham\'s journey and pilgrimage to Gerar, how Abimelech took his
wife from him, and how he apologized for it.**

**V. 1. And Abraham departed from thence into the south country, and
dwelt between Kadesh and Sur, and was a stranger in Gerar.**

\(1\) Now I have often said that Moses describes the life of the most
holy patriarch Abraham in a very mean way. For he does not speak of
miraculous works, or of strange and wondrous deeds of which he would
have taken occasion; as then the monks and

He is not the kind of man a hermit is accustomed to praise for such
works, but makes him such a man as another common man might be, who has
dealt with such business as belongs to housekeeping. For he had a wife,
children and a large household, with which he moved to and fro as his
need and opportunity required. Therefore, there is no special appearance
of holiness here. That is why the papists and especially the monks do
not pay much attention to this history and do not read it diligently.
But if they want to see in this patriarch a new kind of peculiar dress,
strange and peculiar customs, and such a way of life, which

**[1302 L. v. z-s. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 1. W. i. loss-E.
1303]{.underline}**

If he were against all men\'s lives, only then would they praise him as
a holy man.

\(2\) This false delusion cannot be taken away from the world: it does
not wonder at anything, nor does it praise or extol anything, except
what is special. Because it hears that Abraham so often wanders about as
a stranger, always seeking a new dwelling: What, she says, is this
special, or how should this be highly praised? What he has done in this
case, many other people also do, and most of all the beggars and other
poor, despised people: what is worth praising, this must be something
special, so that everyone may marvel at it. 2c.

3 Therefore, these histories are despised, and a juggler in the
marketplace, for example, is more popular when he breathes fire than
this holy man, who walks in faith and word, and waits with utmost
patience and hope for the promise made to him by God, so that it may be
fulfilled. The papists do not see this, but only look outwardly at the
mere work, but do not consider the heart itself in the work, or how the
saints were afraid of it. Abraham, they say, wandered about like a
stranger, taking his wife and household with him, therefore he is a
common bad layman: but if he had gone into the desert and become a monk,
that would have been something wonderful, and well worth describing. In
sum, the world wants to be deceived with outward showmanship, because it
despises and hates the truth.

**I.**

\(4\) Therefore we must look to the word that God Himself called Abraham
to go out of his fatherland and to be a stranger in another land, as we
have heard above. But although these words are clearer than the sun that
we see before our eyes, yet the blind moles will not see them, but boast
only of them

From their caps, from their many watches and fasts. But what do we mean
that this holy man with his many and large household must have suffered,
since he wandered about among all peoples like a stranger, and had to
change his dwelling place several times? For he had to hover between
heaven and earth, since he did not have a foot wide in the land: which
was truly a strange and strange religion, much more difficult and
troublesome than the monks\' religion can always be.

\(5\) For how bad and small a thing it is to put on a cap and be
provided with food and drink, and to have good peace, good comfort,
honor, and glory in monasteries, which are most beautifully and
splendidly arranged. Therefore, one should not pass by such histories so
diligently, which the Holy Spirit has written and left to the church,
that they should be read, so that faith may be built up and increased
thereby.

6 In the 13th chapter above, Genesis v. 3. 3. 18. that Abraham came from
Bethel to Hebron, into the grove Mamre, where three brothers were, who
accommodated him. In the same place he dwelt twenty years, and there
Ishmael was born unto him; and there he saw Sodom destroyed and laid
waste: and there having received promise that another son should be born
unto him, he departed thence unto Gerar, which might have caused him to
depart. Perhaps the three brothers with whom he lodged died, and the
heirs who followed them were not as pious as they usually are; or he may
have wanted to avoid the same place because it was so close to Sodom.
But what it cost him to change his residence, the scripture does not
indicate, but leaves it to our thoughts, who are fathers of the house.

007 And Abraham, in the same twenty years, shall doubtless have
converted many of them unto Mamre; and find the same-

**[1304 L. V, 5-7. Interpretation of Genesis 20, I. W. 1. 1962-1964.
1305]{.underline}**

In the meantime, five cities, situated there in a very fertile place,
have been destroyed and have even perished. For this is how it commonly
happens: the world accepts the word with joy at first, but soon tires of
it and despises it; indeed, at last, as we see today, it shuns it and
becomes hostile to it, especially where it is necessary to wait for
certain danger for the sake of the word; as Christ says in the parable
of the stoned land, Luc. 8:6. 8, 6. For this is the nature and manner of
all men, that they desire to have eternal life, but so far from it, that
they may also retain the benefit and good temper in this life. But it is
well known how the saying of Christ reads, when he says Matth. 16, 24:
\"If anyone would come after me, let him take up his cross and follow
me\", that is, those who want to be heirs of eternal life must endure
and suffer much.

\(8\) Therefore Abraham teaches and comforts us here with his example
quite wonderfully. He is an heir to the whole land of Canaan, for the
same was promised to him by God, and yet he had not a foot wide in the
whole land, but wandered about with his people in the wilderness,
sometimes in this place, sometimes in another, and had no certain
dwelling place at all. And according to his example, his children and
his children\'s children also wandered about in misery, and had no
certain place where they could have lived. But what is the purpose of
this? Answer: It is so that we may know that this holy patriarch was
waiting for another kingdom and another land or inheritance than that
which is here on earth and in this life: Therefore he remained a
stranger in his own land, which God had promised him, in order that he
might leave behind the Pharisees the right and certain understanding of
the holy Scriptures concerning God\'s kingdom and the most noble
principal of the promise, namely, that the land of Canaan does not
contain the most noble principal of the promise; for otherwise Abraham
would not have obtained the promise, since he lived with his children in
the promised land as a stranger. Therefore, in this life we also have to
live like strangers, as it were, until

we may attain the right fatherland and come to a better life, which is
eternal. But those who lived after the time of the fathers, as the
history of the Pharisees teaches, have forgotten the eternal promise and
have only coveted the possession of the land of Canaan, and thus have
considered the kingdom of Christ to be a fleshly kingdom.

\(9\) But the prophets and other saints have considered this pilgrimage
of Abraham, that he has been a stranger from time to time, somewhat more
diligently, and have reminded that one must wait for another land and
another fatherland, than for this fleshly and perishable fatherland. For
otherwise this land of the flesh would also have been given to the
patriarch Abraham, as it was promised to him; but in it he was not given
a foot wide all the days of his life; indeed, he bought the place where
he buried his Sarah for his own money. This the prophets have seen: our
papal blind moles, however, cannot and will not see it, but say: Abraham
had a wife, therefore he was only a common layman, therefore there is
nothing spiritual in his history, it is all bad, mean thing 2c.

\(10\) But the epistle to the Hebrews judges it differently. For it
wraps these common things in the spirit, and says Cap. 11, 8. 9. that
the same common things happened in faith, that he took a wife in faith,
that he was a stranger now and then by faith, that is, he kept the
divine promise or word everywhere, and waited for another city and
dwelling place than this earthly one; of which he only used as food and
drink. Therefore we should learn to use this life as we would a common
inn, where we stay only one night.

011 And if in this way thou shalt understand the pilgrimage of Abraham,
that he was a stranger in the land, thou shalt not say that this is a
common thing: for it is a work of faith, which was very fervent and
strong in Abraham. But the wicked do not see such a thing;

**[1306V , 7-9. Interpretation of I Genesis 20:1. 2. W. 1, 1964-1967.
1307]{.underline}**

As it is written in Isa. 26:10, \"Depart from the wicked, that he may
not see the glory of God. For the works that originate in the word and
are done in faith are perfect in the sight of God; the world may judge
them as it pleases, even if you are only a poor shepherd or a wet nurse.
But as I said, blind moles look only at things that have a special
appearance. If you were to put a monkey, which is a disgraceful, useless
animal, in public in a common place, you would soon find people running
to the same place who would also be amazed at the monkey as a very
beautiful animal. Thus the world does: what are strange and unusual
works, of these it marvels and praises almost highly; but of faith it
understands nothing at all. And God\'s works are always hidden under a
vain and insignificant appearance; in the world they have no special
appearance or prestige, but only in the eyes of the heavenly Father. Now
let us come to the text.

012 Abraham journeyed from Hebron toward the south, and dwelt between
Kadesh and Shur. Kadesh is on the border of the tribe of Judah toward
the east, but Sur is in the tribe of Judah toward the west, by the
mountains that border Egypt. And in the middle of these two places is
gerar, which word means a pilgrimage; for the word ger means a stranger.
Therefore the guest or stranger and the name of this place rhyme
together: the guest is a stranger and the place has the name of the
pilgrimage, as we call it an inn or hospice; so that you understand that
Abraham was not a resident citizen in the same place, but only a
stranger guest. Now Gerar is a city in Palestine, almost the very
outermost toward the south. Palestine is not yet called with any special
honor or glory, perhaps because at that time it was not yet a kingdom,
and every city had its own special king who ruled over it.

V. 2 **And said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister. Then Abimelech king
of Gerar sent for her and sent for her.**

Here Abraham is now in another new danger. But before we explain the
history, I must remind you of the chronology, which serves very well
that one may understand the scripture correctly. At that time lived
Shem, Salah, Serug and Tharah, among whom Shem had seen the first world
before the Flood. We are not to think that these holy men spent their
lives in idleness, but held public meetings about the right worship,
taught their households and taught them the will of God, and also held
up to them the promise and the law 2c. The neighbors who lived around
them undoubtedly saw and heard the same, and through them the Gentiles
also came to the right knowledge of God and were saved, even though they
were not circumcised. Because of this, there were many churches in the
world at that time, which were glorious and well arranged; and yet it
happened, as we have experienced in our time, unfortunately, that at the
same time there was a great deal of arrogance and the people were very
wicked, as can be proven with the example of the Sodomites, who soon had
around them the most consoling teacher, Abraham, who had helped them to
be delivered from the power and servitude of the foreign kings.

14 It is still the same today. Germany has never had finer, more
understanding and more learned people than now: but if you think about
it, the people have never been more wicked than now. Those who, with
their art of eloquence and understanding of languages, and with other
gifts, could serve the church gloriously and well, serve the tyrants and
the pope, and are the most bitter enemies and adversaries of the church.
But you see that the same thing happened at the time when so many holy
fathers lived. Therefore, let us only bear patience and suffer the
ingratitude of the world, its enmity and blasphemy, as these holy men
did.

**[1308 L. V, 9-11. interpretation of I Moses 20, 2. W. 1, 1SS7-1970.
1309]{.underline}**

have also had to suffer the same. For the seed does not find a good land
everywhere. The stony land is unfruitful; the thorns and thistles choke
the seed when it has sprouted, and Satan also secretly pursues the
secure hearts. Therefore we should be satisfied that there are still
some who hear and accept the word with fruit. But now let us look at the
history.

15 Abraham is afraid that he will be in danger of his life, so he
invents a lie in this new inn and calls Sarah his sister. Why does he do
this? Because God wants to teach us that even in the most holy fathers
there were such inclinations and affections as in other people; so that
we do not judge them in the same way, as we tend to do, that they were
stones or blocks, who did not ask for fear, sorrow, anger or joy, but
were like angels. But this is not true; an angel is not afraid, but
Abraham is full of fear here, and is afraid that he might lose his life.
Therefore Moses describes him as a man and does the same for our
comfort.

16 For since he has no certain word from heaven that his wife should be
preserved and remain unharmed, he does what his reason advises him to
do, hoping that he and his wife will be preserved and protected by such
a lie. For the Holy Spirit does not drive the saints all the time, he
lets them do some things according to their will and pleasure. When
Elijah killed the prophets of Baal, he was driven by the Spirit of God,
1 Kings 18:40; but the same Elijah, when it was announced to him that
Jezebel was angry with him, was afraid that something would happen to
him; therefore he escaped into the desert, so that he would save his
life, 1 Kings 19:4. 19, 4. He did the same according to his own will;
for he had no command from God in particular that he should escape:
reason gave him such a command; he would be safe and well protected if
he stayed secretly in the desert. Therefore

Elijah, who had strong courage and great zeal when he killed the
prophets of Baal, was afraid here, was frightened, and thought that he
would not be safe in any place in Israel. And this is written to comfort
us, who have no other thoughts of the saints than that they were blocks
and sticks, that they neither felt nor felt any burden, affliction, fear
or joy.

\(17\) Therefore Paul and Barnabas say of themselves, Acts 14:15. 14,
15. rightly say of themselves, \"We are also mortal men, like
yourselves.\" They are not afraid to say the same to idolatrous men; for
the saints are not always led and carried by the Holy Spirit, but have
their desires, lusts, and griefs like other men; therefore they also go
about with common works, sowing, plowing, building 2c. For which outward
things the reason and skill of men is sufficient. And though the ungodly
also do such works, yet in the pious they please God and are pleasing to
Him because of the faith in which they live: therefore they do nothing
wonderful, unless they are specially prompted and impelled by the Holy
Spirit, and are commanded to do so in a certain and expressed word;
otherwise they remain and live in such a way that they are also like
other men, and have common works, so that they deal like other men. They
do not do any special works, as the pope\'s saints do, who put holiness
in having different clothes, living alone in special places and
separating themselves from other people: but in the meantime they leave
the fear and love of God, and do not respect it, but are mosquito
swallowers and camel swallowers, Matth. 23, 24.

18 Abraham was not such a saint. Although he was holier than all monks
have ever been and still are, or still will be, he is frightened when he
comes to the unknown Gerarites, and fears that he will lose his life:
and because the wickedness of the Sodomites is so great, he is afraid to
die.

**[1310 L.v, 11-13. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 2. W. 1. 1S70-1S73.
1311]{.underline}**

he was suspicious that there would be no fear of God in that place
either. So Shem and his ancestors were also fathers of the house, had
the word and taught their church or congregation; and we are also to
remain with it, which God has ordained. For if he would have something
special done by you, he will call you to it and give you the opportunity
to do it. But if this does not happen, let each one rejoice that he is
in the divine calling, if he has such common offices of this life upon
him, and diligently performs the works that belong to them.

\(19\) The papists know how to praise their canons and statutes of the
fathers, which are not ordered or commanded by God, and they worship
them and hold them in great honor; but in the meantime they do not
respect love, hope and faith, and, what is more, because they persecute
the word, they are enemies of the faith. From them you must flee, and
follow in the footsteps of these holy men, who have not been in the
company of other people, nor have they sought good days, but have been
subject to the common sufferings and miseries of this life, and have had
their wives and households, and have nourished them with their skill and
labor, as all sensible heads of households are wont to do, even among
the heathen.

20 Yes, you say, these are common things. Answer: But they are commended
in the Scriptures, which testify that man was created for domestic and
worldly service. Therefore these very common works are God\'s ordinance.
But what greater praise or glorious testimony do you want? Therefore,
when a maid milks a cow, when a servant plows a field, if he is a
believer, that is, if he is certain that the same position is pleasing
to God and is appointed by God, he serves God more than all monks and
nuns can do, who cannot be certain that their position, in which they
live, is pleasing to God. Therefore, set this history against the
statutes and rules of men.

For here is a certain testimony of the Holy Spirit. For here is a
certain testimony of the Holy Spirit, who describes his saints in such a
way that they lived in faith, in the word and in right confession, and
otherwise were like other men in all other things; as St. Paul, Acts
14:15, says to the Gentiles: \"We are also mortal men like you. 14, 15.
says to the Gentiles: \"We are also mortal men like yourselves,\" that
is, we are of the same mind, we are sad when things go badly for us, and
we rejoice when things go well for us according to our will.

\(21\) I often impress this upon you and gladly repeat it, knowing that
it will not come to pass without fruit. For this error has sunk so
deeply into the hearts of men that we alone marvel at things, and exalt
and praise such works as are strange, strange and monstrous. But let us
rather remain disciples of the Holy Spirit and of the Holy Scriptures,
that we may follow those lives and works which the Scriptures praise and
reproach us with, and take no notice of the fact that Abraham, according
to his peculiar calling, was a man of war. Abraham was a man of war, and
slew and smote four kings; for he did the same, when he was specially
commanded to do it. Now if God wanted you to do something like this, He
would also command you to do it, not from heaven through the holy
angels, but through the ordinary authorities. But if this does not
happen, abstain from special works, and imagine Abraham, who is a
householder.

\(22\) And although in the same profession, as the papists say, there
are many common works, with which the laity also deal, yet for the sake
of the word and faith they are true spiritual works. Therefore, a monk
cannot boast of his monastery that he has the canons and rules of the
fathers, or the decrees and statutes of the popes for himself. For where
the canons with their conciliarities and also the decrees have something
good in them, they agree with the holy scriptures; but where they do not
agree with them, we pay no attention to them, but flee and reject them
as vain and suspicious things.

23 But we praise the common works with the testimony of the Scriptures.
For God wills

**[1312 . L. V. IL. 14. interpretation of Genesis 20, 2. 3. W. I.
IS7S-IS7S. 1313.]{.underline}**

He tells us not to despair in all this, but to be confident and trust in
him that he will be with us and help us; and what is more, he has
equipped us and gifted us with natural reason to govern and carry out
such common works, so that we do not tempt God, who has subjected the
earth to us. Now let us come to history.

24 The text says that Abimelech the king took Sarah from Abraham by
force. Therefore a question arises: How it could be credible that Sarah
should have been taken from Abraham for the sake of beauty, and that
this should not have been done by a common man, but by the king himself,
since she was already an old, aged woman, namely, of five and seventy
years? At such an age, one does not praise or love a beautiful figure.
Therefore, at that time, people must have been much livelier and of a
much stronger physique than they are now. For when women now approach
their fortieth year, they are no longer fit to bear children; but Sarah,
who is now already seventy years old, is not only praised for her
beauty, but there is also still hope for her that she will be fruitful.
That is why people in those days lived a little more moderately, and I
think the good air also helped them a little. Nowadays, however, we not
only plague and weaken our bodies with excessive eating and drinking,
but also spoil the air with our many sins, that is, we drive God to make
the storms always greater than they were at that time.

\(25\) And God also willed that great blessings should be seen in His
own, namely, that those who fear God should grow young again like an
eagle (as the 103rd Psalm v. 5. says) and their godliness should break
forth in their bodies; as the Scriptures testify of Moses, Joshua,
Caleb, and others, that they retain their strength and vigor, which they
had in youth, even in old age.

have to keep. Although this is actually true, that where one is moderate
in eating and drinking, nature is strengthened and preserved by it, even
the very strongest bodies are corrupted and weakened by excessive eating
and drinking, fall into various diseases and die before their time.

V. 3. **But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
\"Behold, you are dead because of the woman you have taken, for she is a
man\'s wife.**

\(26\) Abraham puts his wife in danger by the very fact that he meant to
protect her and keep her in honor, but he has not sinned by thinking of
and taking such counsel. For where there is no higher word to govern us,
it is right that we follow reason. But this I speak of worldly things.
For as for spiritual things, God has abundantly revealed all things in
his word: but as for outward and corporeal things, he has subjected them
to reason, and for this, to speak plainly, one must not depend on the
admonition of the Holy Spirit, but one needs skill and special diligence
to pay attention to a thing; otherwise we tempt God.

27 As far as history is concerned, King Abimelech is described as having
been a godly king. Therefore, he was undoubtedly one of those who
belonged to the patriarchs Shem, Salah and the others. For this is a
great thing, that Moses clearly says that God has honored him to speak
with him. He says that it was not an angel who came to him, but God;
therefore the same thing is to be specially noted. Yes, you say, why was
Abraham afraid of such a godly man? Answer: I think the same thing
happened because of the terrible example of the five cities; for there
he learned that the wickedness of men was so great that, as God Himself
testified, not even five righteous men were found in the whole country.
Therefore he will have thought: Where in this promised

**[1314 v, 14-is. Interpretation of I Moses 20, 3. W. i. isw-isrs.
1315]{.underline}**

If the country, which has had the great patriarch Shem as a teacher, is
so godless, and so many sins have been committed, I will find such
godless sodomites, murderers and adulterers wherever I go. From such
thoughts, I think, this fear has come. For our own misfortune always
teaches us what we must do in the future, as the Greeks say, that
misfortune and adversity make us wise.

028 And Abraham, being a wise and understanding man, could not despise
this doctrine. For if thou shouldest see a city or two punished from
heaven, of which thou hadst hope that the churches in them would be well
arranged and ordered, what hope couldst thou have of the others, which
are notorious for adultery, usury, profiteering, gluttony, drunkenness,
and other excesses, as well as for lying and deceit? as almost all the
great commercial cities of Germany are at this day. Thus the Sodomites
have misled the pious heart with their sins, that it has even dropped
hope in all other men: and experience itself has brought him to such
thoughts, and that without sin.

29 So Abraham feared that he might lose his life, and if we look
diligently at all the circumstances, he did not do so without cause. The
promise had come to him that Sarah would give birth in the same year,
and the promise was so much more glorious and certain because the son
had already been named Isaac. This joyful message was soon followed by
the heavy fall of the five cities, for which Abraham had been so
concerned that he had asked God for them, but God had denied him the
request, so that the people in the same cities were so wicked that not
even five righteous people were found in them. After that also the
misfortune in his house came. For Lot was Sarah\'s brother, and first
his wife was taken from him, and then he committed incest through his
daughter\'s foolishness. Why is it such a wonder that so much and so
great misfortune has come to this house?

How could the fortune that happened in one year have made the heart of
the holy patriarch timid, so that he thought he would not be safe in any
place? And those who do not pay attention to such circumstances do not
understand history either: that is why they read it contemptuously and
industriously. But I consider it a great miracle that Abraham was still
able to beget children in such great sorrow and heartache.

\(30\) But all this belongs to the fact that we are to learn how God
uses his saints. The monks think that because Abraham had a wife, by
whom he begat a son, he lived in all happiness; but they do not see the
temptation and danger, which were many and difficult, and which he
encountered in one year. For they are inexperienced in spiritual trials,
that God may exercise the faith of the saints daily.

In the papacy there is a book containing the legends or histories of the
saints; I am very hostile to this book only for the reason that in it
are described dreadful divine services and foolish miracles which men,
being idle, have invented. And in truth, such fables only help to make
the secular police and household government, and even the church
government itself, the more despised. Therefore, one should beware of
such fables and reject them altogether, for the mainstay of Christian
doctrine is faith. The same book does not mention this in any place, not
even with a word, but deals only with praising and extolling the
monastic life and the works of the monks, which are unusual and
completely separate from the community of other people.

\(32\) As even today the papists exalt those who founded and invented
the monastic life and praise them for having been holy men. But what is
that to us? For we do not dispute whether Augustine and others were
holy. But if one wanted to speak of holiness, one would have to admit
that Paul was much holier; indeed, what is more, should not Christ be
much holier?

**[1316 D. V, IS-18. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 3. W. 1, 1978-1981.
1317]{.underline}**

Have they all been? Why then do we not follow the same? Why do we not
accept their rules and teachings? Because we are sure that if we hear
Christ and follow him, then we will be pleasing to God.

\(33\) And we should be satisfied with this holiness and not seek other
holiness outside our profession with special works. The Carthusian monks
do not eat meat all their lives, but why is that? Well, a holy man has
decreed it so. But is it enough to answer thus? How much better did St.
Augustine speak of this, as a very wise and understanding man, who had
this light and knowledge before others, that he said: He reads the
previous fathers\' books in such a way that he does not believe them, no
matter how holy and learned they are, unless they agree with Scripture.
These are indeed two glorious and great titles, holiness and great art,
but they are not enough for faith: he alone should hold to God\'s word.
And this saying of Augustine\'s holds before us a very beautiful
judgment against all human statutes. For if you follow this judgment,
you will say: Let the pope be as learned, as holy, as rich and powerful
as he can ever be, he may go wherever he wants with his holiness, his
art, and other such gifts, but we will not hear him unless he brings
forth the holy Scriptures. This admonition is very necessary. For our
lords jurists have not yet ceased to boast of their foolish and godless
canons, and to protect and defend the power of the popes.

34 But now about Abraham. You see him described as walking in faith,
doing much good and suffering much misfortune: let us follow him and
such other patriarchs. For we have better examples than those which the
pope holds up to us in his legends: and the very fathers themselves,
whom the papists praise so highly, kept their statutes only voluntarily,
and so called others voluntarily and unnecessarily. The pope does not do
the same, and

So he lays ropes on the poor consciences and makes his statutes
necessary; for the laws he commands to be kept he wants to have kept
under penalty of eternal damnation.

35 But this is the way the devil should speak, and no right bishop or
pastor; therefore St. Paul 2 Thess. 2, 3. calls the pope a child of sin
and destruction, as he does not order or cause anything, but only sin
and destruction. Therefore he should be driven out of the church, which
Christ wants to be free; as St. Paul 2 Cor. 1, 24. says: \"We do not
rule over your faith.\" He did not want his church to be subject to the
tyranny of the teachers; for it recognizes only the One Teacher, Christ,
whom it also serves in right humility.

\(36\) Now Abraham, having been afflicted and tempted in many ways
during this year, has at last found comfort. For the king had restored
his wife Sarah to him, and he had come into close contact with the king;
the king also offered him lodging of his own free will. Of the lie we
have said above, since we have acted a similar history. For in Egypt
Abraham encountered the same thing that happened to him here in Gerar.

37 In schools, however, three kinds of lies are taught, namely, joke
lies, lies to serve others, and harmful or shameful lies; but in truth
there is only one kind of lie, which harms the neighbor either to the
soul, as there is the lie of the devil, or to the body, or to his
property and good name. For the joke lie, when we invent something,
belongs to the point of teaching the youth, as when some funny fables
are told and held up to them, when they are frightened with fictitious
characters, as happens in comedies.

38: So the lie, the so-called white lie, is also invented for the
benefit of the neighbor, as Christ poses as if he wanted to leave, Luc.
24, 28. Item, the daughter of Saul says of David that he is lying in
bed, 1 Sam. 19, 14. 15. This is also the case that Sarah invents how she
is Abraham\'s sister and not Abraham\'s sister.

**[1318 \" v, i8-A\>. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 3. W. i, issi-iW4.
1319]{.underline}**

is his wife. But that King Abimelech believes that she is his sister and
takes her to himself, even though he sinned against her out of
ignorance, God nevertheless punished him, not to condemnation, but in
mercy. And it is a certain proof that the king was a pious, holy man,
since God speaks to him and seriously admonishes him not to sin so
carelessly.

\(39\) But all this is that the patriarch Abraham may be praised and
glorified before us, because his faith had to struggle hard in this
danger. For this was no small accident, or one that could easily be
despised, that his wife should be taken from him by the king himself,
and at the time when the seed was promised to him. For the LORD had
foretold the time, saying, At this time, in the next year, Sarah thy
wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name Isaac.\"
Because of this hope, he loses his wife; he does not know when the Lord
will give her back to him, but with firm faith he believes that the
promise of God will not be in vain. Therefore he had many thoughts in
his heart. For when he thought about the world and its ordinary nature,
he had to doubt what the outcome would be that his wife had been taken
from him. For one knows well what tyrants are wont to do: they cannot
suffer that anyone should be obliged to hinder that which their will and
desire drives them to do. And the fact that his wife was taken from him
soon after he had arrived at the place confirmed the delusion in him,
namely, that there was no fear of God among these people.

\(40\) But just as his heart, when it had pursued such thoughts, had
become despondent and weak, so again, as often as he thought of God and
His promise, he had a certain hope, namely, that Sarah would be
delivered to him unharmed, and so by faith he overcame the thoughts that
the flesh had given him; he kept the word against them and also prayed
earnestly.

But where God is called upon, He comes immediately and does not leave
His own in distress and danger; for it is impossible that a person who
believes in God\'s promise should be abandoned. God would rather break
the heavens before he would abandon his faithful. And I do not doubt
that David looked at this text, since in the 107th Psalm he thanks God
for the help he showed his people in their time of need. \"They cried
out,\" he says in v. 6, 7, \"to the Lord in their trouble, and he
delivered them out of their distresses, and led them in a right way, so
that they went to the city where they could dwell.

\(41\) Therefore learn from this text what a great thing faith is, and
how a sacrifice acceptable to God is a heart that believes. For Abraham,
having been forsaken and having no counsel in himself, was preserved by
the promise. Therefore, when we are in trouble and danger, as we
certainly must be, if we want to be true Christians, we should be
confident and rely on God\'s help, which the promise certainly promises
us, according to the saying in Psalm 50, v. 15: \"Call upon me in
trouble, and I will save you.

\(42\) Many difficulties are often placed in the way of those who are
entrusted with the temporal government; therefore, the majority of
rulers wait for their office, fearing that they will earn ingratitude
and anger the people. But there one should not fear at all, and should
only do in faith what the word means. For if the authorities do not want
to punish a murderer or an adulterer, because they should be afraid of
him because of his great image and goodness, lest he should do harm to a
country or a city, they are acting contrary to their office and contrary
to God\'s will, and should rather look to the promise that says Rom.
13:1, 2: \"There is no authority except from God; whoever therefore sets
himself up against the authorities is contrary to God\'s order.\"
According to this promise, it should always proceed and punish the
wicked. But if it is the case that she has to invite hatred and enmity
upon herself, she should command herself and her welfare to the Lord in
faith, then she will feel

**[1320 k v, 20-22. interpretation of Genesis 20, 3. W. i, is8\<-isgs.
1321]{.underline}**

that God will protect them. But whichever authority does not have this
faith must see through its fingers where public sins and disgraces
occur, and thus transgresses God\'s commandment, will also have to
suffer its due punishment because of it.

\(43\) The works of a pious, faithful and believing authority are much
more excellent and better than those of the hermit Anthony and the
others, who can also be holy, but they are of the lesser saints. They
fear and are soon frightened like women, and flee when there is danger.
But a bishop who remains with his citizens waits fearlessly for the
sword, if a tyrant should draw it on him, as Cyprian did; so also a
pious believing prince, as Constantinus and Theodosius were, item, pious
believing fathers of households must all in their state be aware of many
and innumerable dangers. But because they are sure of their profession,
they call upon God when there is need and danger, and are thus saved by
faith.

44 And such constant struggle serves the saints to prepare and
strengthen them, so that they are not so soft and despondent as the
hermits or recluses, who suffer nothing but what they impose on
themselves. And if the tyranny of the princes, who devastated the church
everywhere, somewhat excuses the hermits, as Antonius and the others,
they may also be counted among the saints for this reason, but
nevertheless among the saints who were weak and frightened. But Ambrose
led a holier life in one year and did more good works than Hilarion did
in seventy years. For Ambrose lived in a common way and did not have a
wife, not as if he had had to do this because of necessity and out of
compulsion, but he did it voluntarily; just as marriage is also a free
thing. After that he taught and preached publicly, but especially where
he had the opportunity, he comforted some, punished others, and took
great pains to protect and save the church and congregation of God in
the most diligent way. But whether such works are badly and poorly
regarded

But even if they are not, they far surpass the work and worship of all
monks.

\(45\) Therefore it is a great thing that one is either a householder or
a temporal ruler, or also a church servant; for these three kinds of
status are ordained by God. For this reason, even those who live in
them, though they are not without danger, should always have some hope
that they will be helped, for they have been commanded to call upon God
for help.

46 If you want to know something about the life of Christians, or about
the legends of the saints, which they may be, I will tell you recently.
If you are a Christian, in whatever state you may be, God will attack
and tempt you in many ways through the devil, the world and your own
flesh, and this in this common life, which has no special reputation.
Therefore, faith and invocation or prayer Therefore, faith and
invocation or prayer should shine and precede Christians throughout
their lives, of which you can see an example everywhere in the history
of Abraham.

\(47\) It is a great trouble and danger that Abraham should be deprived
of his wife; and though he could not help it in his heart that it should
not have hurt him, yet he did not despair at all, but called upon God,
and believed that he would help him; and as he believed, so it was done.
\"He has punished great kings for their sake,\" says the 105th Psalm, v.
14; thus Abimelech is punished for Abraham\'s sake.

For God, says Moses, has come to him. And thereby he wants to indicate
that God has come to him with his terror: not as he is wont to do when
he takes on an ordinary form, namely, a man, a dove, a lamb. But he does
the same, so that he shows that he cares for Abraham.

\(49\) Of three kinds of prophecy or divination, namely, of divination
itself, then of visions, and of dreams, we have said above: and as for
dreams, the rule is well known, that such revelation is to be tested by
word and faith. For where they are associated with

**[1322 2 V, 22-24. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 3. 5. W. I, 1986-1989.
1323]{.underline}**

disagree with the Word or else nullify the faith, they are devilish.

5V. That we gave in Latin, juncta marito, is in Hebrew beulath baal, so
that in Latin is, maritata marito; we gave it in German, \"She is a
man\'s wife.\" But the word baal is well known, because it means
husband. But they have called some idols by this name, and have boasted
that they were thus joined to GOD as a bride is joined to her
bridegroom. Hence it comes that Hosea says Cap. 2, 17: \"I will put away
the names of Baalim from their mouths\" 2c., that is, they shall no
longer have many gods or idols, they shall have me alone for the right,
true God, whom they shall accept with right faith and to whom they shall
adhere, just as I will adhere to them with right love.

51\) In this way the word baal is also put in this place: Sarah est
maritata marito, \"Sarah is a man\'s wife,\" that is, you do wrong in
loving such a wife, who has her own husband, by whom she is loved and
whom she also loves in turn: therefore abstain and leave her, and give
her back to her husband. For this is a sermon on the law, which was so
severe and serious that if God had not preserved the king, he would
immediately have died of sorrow and terror; but he rises up again by
faith and considers God righteous, and for this reason also cites his
innocence.

**(v. 4, 5) And Abimelech touched her not, and said, Lord, wilt thou
slay a righteous people unto him? Did he not say unto me, She is my
sister? And she also said, He is my brother? I have done this with a
simple heart and innocent hands.**

God comforted Abraham in two ways: First, in that he has procured that
his wife be restored to him; second, in that God has shown him that the
people of Gerar are not as wicked as those of Sodom were. For there they
did not abstain from men: but here, when the king is admonished that
Sarah should be given a

He abstained from being a man\'s wife, and for this reason he is justly
and rightly praised for having been chaste and chaste, for not having
suddenly followed evil lust and committed adultery, nor forcibly invaded
the strange guests, as the Sodomites did; but the wife, whom he abducted
and took from the man, he kept honestly at home in his house, and as
soon as he learned that she was a man\'s wife, he willingly left her.
Therefore he has been one of the pious kings who will undoubtedly have
ruled his subjects godly and well; as is said in the common verse: Regis
ad exemplum totus componitur orbis, that is: As the king holds himself,
so all his subjects hold themselves.

\(53\) And it was a special comfort to Abraham that he found such a king
even among those who were uncircumcised. For this thought or temptation
troubled him very much, that he, reminded by the example of the
Sodomites, had to conclude that the whole world was corrupt and without
fear of God. This thought, however, is now taken away from him by such
an apparent example, so that he finds those of whom he was most afraid
to be innocent and quite pious, holy people.

\(54\) But this text also belongs to praise the marriage state, so that
we know that it is not only created by God, but we experience and see
here that it is also protected by God; just as the sixth commandment
does not only forbid adultery and fornication, but is also like a fence
and fortress of the marriage state, so that it will not be weakened.

**II.**

55 Abimelech\'s speech, in which he apologizes before God, is well worth
looking at and moving. He does not despair soon after the frightening
preaching of the law, when he hears from the Lord: \"You are of death\":
but he first states his innocence; then he has good hope in God\'s
justice, that is, in His grace and mercy.

56\. for the righteousness of God is not

**[1324 2- V. 24-26- Interpretation of I Genesis 20:4, 5. W. I,
ISS9-ISS2. 1325]{.underline}**

Such severe severity or wrath as they taught in the high schools, so
that God may condemn people; but is such justice, that he may have mercy
on the wretched and protect them against unjust violence, and punish
those who are guilty and deserve punishment. For it is both right to
punish those who are guilty and to protect the innocent. Whoever
recognizes God in this way, that he is therefore just, will easily be
able to withstand the terror of conscience and will find comfort to hold
on to.

\(57\) But this also belongs to it, that Abimelech says here that he did
this with a simple heart and innocent hands, that is, a good conscience
belongs to it. But because those who follow sin and their flesh cannot
have it, it is necessary, when they are to be converted, that they first
be frightened, and not so easily, but that they do not know which way to
turn or which way to turn; as we see in St. Peter and David. Because
they know that they are guilty, they do not excuse themselves, but
because they recognize their sin, they are greatly grieved and
humiliated, and yet they finally take hold of the grace and mercy of
God, and are thus reconciled to God through faith, which adheres to the
mediator.

058 But why did Abimelech, being spoken to alone, include the whole
people in his answer? He says not, Wilt thou destroy me, who am
righteous? but he says, Wilt thou slay a righteous people also?\" The
answer to this is that he must have had a large household and Sarah was
brought to him by others, so that not only the king but also the people
sinned.

\(59\) But this is more credible and in accordance with the truth, that
the pious king of spiritual things had good sense. Therefore he
concluded from other examples and experience that often for the sake of
a godless king a whole nation is punished, just as for the sake of a
pious prince God often blesses a whole nation. Just as He blessed the
whole country through Naaman.

Syria happiness and salvation; but because of the sins David committed,
he struck the whole nation of Israel. The Gentiles also learned this
from experience, as Hesiod wrote several verses about it, that often a
whole city is punished because of a man\'s sin. And Horace also says
rightly: Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi, that is: What lords
and princes or rulers sin and commit out of foolishness, the country
must pay and be punished for it.

60 Since Abimelech was supposed to apologize and beg God for what he had
done wrong, it served him well to speak not only of himself but also of
the entire nation. Therefore, it is also true that no greater harm can
happen in the kingdoms and lands than where pious and godly princes
depart.

\(61\) But the king is not satisfied with the fact that he has declared
his innocence, but he also tells what has caused it, and puts the blame
on others. Abraham, he says, has confessed without obligation, from
himself, that this woman was his sister; yes, she herself, when she was
asked, has confessed that she was his sister and not his wife. So why
did they lie? Because if I had known how it would have been in truth, I
would never have started this.

62 What answer shall we give here? Both Abraham and Sarah are accused by
the pious king: therefore either the king must lie, or Abraham and Sarah
have sinned. To this I answer thus: The saints, however great they may
be, are not always to be excused as if they had no sin. For though
Abraham was full of faith, yet here he fell through weakness, and feared
lest harm should come to his body. Yes, you say, he had cause for this;
for the miserable fall of the Sodomites had so tempted him that he had
to be afraid even when it was quite safe. And although this cause of
fear could not be despised, and Abraham could not even put it out of his
mind, it does not excuse him.

**[1326 D v. 26-28. interpretation of Genesis 20:4, 5. W. I, ISS2-19SS.
1327]{.underline}**

First of all, this fear was a sin in itself, and as it tends to happen,
another sin soon follows from this sin, namely, that he lies and also
teaches his pasture to lie. These are the sins of the saints, which are
forgiven and not imputed to them. St. John says 1 Ep. 1, 8. \"If we say
we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.\" And
we have an article of faith in which we say, \"I believe forgiveness of
sins.\" For this reason we do not want to excuse Abraham altogether, but
we want to include him in the sinful way, which has such a form that
even though it is not completely godless, it still has other sin in it.
For the same can be proved from the fact that God Himself does not
excuse Abraham, but accepts the excuse of the king.

\(64\) The saints commit many such sins daily, for they are also led
into sins by various occasions. But there is a difference between these
sins and the sins of the ungodly; for the sin of the ungodly denies
faith and contends against the known truth. Abraham is not such a man,
and yet he feels the law in his limbs, which sometimes pulls him away
from the right path, namely, when he is not in the battle and strife of
faith, when the days are evil and the time of tribulation is present; as
we also experience daily in ourselves.

65 For this reason you should know that the saints are not always
excused from all sins. For this is our consolation, that we take it for
granted that they also have been blood and flesh, and have felt their
temptations and lusts, which original sin still leaves in those who are
born again through faith.

\(66\) But there is another question here, namely: Why does God allow
such sin to happen to His own and why does He allow it to happen in this
way? The answer to this question comes from what follows from it,
namely, that God allows it to happen so that He may take from it the
cause of many good things. For the saints or believers do not fall
because of this.

but that God may do them abundant good, as he showers them with much
greater goods; as Rom. 8, 28. is written: \"We know that to those who
love God all things are for the best.\" There the gloss adds that even
the sins and infirmities themselves must serve them for the best.

67\. for that God sends us tribulation and the cross for the reason that
it is useful and good for us, let no one doubt this; for we know well
the saying of Paul, 2 Tim. 2:12: \"If we endure, we shall also reign.
Yes, even more so, God also wants to repay and reward the affliction.

68\) The sons of Israel sold their brother Joseph; he is led as a bought
servant to Egypt and there a new misfortune is inflicted on him by the
adulteress: but at last he is saved with great honor, and he says
rightly to his brothers: \"You intended to do evil to me; but God
intended to do it well\", Genesis 50, 20.

\(69\) As I have said, not only the misfortune that we suffer and that
is inflicted on us by others, but also the evil that we ourselves do,
must be for the good. Yes, you say, how does this work? Answer: In such
a way that a pious and godly man, when he sees his fall, is ashamed and
dismayed, and so initially the same fall brings about that such a man is
humbled and after that must also call upon God diligently and fervently.
For this reason Solomon says, Proverbs 24, v. 16: \"The righteous fall
seven times in a day, and rise again\"; for they do not persevere in
their sins, but groan and grieve over them. And does our corrupt nature,
which is still in our flesh, always drive us to become enemies to
ourselves, to condemn ourselves, and to say with Paul, Rom. 7:24, \"I
wretched man, who will deliver me from the body of this death\" or these
sins? Lord take and crucify our flesh! So faith increases by the
occasion of the sins and infirmities that are still left in our flesh.

That is why God leads His saints whimsically, as the 4th Psalm v. 4
says. \"With the

**[1328 L. V, rs-M. Interpretation of I Moses 20:4, 5. W. I?1W5-1S98.
1329]{.underline}**

With the pure thou art pure, and with the perverse thou art perverse,\"
Ps. 18:27. But this is not to be taken as meaning that sin is a good
thing. For sin remains evil in itself; but in the saints it becomes a
cause of good, according to the saying Ps. 18:26: \"With the saints thou
art holy.\" For everything that the saints do is sanctified, that is,
even if those who are holy and righteous, or who believe and fear God,
fall, their faith is nevertheless exercised and increased. God is so
wonderful in His saints.

71 Thus Abraham, who is still of fervent faith, is challenged, fearing
harm to his life and limb, and by his lie causes his wife to be taken
from him. Now this is sin and infirmity in itself: but what fruit
follows after such a case? This is that faith and prayer are restored to
him, and his wife is given to him again: for this purpose the pious king
is united with Abraham and becomes his good friend, so that through such
a cause he may become more and more enlightened and come to a more
perfect knowledge of God, and Abraham\'s prayer may also help him.
Moreover, King Abimelech felt death and punishment, and this was not for
condemnation, as it could be considered, but that God would have cause
to prepare him completely and incorporate him into the Church of
Abraham.

These are the wonderful works of God in His saints, that is, in the
faithful, who are not ungodly, nor do they persist in sins, and yet
often fall from weakness: the same fall must be for their good, for they
are holy.

73\. but again the 18th Psalm v. 27. says: \"With the perverse you are
perverse\"; for either their merit or good works (for so I must call it)
counsel them to evil; for they abuse against God the beautiful gifts of
God, as, their good understanding, and that they are eloquent and
learned, strong and beautiful 2c., become more and more hardened and
blinded in their godless nature, and finally become so proud that they
make themselves believe that they are like gods before other people.

tions. For that they are thus wrong with the gifts of God is evident
from them.

It has also happened to me that I have often started and have made many
attacks quite literally. That is why God, who governs all things, did
not allow such things to happen. Then I became ashamed, began to be
hostile to myself and to be angry with myself: and since I was thus
humbled, I subsequently became so much more diligent to know that I
would not be deceived by the counsel of my own flesh, I kept the word a
little more diligently. But I thanked God diligently that he thus
miraculously changed my counsel, and gave me a different outcome, so
much better than I had intended and planned. Thus it happened, when we
were in Schmalkalden, that we even refused the Pope the Concilium; but
it would have been much better if we had not refused it in such a way,
so far as it might have been done in a fair and lawful manner.

\(75\) So it goes through and through our whole life: we often do much,
counsel and say much that is not good; but by this God humbles His
saints and turns it to greater good and correction, which He might not
have done if such infirmities and deficiencies had not been found in us.

\(76\) These are theological matters which we do not say to the
canonists and sophists, who diligently falsify and blaspheme our
doctrine. But we say this to the saints and believers who do not follow
their flesh, but nevertheless find themselves burdened with sins, not
out of malice, but out of weakness. If they have fallen, they should not
despair, but should remember God\'s counsel, \"who leads his saints,\"
as the fourth Psalm, v. 4, says, \"wonderfully,\" that is, he leads and
governs them according to his wonderful counsel. How then this is very
marvelous, that he should cause his saints to fall, that they might be
humbled, and that their faith and prayer might be kindled, and that
safety might be driven from them. For the saying is true, which St. Paul
says Rom. 8, 28: \"The devout are not to be

**[1330 V. 30-32. Interpretation of Genesis 20:4-7. W. 1, 1998-2002.
1331]{.underline}**

chosen children, all things must be for the best,\" and as the 18th
Psalm v. 26. says, \"With the saints also thou art holy.\"

\(77\) So in this place also a fault is found in Abraham, that he
sinned: but the same becomes a cause, by which the king and his kingdom
were converted. Which is truly a marvelous work of God, who deals with
His saints in a marvelous way and leads them in a marvelous way, so that
He may keep them in holiness of the fear of God, and defiance and
constancy of faith. Which faith would even fall away if this weakness
did not remain in the saints. For they would even exalt themselves of
the great gifts and grace of God and become proud.

\(78\) As we see in the case of the wicked, who use their good gifts to
their own detriment and cause themselves to do evil. For they boast of
their goods, do not thank God for them, nor do they help their brothers
and neighbors with them, but think they are gods and lords over other
people. Therefore, just as all things are for the good of the saints, so
all things must be for the evil of the wicked.

79 But you should also know in this place that God is not an antinomer.
For he starts his trial from the law; then, hearing the innocence, he
absolves and comforts Abimelech again, and blesses him in many ways.
This is the process and order that God uses to keep, and is also the
right process. Abraham and his Sarah also came into danger through their
sin; but such danger was a cause for something good. For by such an
occasion the king joined the house and church of Abraham.

**Second part.**

**Of the sermon that God preached to Abimelech about this, and what
effects it had.**

**I.**

**V. 6 7. And God said to him in a dream, \"I also know that you have
done this with a simple heart. That is why I have kept you safe,**

**that you did not sin against me, and did not admit to yourself that
you touched her. Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a
prophet, and let him pray for thee, and thou shalt live. But if you do
not restore her, know that you must die, and all that is yours.**

This is one of his lovely sermons, in which God Himself absolves and
absolves King Abimelech from all sin with His voice. \"I also know,\" he
said, \"that you have done this with a simple heart,\" that is: I know
that you truly fear me and will not do anything against my will out of
malice; \"therefore I also have kept you from sinning against me.\" But
that I spoke somewhat harshly to you at first, I did so for the sake of
the cause that will follow, namely, that Abraham might receive comfort,
and that you might come to a more perfect knowledge of God, if you would
keep yourself to the house of Abraham. Therefore my hand has been upon
thee, \"that thou sin not against me.\"

These are words of special grace. As if God wanted to say: I am your
shield and your guardian, who will protect you, not only so that you
will not be harmed in your body, possessions and goods, but also so that
you will not be harmed in your soul. For this reason you first thought
that I was angry with you; but in truth I am angry with you in such a
way that I may not be angry with you afterwards, and so I hold back my
anger myself, so that you may be without sin and Abraham may have
comfort, and your whole kingdom may be converted. How could we imagine
God to be more sweet and kind?

\(82\) Therefore the Jews are rude asses, who have imagined in this
place that this pious king was smitten by God in his body, that he could
not touch Sarah. But you hear much else here, that God did not punish
him in his body, but kept his heart chaste; for otherwise, with a
troubled body, the heart may nevertheless have been inflamed with evil
desire. Therefore, this text should be well remembered,

**[1332 . v, 32-34. interpretation of Genesis 20:6, 7. w. 1. 2002-2008.
1333]{.underline}**

Namely, that God preserves His saints so that they do not sin against
Him.

The fact that God speaks to Abimelech in so many words in a dream is a
special sign of grace and mercy, just as it is a sign of God\'s wrath
when He is silent. For although God speaks in anger and punishes people,
His grace is nevertheless present, since it is impossible that people
should not improve and become more devout from the Word. For God is not
a useless and futile speaker: all that he says is a great thing and does
not come to pass without fruit. Abimelech had recognized Abraham as a
pilgrim and a stranger; but from the preaching that God does to him, he
learns that Abraham is a prophet of God, that is, that he is an
excellent servant of God, above whom the world has nothing higher or
greater; since God Himself commanded him that he should teach and
instruct the world about God, and that God should gather a church and
congregation in the world through the preaching of His word.

\(84\) Shem, Salah and other patriarchs lived at that time, but Abraham
alone was the man whom God chose to be the church, to whom He gave the
promise that in his seed all generations on earth would be blessed.
Therefore, by the voice of God Himself it is declared that he is the
High Priest, with whom one should certainly find God\'s word,
forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

From this we can imagine what a great reputation Abraham will have had
with this king, since he hears that he is called a prophet by God
Himself. Therefore, he accepted him most kindly and heard from him the
heavenly wisdom of the Son of God, who was to be born from Abraham\'s
lineage and redeem the human race, thus lifting the curse and bringing
eternal blessings.

Thus Abraham is made a bishop and doctor or teacher by God\'s voice, but
the king with his citizens or subjects is the student and tutor.

listener. And God blessed the same place, that there Isaac should be
conceived and born, and the Holy Spirit be given to the Gentiles, and
not circumcision; though the same flocks were taught and told of God\'s
word, that they knew and believed that there was no other God, but that
he should be born of the circumcised people of Abraham.

These are actually the great goods that follow according to right
doctrine, namely, the glory of God, the fulfillment of the Ten
Commandments, salvation from death and hell. Therefore the pious see why
Moses wrote such things, namely, that the promise of faith would be
confirmed, and that the Gentiles also belonged to the church of Abraham,
even if they were not circumcised. And so this change always remains in
the world: the Sodomites, who are unrepentant, fall away and are
condemned, but the land of Gerar is converted. So it is this day also:
Some are hardened and blinded, but again there are also some who believe
the word and are enlightened by it.

88\) But that God says that Abraham will pray for the king, you see how
the Scriptures agree with him everywhere. For it places the spirit of
grace and prayer everywhere together, Zech. 12, 10. Therefore Abraham is
a prophet, that he should teach the world the true knowledge of God; and
at the same time he is a priest, that he should pray, not only for
himself, but also for his church, and even for the Gentiles who belong
to the same church. For when God says, \"He will pray for you,\" He
calls the king and his subjects to Abraham\'s church with the same word,
and thus a Gentile man, like a wild olive tree, becomes partaker of the
sap in the right fat olive tree, and is also grafted into it, Rom.
11:17. Abraham, however, is praised by God as a great high doctor or
teacher, and one who can pray mightily and powerfully.

Yes, you say, why does God not do this without Abraham? What is the
point of such a long speech? Answer: God honors the one who honors Him,
and because Abraham honored God, He honored him.

**[1334 2 V. 34-36. interpretation of Genesis 2V, 6-8. W. 1, 200S-S007.
1335]{.underline}**

God confesses him again, and adorns and praises him with a very
beautiful and glorious testimony, submitting the king and his whole
kingdom to him, so that they must become his disciples.

We have often said of prayer that God is willing to give us whatever we
need, but He has commanded that we pray, according to the saying, \"Ask
and you shall receive,\" John 16:24. We should not pray for our own sake
alone, but that we may also serve God with it. For whoever prays
confesses that God is gracious and merciful and forgives sins. For this
reason, just as the Word should always be taught and diligently
practiced in the Church, so also prayer should always be practiced, so
that the grace of God may be abundantly with us, and that the gifts that
have begun in us may be increased, and the glory of God may increase and
become great everywhere.

91\. But why does God repeat this threat at the end? Answer: Because
those who are hardened always fall back into sin; like Pharaoh, who is
so often admonished, yet does not desist from his tyranny. Saul also
often justifies David and praises him for being righteous, but he
accuses himself; nevertheless he continues and does what he is supposed
to do, so that he is also obliged to destroy David. So the seed falls on
the stony land, but it remains there without fruit. Such a one, God says
to Abimelech, you shall not be or you will die. There are many of them,
who are careful not to get into outward mischief, but at last they are
safe. And the sophists teach wickedly and unjustly that even a little
love is enough to gain eternal life: they do not know, therefore, that
the word must be heard and sharpened daily, and that we must always
persevere in prayer, if we are to persevere in grace. Therefore, this
threat, which is repeated here, is to awaken and admonish the king to
remain in the grace that was given to him, but if he sins, he threatens
him with death. For they that are sure of themselves are consumed and
destroyed.

**II.**

**V. 8 Then Abimelech arose early in the morning, and called unto all
his servants, and told them all these things in their ears. And the
people were greatly afraid.**

\(92\) These words should be remembered diligently, for in them a very
beautiful example of repentance is presented to us. Abimelech did not
delay the repentance of his deed from one day to the next, as we are
wont to do, for we have been delaying it for a long time. For when we
are confronted with a devotion, we promise and offer that we will mend
our ways from now on. Abimelech hears the sermon in a dream that he
should beware of sins; therefore, as soon as the day dawns, he calls
together all the court servants and tells them what has happened. Then
he calls Abraham and gives him back his wife. He, who was a king before,
now becomes a bishop in his kingdom and spreads the fear and knowledge
of God among his servants and subjects, so that they may also learn to
fear God and honor his word.

Now this is a great gift of God, when a king becomes a teacher, that is,
when a pious, God-fearing authority warmly embraces the true religion.
Before the arrival of Abraham, Abimelech had also known God and ruled
his subjects godly, but this knowledge of God was of a general nature:
now, however, when he hears Abraham, he learns to look at God a little
more closely, as it were, because he knows that Abraham will be the
father of the seed to be given. He also spreads this knowledge of God
among his subjects.

\(94\) There are many of them today who say that they would accept the
gospel if the kings themselves became preachers, but because the common
preachers are such wretched, miserable, despised and even mean people,
this is the reason why reasonable and sensible people despise such
preachers. But those who say this are lying about it. For the wicked
always neglect and despise the word, no matter whether it is preached by
angels from heaven or by kings of the world.

**[1336 \" V, 38-38. Interpretation of I Genesis 20, 8. W. 1. 2007-mi.
1337]{.underline}**

95 For what do they miss in us? Did not the most noble, our most
gracious lord and prince, of holy memory, John, Elector of Saxony, in
the year following the birth of Christ our Savior, 1530, at Augsburg,
freely publicly proclaim and teach the gospel of Jesus Christ at the
Imperial Diet, where Emperor Carl and all the estates of the empire were
present? He did not do this alone, but with him and after him many
others.

Therefore, this excuse they make to contradict the truth is vain and
false. For even if God would send some angels from heaven, as He did to
Sodom, the wicked would not believe. Therefore, let them always go away
with their devilish rhetoric, who pretend that the teachers and
preachers are little people, and wait until they may have tender,
glorious and great mighty preachers; as the Jews also say Joh. 7, 48.
49.: \"Does any ruler or Pharisee believe in him? But the people who
know nothing of the law are accursed.\"

97\. But this devilish excuse, with which the wicked want to decorate
their hardening, will finally fall to the ground and God will certainly
punish such great contempt of His word. For what did it help that the
angels came to Sodom, that Lot was a pious man and of a good blameless
life, in whom his citizens could neither blame nor punish?

But there are others who, under another pretext, despise the gospel.
What good, they say, has come from it? They seek to shake our whole
doctrine with this storm ram. The hearts of the pious should be guarded
against such angry words. For why do they not hear what Paul says in 1
Cor. 1:26, namely, that not many noble men are called, not many wise
men. But he who says that there are not many of them called,
nevertheless leaves it that there are still some called. Thus, in the
time of Abraham, not many kings accepted the true doctrine; yet
Abimelech accepted it and became a teacher in his church.

So at the Diet of Augsburg there were many princes who cursed and
condemned our doctrine, but there was also John, Prince of Saxony, of
holy memory, who with great courage confessed the Lord Christ before the
whole world.

\(100\) But if you ask what good comes or has come from our teaching,
answer me first what good has come from the preaching of Lot which he
did in Sodom? namely, that the fire which fell from heaven consumed and
devoured them, because they had heard the word without fruit and in
vain. Such a punishment will also befall our despisers in its time, and
let us see that they become more and more deluded and senseless from day
to day. This is the beginning of their fall. But you should keep this in
mind, so that you may counteract and suppress the devil\'s dialectic,
with which he blinds the eyes and hearts of many people.

The world proceeds according to this German proverb: If you were to
carry a man on your back all the way to Rome and set him down rudely,
all thanks would be lost. Our doctrine redeems all nations from the
great plague and tyranny of Satan, from sin, from eternal death, and
from many, countless abominable idolatries and false teachings of the
pope, and from the heavy burden that lay on the poor consciences. But
the ungrateful world does not see these great, innumerable benefits of
God. But where there is a little evil or a little harm, either because
there are some who take the church goods by force, or because there are
some who speak a little too mildly or do not live rightly, they can make
a fuss about it and make it great without measure. Such people, however,
are not students of the teaching of the gospel, but lie in wait only for
that which is evil, and outwardly seems weak and infirm, and what they
see only in the teachers and hearers of the gospel, they pull everything
by force and by the hair, that they may thereby blaspheme, revile and
suppress the teaching.

102\. But why is not Abraham\'s ministry also reproached and blasphemed,
which was followed by the fall and ruin of Sodom? And

**[1338 V- 38-40. Interpretation of Genesis 20:8. w. 1:2N0-2M3.
1339]{.underline}**

If the Sodomites had remained and lived so long, they would undoubtedly
have laid all the blame on him, namely, that he had lived too close to
them. For they had long forgotten that they were redeemed by his good
deed. This is what the world is wont to do.

\(103\) I call the world not only the people of low estate, but the very
best, who are excellent, wise, honorable, and pious. These are the
noblest, who, from a little harm or wrong, cause themselves to forget
all, even the greatest, good deeds, and then judge the doctrine of the
gospel and begin to be hostile to it.

And, God be lamented, we ourselves, who have the word and boast of it,
are moved by very little harm, so that we easily forget more arid
benefits of God. Our Lord God has given me a healthy body until my
fiftieth year, has given me a wife and children, and what is more, he
has given me the knowledge of his word. But now, because I am troubled
by my blood or by the stone, some misfortune may cause me to forget all
the other goods that God has given me. So God gives the world more
sunshine, rain and other gifts that are useful and good; but if, in
twelve or ten years, a pestilence or a theurge occurs, there will be a
great cry and lamentation, and the blessings of the previous years will
soon disappear among the people. But it is a heavy cross to live in such
great wickedness of men who despise the benefits of God,

We should keep the contradiction, that is, that we learn to tolerate and
overcome the small harm, which does not happen so often, against the
great, manifold benefits of God, so that He showers us with them daily.
For what are all the harms, where they are heaped together, against this
one gift, that God has revealed His word to us? Are these not harmful
evil people, who despise so many innumerable goods, which one has from
the right doctrine, for the sake of some harm?

How much better does St. Paul speak of it 2 Cor. 4, 17. 18. that our
tribulation is temporal and light, but the glory, so that God will repay
it, he says, is eternal, and important beyond all measure to those who
do not look at the visible, but at the invisible. But it is in vain that
Paul preaches this, for the world does not believe it, but is always
bound to the visible, but despises the invisible and considers it
nothing. The merciful Father has given us His Son, who died for our
sins: He demands of us that we confess His name before the world and
lose our lives for His name\'s sake, and promises us that after such a
small cross and suffering, eternal rest will follow, and a glory that is
great and important beyond all measure. And what can be more sweet than
such a promise, which promises and assures us of certain salvation from
eternal death? Otherwise, our life would be in such a state that we
would have to die at last: why would we not rather die for the sake of
the name of Christ?

But our nature does not suffer that one wants to compare the great goods
with the small damage. The flesh, in its own way, does not do otherwise;
it always obscures the innumerable great goods of God with the harm or
misfortune that has an end and is most certainly transient.

\(108\) Therefore, we should always have before our eyes the list of
God\'s benefits, both natural or physical and spiritual, so that we will
see that where there is a drop of misfortune, there is a whole sea full
of God\'s benefits. We should praise and exalt ourselves with God\'s
rhetoric, as St. Paul does so wonderfully. For he grasps and devours in
one word all the danger and harm that the world can complain about.

\(109\) Those whom God has commanded to preach do not have many good
days in the world, but are driven out of house and home, are strangled,
whoever is in need of help, and whoever is in need of help.

**[1340 v. 4\"-t2. Interpretation \'of I Genesis 20, 8. M. i, Ans-sois.
1341]{.underline}**

burned. Yes, you say, is this not a pity or a misfortune? To this St.
Paul answers and says: It is indeed misfortune and tribulation; but yet
it is light and fleeting, and creates an eternal and beyond all measure
important and infinite glory. St. Paul sees this and believes it; but
the world neither wants to see it nor believe it, but only accepts the
present. If, therefore, as the German proverb says, you were to carry it
on your back all the way to Rome and set it down rudely, all thanks
would be lost. She does not want to feel any cross, not even a small
damage, not even a splinter of misfortune, if she is full of beams and
especially harmful and burdensome to the church.

Therefore, we who are Christians should suppress and minimize these
strange and terrible wounds of the devil, but make the benefits of God
great. For in truth all misfortune is small, and is especially a small
cross that we bear if we hold it against the gifts and benefits that we
have obtained from creation, redemption and sanctification, and these
will be much more glorious and greater in the life to come.

But now we want to come back to history. The sorrow and misfortune that
came upon the Sodomites was very great, which the patriarch Abraham had
to see; therefore God now consoles him with another example, which is
not sorrowful, but quite joyful and sweet, namely, that the heathen king
Abimelech becomes a bishop and teaches God\'s word even in his court.
\"He called,\" says the text, \"to all his servants\"; and was not this
preaching in vain; for Moses adds, saying, \"And the people feared
greatly.\"

For this reason the Sodomites and the peoples of Gerar are held here
very much against each other. Abraham had saved the Sodomites and the
surrounding cities, and had not only shown them this physical benefit,
but had also taught them the right knowledge of God and the right
worship of God. Lot, who lived in Sodom, did not keep quiet about this
either, but

He was eager to spread the knowledge of God and to openly proclaim his
faith. But the godless citizens and inhabitants of the country despised
these two teachers, and not only did they not fear God, but they also
despised Him.

But here you see the contradiction in the Gerarites. When they heard the
word of the king, they were afraid, humbled and turned to God. They knew
nothing of the dream their king had had, nor had they seen it; but they
believed him when he told them about it, and they received it as the
word of God, and they were afraid, but in such a way that they
nevertheless retained the hope of God\'s grace, and they gave Abraham
abundant gifts.

Moses tells these things in short words and does not emphasize them with
much praise, as the pagan historians are wont to do, for he wants to
command the reader to do the same. But all this serves to comfort
Abraham, who was frightened by the Sodomites\' example and thought that
there was no fear of God left in the world. But God showed him that
although the greatest part of the world is always evil, God nevertheless
has His church in it, even though it is small and hidden.

115\] In the same way, he comforted Elijah in the books of Kings. For
when he complained that he was the only one left who still kept the
right service, God answered him that there were seven thousand of them
left, all of them pious and righteous and serving the right true God, 1
Kings 19:10, 18.

Because the ingratitude and wickedness of the citizens and peasants and
other people in all classes is so great, we often get such thoughts that
we think the whole world must be possessed by the devil. Now it is a
very sad spectacle that the hearts of pious, God-fearing people should
be so saddened and afflicted; but one must keep this comfort, which is
held up here to Abraham, namely, that nevertheless some pious and holy
people still live on earth. For God is

**[1342 L. V, 42-\^4. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 8. W. 1. 2VI6-20I8.
1343]{.underline}**

He is a God of grace and judgment, therefore he sustains and governs
those who are not impenitent, but humble themselves and ask for grace.
Thus the 12th Psalm v. 2 says that the faithful are few among the
children of men; that is so much to say: The world rejects the truth and
the word, yes, it is hostile to it; and yet the Lord says at the end of
the same Psalm v. 6: \"I will rise up for the sake of the wretched and
the poor\" 2c. Therefore there are always some left who keep and accept
the word.

So, when Christ had left Jerusalem because the Jews wanted to stone him,
he comes back to Jerusalem and says to his disciples John 11:9: \"Are
there not twelve hours in the day? This is said so much: With time, the
hearts of men can be changed, and some can mend their ways and renounce
their wickedness. Thus a constant change takes place: in some places sad
troubles come to Abraham\'s eyes; but in other places he again receives
comfort. Here, in his misery, he finds pious, God-fearing people who
receive him kindly and honor him like a prophet of God.

In addition, there is a great comfort, namely, that Sarah becomes
pregnant and gives him certain hope that he will now have an heir. God
thus abundantly proves that he loves his saints, that is, those who
believe in his promise, very tenderly. He lets them be tempted in many
ways, but still faithfully keeps what he has promised. Therefore, let no
one despair, even in the greatest distress and affliction, but let us
all be sure that the heavens will fall before God forgets his promise.

\(119\) The same is to be said of Lot and his daughters, though Moses
says nothing about them. For they will undoubtedly have taken refuge in
Abraham as the father of the promise, wanting to hear comfort from him
in the face of so much and such great misfortune into which they had
fallen so unawares. Moreover, their affliction was soothed by the
company and fellowship of the Gerarenes, whom God

while the Sodomites, as St. Peter says in 2 Pet. 2, 8, tormented the
eyes and ears of the pious, holy people: Abraham himself, as the right
high priest or bishop, absolved them from the blood shame they had
committed. For although such a deed was neither excusable nor
praiseworthy, he nevertheless reproached them with the fact that God was
merciful, forgave the sin, and would bear with our weakness. He will
have said: \"Now therefore God demands nothing more of you, except that
you recognize your sin, and hope in His grace and mercy, which He will
show for the sake of the promised seed, and take comfort in it.

120 But the children born of Lot\'s daughters he will undoubtedly have
loved and received kindly, as grandfathers love their children, and he
will have promised them kingdoms. Therefore their accident, by which
they were humiliated, was also a comfort to them; for Abraham could not
have been satisfied if he had not known that Lot and his daughters had
been reconciled to God.

121 Therefore we who believe the promise have such a God, who indeed
tempts us, but such temptation is easy and does not last long; as St.
Paul 2 Cor. 4:17 calls our tribulation temporal and easy. For we are not
like the wicked who say, \"What good has come from the gospel?\" but we
know that Abraham also believed in God, but what good or benefit did he
get from it? He had to leave his homeland and go into misery, and there
he had to suffer immense misfortune among the heathen. The world
considers all this to be evil, and we do not deny it either. But we say
it is a temporal and light affliction, if you consider, on the other
hand, that the goods with which God has endowed us are important and
eternal beyond all measure.

But only the faithful do this, namely, those who look only at the
invisible and not at the visible, that is, those who cling to the Word
with simple, pure faith.

**[1344 D. V. 44. 4K. Interpretation of I Moses 20, 8. s. W. I.
ANK-ross. 1345]{.underline}**

And it is the same in the temporal, that as we have said above, the
goods we have from God are more important and more excellent, than the
temporal misfortune can be. But how much more is this true in the
church, in which this word of Christ is heard, when he says Matth. 11,
29. 30.: \"My burden is light,\" namely to those who believe my words;
\"and my yoke is easy,\" when we look to Christ, who promised that he
would give us rest, just as he says there: \"So you will find rest for
your soul. For these words, \"Ye shall find,\" indicate that the godly
are without rest for a time. But such restless time is short; but the
rest of the souls, which the faithful will find, will be important and
eternal.

The wicked are so far from believing or understanding this that they do
not understand their present goods, which they enjoy daily. For even if
they have lived a whole fifty years quite gently and quietly, and only a
few days a little fever attacks them, they forget all their former
benefits and become almost senseless with great impatience. This is a
terrible delusion of Satan, who thus obscures the benefits of God.

I am therefore very hostile to Pliny, because he accuses nature of
always being our stepmother, and not rather our true mother, who
nourishes us; therefore he makes a great noise about poisonous animals,
snakes, crocodiles, etc., but he does not see the many innumerable goods
that one has from cows, oxen, sheep, birds, fish, and from men; yes,
that is even more, he sees neither the sun nor the moon.

The Scriptures do not speak of creatures in this way, but the rhetoric
of the Holy Spirit, so that it may be used, is that it may make
misfortune and tribulation small, and the goods we have from God great.
Satan, however, is wont to do the contrary; for it is evident in
himself, and in the day, that where there is but one hideous serpent or
dragon, there are a thousand cows; and where there is one wolf, there
are a hundred sheep.

**Third part.**

**How Abimelech talks to Abraham about this trade, and what Abraham
answers him.**

**I.**

**V. 9 And Abimelech called Abraham also, and said unto him, Why hast
thou done this unto us? and what have I sinned against thee, that thou
hast brought such great sin upon me and upon my kingdom? Thou hast dealt
with me, not as one ought to deal.**

After the king Abimelech was frightened by the divine sermon and the sin
was shown to him, he was humbled: but since he was thus humbled, he
heard the forgiveness of sins and accepted the consolation. Now he also
adds his confession, and finally all kinds of good works follow, so that
he has also proved his love for those who were miserable and strangers.
But the words of this confession are not to be understood as if the king
alone had spoken them. It is a common confession of the whole kingdom,
that is, of the king and his subjects.

This is a wonderful example that even before the birth of Christ, even
before the law was given, many people without circumcision joined the
church of the circumcised and were saved. For the ways of the Lord are
unsearchable, as St. Paul says in Romans 11:33. And this is an impudent
lie of the Jews, that they let themselves dream that God should have
rejected all Gentiles and wanted to be known and honored only by the
circumcised.

Our Latin interpreter thinks that these words are directed as if the
king wanted to accuse Abraham. But he speaks of it as one who is
inexperienced in spiritual matters and in temptation. For the king does
not accuse Abraham, but he laments out of a crushed and sorrowful heart
with great humility about the cause of such a great misfortune, and is
one of them who say with Job Cap. 23, 15. say: \"I am ashamed of all my
doings\" 2c., and with

**[1346 L.V, 4S-47. interpretation of Genesis 20:9.W.I,S\<W-AW.
1347]{.underline}**

David in the 19th Psalm v. 13: \"Who can realize how often he misses?
Forgive me the hidden faults!\" Item, as St. Jacobus says Cap. 3, 2:
\"We all lack manifoldly.\"

For it is neither a joke nor a game where one hears the word of God. For
it touches the heart, and is like a thunderbolt, which with its great
power overthrows such cities that are quite firm; just as the story of
Paul\'s conversion shows, Acts 9:3, 4. 9:3, 4, when he was struck down
to the earth on his way to Damascus. There he did not hear any glorious
words, but he felt that his spirit was crushed; as the Lord says in the
prophet Jeremiah Cap. 23:29, \"Is not my word like a fire, and like a
hammer that breaketh in pieces rocks?\" For Paul was so hostile to the
gospel with a hardened heart that he was like an immovable rock, and yet
he was crushed with the hammer of the word. For \"God kills and makes
alive, leads into hell and out again\", 1 Sam. 2, 6.

Therefore God speaks to us, not as one man speaks to another; His words
are like a two-edged sword, Heb. 4:12, that the hearts may be pierced.
Therefore the hearts are not proud, but are humbled to the utmost: they
do not boast of their works or merits, but shun with Job Cap. 23, 15.
over all their doings, and find nothing in themselves to hold up against
the wrath of God, but see and feel well that even their good works are
unclean and defiled before God. Just as there is a wonderful saying of
Augustine, which is especially praised: Woe to the life of man, however
good and praiseworthy it may be, where it is judged without God\'s grace
and mercy.

\(131\) This is also the opinion of the king here; he does not accuse
Abraham as if he were righteous and did not deserve this punishment; he
has a broken spirit, and because he hears from God that he has sinned
unknowingly, he now looks around to see what the cause might be. And
because he hears from God Himself that Abraham is a prophet of God, he
complains before Him of his

Misery and unhappiness. Well,\" he says to him, \"you holy prophet, tell
me what my sin is. What have I done, or wherewith have I sinned, that I
have fallen into this error, and thought to take thy Sarah to wife? 2c.
For this is what the brokenhearted do: they cannot rest until they hear
what their sin is, so that they may find help and comfort against it.

But Abraham had said that Sarah was his sister, and this caused the king
to sin. For if he had known that she was Abraham\'s wife, he would never
have thought of marrying her or taking her from Abraham by force.
Therefore he now thinks, \"Another sin must necessarily have preceded
it, so that I deserved to fall into this sin. Therefore, I say, he does
not accuse Abraham, but he is frightened and trembles, and seeks how he
may find peace in his conscience. He is not aware of anything, and yet
he feels that he must have sinned, according to the saying of Jacob Cap.
3, 2: \"We are all manifoldly lacking\"; for we also sin in many things
unknowingly. Therefore Christ also gives us this advice, Matthew 6:12,
that we should pray, \"Forgive us our debts,\" and commands us to
forgive others their debts and faults as well, because there are still
remaining sins that need to be forgiven daily.

The pope barks and cries with his frogs and dogs against us, that we
deny or forbid good works: but we say and exhort every man to do good
works, but deny and contradict that no works, however good they may be,
may be held against God\'s judgment. And this is what King Abimelech
means here; for a frightened conscience thinks of nothing but sin alone,
and loses or forsakes all glory and confidence, however many good works
it may have.

134: On this opinion one should also understand the saying of Gregory,
since he says:

**[1348 \" v, 47-ts. Interpretation of 1 Mofe 20, S-13. W. i. 2025-2028.
1349]{.underline}**

It is due to pious healers that they also recognize their guilt in this,
since there is no guilt. The pope, as the antichrist, has drawn this out
so that he would confirm his tyranny with it, and has wanted that one
should fear him in this way. But this is wrong; for one should recognize
this for guilt before God alone, which is no guilt, and not before men.
I can say with truth that I have not committed adultery, that I have not
stolen; but I cannot say in general that I have not sinned against the
sixth and seventh commandments.

For here I must fear God\'s judgment, even though I am not aware of it.
For sin is not yet extinguished or buried in us; and God is not
satisfied with the fact that we have outwardly abstained from sin with
our hands, but He also condemns the evil desire of the heart. Therefore
it is right that we acknowledge before Him that we are guilty, since
there is no guilt, that is, since we are not conscious of anything. We
say rightly with David Ps. 19:13: \"Who can perceive how often he
faileth? Forgive me my hidden faults,\" for God also has original sin
against us. In the same way, the Pope has nothing against us: he is
neither God nor a judge of original sin. Therefore, if he accuses us
unreasonably, his accusation should be refuted, and this tyrannical
saying, which came from Satan\'s mouth, should have no place with us,
that they say: Sententiae nostrae, etiam injustae, metuendae sunt, that
is: If we say, order or set something, which is obviously wrong even in
itself, one should nevertheless be afraid of it, so that one does not
transgress it or consider it wrong. Against this you only say freely
that one should reject such things and consider them unjust. And in such
a case, neither St. Gregory\'s nor any man\'s authority or reputation
shall count for anything. For the pope is not God, that he should accuse
us; but we are always subject to God, and he alone has to accuse us in
the case.

\(136\) Now here you have an example of such a man who confessed
gloriously and was afraid of sins, since there were none.

sin, that is, since he was not aware of anything himself. He may have
heard vain absolution from God; but a heart that has once been properly
frightened cannot be satisfied enough: it is always troubled and
tormented with its worry and fear. Even though this is very painful for
the heart to be tortured in this way, it is pleasing to God according to
the saying of Isa. 66:2: \"I look upon the wretched and the
brokenhearted\" 2c. And that this is the meaning of this confession can
be proved from the fact that the king asks Abraham at the second time
and says: \"What did you look upon that you did these things?\" The
word, vidisti, \"what hast thou looked upon,\" has a peculiar emphasis;
for to look, videre, belongs properly to the prophets, to whom God
reveals His will by visions; as if now Abimelech wanted to say to
Abraham, \"I know that thou art a prophet, therefore tell me, didst thou
not have a peculiar revelation of this thy counsel, and didst say by
peculiar command of God that thy wife was thy sister? Verily, there must
be a guilt hidden under it, which neither I nor my people are aware of:
therefore I ask, if we have forfeited something or are guilty of
something, will you inform us of it, and we will repent.

**II.**

**V. 11-13. Abraham said: I thought, perhaps there is no fear of God in
these places, and will slay me for my wife\'s sake. Also she is truly my
sister, for she is my father\'s daughter, but not my mother\'s daughter,
and has become my wife. But when God sent me away from my father\'s
house, I said to her, \"Have mercy on me, so that wherever we go, you
will say of me that I am your brother.**

Abraham does two things: he excuses himself and clears the king\'s
conscience. As if he wanted to say: God did not command me, so I did not
see a prophetic face, therefore you must not be afraid. But this was the
only real reason why I had presented myself as if Sarah were my sister
and not my wife.

**[1350 \"V.LS-SI. Interpretation of Genesis 20:11-13. w. 1, 2028-2031.
1351]{.underline}**

Woman, that when I left my fatherland, and when I moved from Hebron
(where I also stayed for some years), I had the Sodomites as neighbors;
also the Lord saved the whole country by my sword; I also wanted to save
them from his wrath with my prayer, so that I would represent them
diligently before God: but because of their stubborn wickedness I was
unable to do anything. Therefore, when I have seen it, I must confess
that I thought there must be no more people in any place in whom some
fear of God could still be found. Since I was worried that I would be in
danger of my life, I thought that I could be protected and preserved in
this way: I therefore took this advice, since I was full of sorrow and
misery; therefore I ask that you also forgive me.

Such histories are worth reading, for they teach us that the saints have
always been killed for and after the flesh: therefore they are very
useful, that we may learn from them how we should rightly live our
lives. For how much easier would it have been for Abraham to have
stretched out his neck to the executioner, to have snatched it in an
hour, than to have been put to death daily? But by such examples a godly
heart is taught and instructed to faith, hope and all Christian virtues;
therefore one should read them often. For wherever a new tribulation
comes, God always has new sermons or sermonettes that he does to
alleviate the tribulation that has occurred.

139\. You see nothing like this in the common legends or histories of
the saints. For where they come to the highest, they praise the celibate
state, since it would have been much easier for Abraham if he had not
had a wife, because he has always been plagued with so many misfortunes.
But because he has a certain hope that God will give him heirs and
descendants, he bears the cross that God the Lord has laid upon him, and
he is not at all challenged by the fact that this state is so devoid of
all reputation for holiness.

140\) Now that Abraham has apologized before the king, saying that he
did everything he did out of fear and confusion after such great
tribulations, because he thought that such sin and the same ungodly
nature ruled in Gerar as he had experienced in Sodom and Egypt, he adds
another apology concerning Sarah. This whole long story is meant to
comfort the king. For it is very difficult to straighten out a heart
that has been quite frightened. Abraham sees this and therefore speaks
more words. My wife,\" he says, \"had a special reason for saying that
she was my sister, for she is indeed my sister, but not as you
understood. For I have let the words fall differently from what I
thought, not because I was hostile to you, but because I was afraid. For
the designation \"sister\" is sometimes actually meant, sometimes
somewhat more broadly. I meant it in a broader sense, since I called her
my sister, but you actually understood it.

Now here is a question: How could he say that Sarah was his father\'s
daughter? For Moses (Gen 11:27) clearly says that Sarah had three sons,
Nahor, Haran and Abraham, and that Lot was born of Haran, and Lot was
Sarah\'s brother. But of Sarah he does not say that she was born of
Haran; unless you want to say that she had two names and that she is
called Iisca in the eleventh chapter (v. 29). But since this is a bit
too far, the next way is to take it that she was Haran\'s stepdaughter,
according to which, since he died before his father, Sarah was brought
into the house of Haran and brought up there: therefore she was called a
daughter of Haran, that she was neither a natural nor a true daughter of
Haran, but was adopted with the marriage of the widow. If we now follow
this reasoning, then the dispute is already cut off as to whether
Abraham could have adopted his brother\'s daughter as his own.

**[1352 L. v,si-Z3. Interpretation of Genesis 20:11-13. W. i, 2031-2033.
1353]{.underline}**

For a man to take his brother\'s stepdaughter to wife was not forbidden
in the Law.

That the Latin text has: Postquam eduxit me Deus de domo patris mei
etc., \"Since God called me to wander outside my father\'s house\" 2c.,
is in the Hebrew text: \"After Gods called me\" 2c. Which text is to be
considered diligently and to be remembered well. It is otherwise common
that the word elohim, in the plural, is put for the name of GOD; but in
this place to the noun in the plural elohim, \"gods,\" is added a time
word also in the plural: fecerunt errare, \"called me wandering.\" And
the Jews, as we know, blaspheme and falsify this text, as if Moses had
spoken this way out of reverence. But we are to believe that Moses had
the same intention here as in the first chapter of this book, v. 26,
where God says, \"Let us make man,\" namely, that he might thereby
clearly show that there are more persons in the one Godhead than the
person of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. And we did not invent
this, but take this wisdom from God\'s word, which is obvious and clear,
and may not be falsified by us, as the shameful Jews falsify it,
especially because the holy scripture is so unanimous and agrees
everywhere, and the New Testament also proves this so clearly.

And Abraham undoubtedly wanted to use this way of speaking before the
king for a specific purpose, namely, to teach him the secret of the holy
Trinity, that God is triune and united, and that the promised seed of
the woman is the \'eternal son of God. Which the holy prophets also
learned from Moses, who read the holy Scriptures much more diligently
than we do today, or even the Jews, who read the Scriptures in such a
way that they become more and more blinded.

The word \"wandering\" is well known and is meant to indicate to Abraham
that he had left his homeland and did not know where he was going. He
had only followed the word of the Lord; then the Lord had chosen for him
this place in the

Land of Canaan. There he now lived, so that he had nothing of his own,
and had to move there and then again to another place. In sum, he wants
to indicate that he moves around in foreign lands by God\'s will and
command, so that Abimelech will not think that he has been expelled and
that he is guilty of having to move around astray. It is, he says,
God\'s counsel and will that forces me to wander, otherwise I would have
stayed at home with my own.

It is also to be noted here that Abraham says that he spoke with great
respect to his wife; he did not strictly command her; he did not say:
You shall be obedient to me for a short time, I will force you to it, I
will have it from you! but he says: I ask you, and accepts the deed from
her not as an obedience, but as a benefit, as from such a person, who
would be higher than he, according to the teaching of Peter 1 Epist. 3,
7: \"You men give honor to the female, as the weakest instrument\" 2c.
But why did Moses write this? Answer: He did it because he wanted to
show us an example of a very good marriage, which is a rare and rare
bird on earth, but still a very pleasant thing for both God and man.

For this reason, St. Peter admonishes husbands and wives with this very
example, that they should learn to love one another, and to deal
modestly and honestly with one another, not as they are now wont to do,
since the men in their homes are almost like lions, unkind and harsh
toward their wives and servants; thus the wives also want to rule
everywhere, and hold their husbands no differently than if they were
their servants. But such a thing is foolish, that a man wants to prove
his manly mind, and great manly power and strength in the rule over his
wife. On the other hand, it is also unbearable when women want to be
masters.

Now this, that the spouses of both parts are strange and whimsical
towards each other, is almost common; as the proverb says: Three things
are almost rare,

**[1354 L.v, 53-55. Interpretation of Genesis 30, II 13. W. I,
2033-2036. 1355]{.underline}**

But they are pleasing and pleasant to God, as \"when brothers are one
and neighbors love one another, and husband and wife are at ease with
one another,\" Sir. 25:2. But the reason that these things are so rare
is that people usually enter this state without prayer and, like swine,
look only to carnal pleasure. Therefore the woman does not see the right
goods in the man, and on the other hand the man sees in the woman only
that which is repugnant to him. If one does not forgive the other and
keep his ways, there will be endless quarreling and strife between them.

For this reason, this example is worthy of frequent attention by
spouses, so that they may learn to treat each other with kindness. For
he who does not want to forgive anything, but wants to seek everything
so thoroughly, will lead the most miserable life and will also be
annoying to other people. For this life, I say, is full of trouble, and
all manner of infirmities and miseries: he that liveth therein shall not
find joy in all things. It is said that where there is fire, there is
also smoke. So also everywhere there is harm and accident, where one has
benefit and piety. But pious hearts suffer the damage with patience, and
where they have benefit, they thank God for it.

\(149\) Now the fact that Abraham says to Sarah in general, \"Where we
are going, you will say of me that I am your brother,\" is a sign that
he was very weak and almost very afraid. For he shows that he was afraid
not only of the Gerarites, but also of all other people; therefore he
was not allowed to confess in any place that Sarah was his wife.

150 Why does Moses write such a thing that is not almost honest to say
to such a great man? Answer: He does it for our sake. For the gifts of
the saints must be praised in them in such a way that we nevertheless
consider them to have been human beings as well, and to have always had
human infirmities and to have suffered them: as St. Jacobus Cap. 5, 17.
says of Elijah:

\"Elijah was a man like us\"; and St. Paul says of himself and Barnabas
to the Gentiles Apost. Hist. 14, 15. \"We are also mortal men\"; and
Peter says to Cornelius Apost. Hist. 10, 26: \"I am also a man.\"

Although the faith of Abraham is highly praised by the prophets and
apostles, history teaches that the usual weakness was often felt in him.
For God leads His saints in their faithfulness in a strange way: at
times they live simple-mindedly like other people, and it can be seen
with them as if their faith were buried. But at other times they are
full of the spirit and do great miracles; just as I have just told you
about Elijah, who strangled the false prophets with a great spirit, 1
Kings 18:40, and afterwards, when it was announced to him how fierce and
angry Jezebel was, he was terrified and fled into the wilderness, Cap.
19:3 ff.

The Holy Spirit has written this for our consolation, so that we may
believe that the holy men were not lumps or stones, who did not feel or
experience any weakness or temptation, as the pope paints them to have
been. St. Jerome writes of Hilarion that he ate no bread for forty years
and drank nothing but water until the seventieth year. And because these
are strange and wonderful works, people wonder about them. But you hear
nothing of this kind from Abraham; he eats, drinks and works like other
people. But if you look at him and see the faith, hope, love, humility
and the right killing of the old Adam, he far surpasses all Hilarion and
Anthony, who had their plague and torture, so I may call it, and their
cross, but they chose it for themselves and imposed it on themselves of
their own free will.

153And Abraham, by the commandment of the Lord, went astray, and was a
stranger from nation to nation; he had no abiding place or dwelling
place of his own in any place; and he saw grievous afflictions, which he
himself had not experienced.

**[1356- L. V, 55-S7. Interpretation of Genesis 20, II-15. W. 1,
2088-2040. 1357]{.underline}**

but came to it by command of the Lord, and suffered it with patience:
whereas the Papal saints are wont to be impatient even in minor matters.
Help God, how is Jerome himself so impatient that he allows himself to
be moved even by a single word to a vehement and vengeful diatribe.
Therefore we should look at these saints, which examples the Holy Spirit
holds up to us, who are full of faith, love and humility: and yet human
weakness runs along with it, so that the weak among us may have comfort
from it. Yes, the Son of God Himself has also been weak in our flesh,
has been discontented and frightened, has fled where there was danger,
2c.

**Fourth Part.**

**Abimelech\'s mildness against Abraham and Abraham\'s intercession for
Abimelech.**

**I.**

**V.14. 15. Then Abimelech took sheep and oxen, menservants and
maidservants, and gave them to Abraham; and he gave him Sarah his wife
again, saying, Behold, my land is open unto thee; dwell where it
pleaseth thee.**

In order that there may be nothing lacking that is required of a pious
and godly king, Moses now teaches us, after he has reported how he was
frightened by the word, then absolved from sin, and how he confessed his
sin before Abraham, and also before his whole court, also about the love
that the king had. For he did not drive Abraham, who was a stranger, out
of the land, as we have just heard about Pharaoh, but gave him royal
gifts of oxen, sheep, menservants and maidservants, and allowed him to
dwell in his land, in whatever place he pleased, as if to say, \"You are
a prophet, you have the word, you teach and preach it; therefore it is
fitting for me, as a king, to help, honor, protect and nurture you.

He held so much of the preaching ministry and priesthood, and paid such
homage to it.

He has shown his reverence. Therefore all kings and princes should
reflect themselves in this example; but they would rather be like
Pharaoh than like Abimelech. And this example also belongs to it, that
the church should be comforted with it. For God does not forsake His own
forever. We have heard the plague that the pious, godly Abraham
suffered; and if he had not stayed with divine promise, it would not
have been surprising that he died of sorrow and sadness. It is also
credible that the good, pious Lot died in that year from great
heartache. But God came as a right helper in time of need and opened the
kingdom of the Gerarenes for him, so that he could live there freely and
safely, and that Sarah could also have a safe place where she could give
birth in peace.

Thus God comforts his afflicted church, for he does not always leave it
for good under the tyrants: he sometimes gives pious, godly kings and
princes who maintain and nourish the churches and do them good. Such
pious, godly princes in our time were the Electors of Saxony, who
considered that it was primarily their duty to care for the churches.
For this reason, they also established good schools and provided the
churches, which had previously been miserably neglected and despised,
with pious, capable ministers: while others persecuted the good word and
with their tyranny saddened and devastated the poor churches.

Abimelech understands well how great a gift it is when a king or prince
has in his kingdom the word and the right worship, a church and prophets
of God: therefore he shows himself so very mild toward this foreign
guest and shows him the greatest honor; he not only offers him that he
may allow him to dwell in the land, but also that he may use all things
with him according to his need, benefit and piety.

Therefore, this king belongs in the register of pious, holy princes,
whose office is not to build monasteries, but to nourish the prophets
and protect the churches and the congregation of God. How-

**[1358 L. V, 57-SS. Interpretation of Genesis 20, 14-16, W. 1,
2040-2043. 1359]{.underline}**

Although there are few of them who do this, the example of Abimelech
should always be praised in the church of God and should serve as an
example to others.

There are still many among us today who seize church property by force
from time to time, and deprive pious teachers and preachers of their due
reward. The papists, however, who are completely possessed by the devil,
use persecution and the sword for this purpose; therefore they will
finally find their reward. But the same reward will be far inferior to
that which Abimelech received because of his fear of God; for Abraham
prayed for him and he was helped: but the tyrants have the prayer of the
churches against them, therefore they will be delivered to eternal
death.

\(160\) Thus this history of Abraham is first of all an example to the
preachers, that they may learn how God tries His saints in the highest
virtues, such as faith, hope and love, so that they may suffer lack and
infirmity, and learn to hope for comfort, help and salvation. These are
the proper practices of those who are prophets or teachers. In Sarah
this history is an example to the mothers of the house; in Abimelech,
the princes; and the city of Gerar is to be praised, because there the
son of promise, Isaac, was conceived and born: and I am surprised that
in no other place in Scripture is this city remembered.

**V. 16 And said unto Sarah, Behold, I have given unto thy brother
baptized pieces of silver; behold, this shall be a covering of thine
eyes in the sight of all that are with thee, and of all that are with
thee. And this was their punishment.**

This text is somewhat difficult for the sake of grammar; therefore the
interpreters are very divided about it: but what the mind is, one can
nevertheless easily take from the circumstances. Moses clearly indicates
that what the king gave, he gave to Abraham and not to Sarah. For thus
the king says, \"I gave it to your brother,\" whom you call your
brother; to you I gave nothing. But he also puts

add the reason why he had not given Sarah anything; \"This shall be to
thee,\" he says, \"a covering of the eyes.\"

It is not surprising that there are some places in the Holy Scriptures
that cannot be sufficiently understood. For who is there today who can
understand the writings or books of the scholastics after the Parisian
way of speaking has ceased? For where things perish in themselves and
also their use, then one cannot understand the words either. He who has
not studied law by no means understands the words that are used in
court. Thus medicine also has its own words; thus also astronomy, whose
words no one understands unless he first understands the art itself.

Now it is certain that after the birth of Christ the Jews have lost
things and truth; therefore they can teach nothing good, and it is in
vain that they torture and break themselves in grammar; they often
divide one word into ten interpretations. For they have lost the right
light of the words, namely, the things themselves of which the words
speak. So in this place the words are also somewhat heavier, since he
says: Erit tibi in velamentum oculorum: \"It shall be a covering of the
eyes to thee.\" For you cannot know whether mau is to understand the
word, velamentum, (covering) activically or passively, as it is called
according to grammar. But the last part of the sentence is even more
difficult, especially if you want to consult the interpreters. Burgensis
punishes Lyra and Sanctes is not one with the others either. Jerome adds
the word memento to complete the sense, and undoubtedly gave it in
Latin, reprehensam, punished. But unlearned people have falsified the
text and have made it deprehensam. For reprehendere is a familiar word
that means to punish, rebuke, chastise 2c. As in the 6th Psalm v. 1:
\"Oh Lord, do not punish me in your anger\" 2c., and Is. 1, 18: Venite,
arguite me, \"Come then, and let us be right with one another\" 2c.

But let us leave the disputation of grammar, and see which of the
following is true.

**[1360 L.V.W.M. Interpretation of I Moses 20, 16-18. W. 1, 2043-svt.\"
1361]{.underline}**

Which, in my opinion, is this: \"To you,\" says the king to Sarah, \"I
will not give even a penny, that you may have a covering of your eyes,
that is, a certain testimony of your honor and discipline, that I have
not touched you. For if I were to give you anything in particular, I
would arouse suspicion in others, as if your honor had been violated. So
I understand the words, velamen oculorum, \"a covering of the eyes,\"
passively, that it is a peculiar way of speaking. Just as we say in
Latin, obstruere os, to shut one\'s mouth: so they also say, velabunt
oculos, they will cover your eyes, that is, they will not be allowed to
accuse you, but will rather bear witness that you have kept your honor
unharmed.

The last part of the text should also serve this purpose, since it says
in Latin: Et reprehensa est, seu redarguta, that is, the king not only
did not give her a gift, but she was punished by him, not out of hatred,
but out of pure love. For in this way the king wanted to protect and
preserve Sarah\'s good reputation, discipline and honor. This, I hold,
is the right understanding of this text. Of the thousand pieces of
silver I cannot say for certain what they were worth, but because the
king gave them to him, I believe it was not a small sum of money.

**II.**

**V. 17, 18: And Abraham prayed unto God, and God bedded Abimelech, and
his wife, and his handmaids, that they should bring forth children. For
the LORD had shut up all the mothers of the house of Abimelech before,
because of Sarah Abraham\'s wife.**

With this piece, it is first shown that Abraham was a prophet of God.
Then Abraham\'s church is gloriously praised, that it is truly the
church of God, from which the Savior of the human race was to be born.
For Abraham was a father of promise, and wherever he went he did not
take many gods with him, just as Aeneas took his idols with him.

But he carried with him the promise of Christ, who was to be born of his
seed.

Therefore, just as Peter teaches Cornelius in the Acts of the Apostles,
Chapter 10, namely, that salvation and blessedness come only through the
Son of God, who became a sacrifice for us on the cross, so Abraham also
teaches the pious, God-fearing king Abimelech about the promised seed
and that there are three distinct persons in the Godhead. This was quite
a prophetic work, to which the other also comes, namely, from the
intercession or prayer, so that he represented the king to God; which
prayer is also soon answered. For it is impossible that a righteous and
faithful prayer should be in vain; for the promises of God cannot lie,
Joh. 16, 23: \"If you ask the Father anything in My name, He will give
it to you\"; item Matth. 7, 8. Luc. 11, 10: \"Whoever asks, receives\"
2c.

168\) But that the text says that the maidens are healed, by this he
understands the women and maidens who were subject to the king and were
his subjects; as it is written in the books of Kings, \"Art thou a
servant of Saul?\" And I have said before that the shameful poem of the
Jews should be rejected altogether, as if Abimelech had been struck or
wounded in his male member. First of all, he was struck enough in bed by
the voice of God; for such dreams do not go away easily, but all of a
man\'s strength is severely shattered by them: just as the example of
Daniel shows, who, when the angel had spoken to him, lay down heavily
for several days, Dan. 8:27. After that, the king was also saddened by
the sad spectacle that he saw that his wife had come into danger over
the birth. And since he had heard that the same thing had often happened
to his subjects\' wives against the common usage, I do not think that
the king was struck in the secret places of his body, but that he had
fallen ill from the punishment he had heard in a dream, when it was said
to him, \"You will die,\" and then also from

**[1362 D- V, 60-S2. Interpretation of Genesis 20:17, 18. w. 1,
2016-2019. 1363]{.underline}**

the danger that his wife faces, seeing that she has had to bear the
punishment of his sins and that she has not been able to give birth. For
as the text says, \"The LORD had shut up all the mothers of the house of
Abimelech hard, that they could not bear.\"

The Hebrew word rechem actually means the place where the fruit lies in
the womb, and is sometimes understood synecdochically to mean the whole
woman. It is also used to mean the kindness and mercy that is especially
bestowed on the female sex, because it is naturally created to beget and
nurture children; item, to gladly take pity on others 2c. This tendency
to have mercy on others is more inherent in the female sex than in men;
therefore, because of such tendencies, women are called reellem in the
Hebrew language; indeed, God also calls Himself reellem, namely, because
He is a merciful God, and does not want to reject us when we are in
need, but has mercy on us, sustains and nourishes us.

170 Therefore the punishment that the women of Gerar bore was not only
that it was dangerous and hard for them in childbirth, but also that
they had to despair of childbirth, so that they would no longer be able
to give birth. The women knew full well what a great misfortune this
was, which is why they all marveled that so many women approached and
sent themselves to give birth, and yet were unable to do so. But they
were suddenly healed by the prayer of Abraham, and in their distress and
danger they learned the sins of the king, and believed that Abraham must
be a true prophet of God, and in his house the true church of God; and
so they were converted to the God of Abraham, whom the Lord had thus
comforted together with Sarah, that she might conceive.

Since our Latin text has: Propter Saram, uxorem Abrahae, for the sake of
Sarah, Abraham\'s wife, the Hebrew has: Propter (dabar) verbum vel
causam Sarae etc.. Just as the title of a book is: Verba dierum, that
is, history of the times. But in

In sum, Moses presented us with an example of prayer in this history,
and how it was answered; how warmly God loves His saints, how carefully
He cares for them, and how graciously and willingly He helps them, so
that we may also learn to believe rightly, that is, to trust God, and to
expect help and comfort from Him in due time.

But this text is also a good proof and example for the papists, namely,
that they say: Abraham takes gifts from the king and asks for him: the
same, they say, we also do in our monasteries, therefore it is just and
right that we also take the gifts that are offered to us: item, that we
may have honor and glory from it. For why should we refuse to accept
such things, seeing that Abraham did not refuse? For he was well pleased
that he was honored and made rich; why then should we pray in vain, as
you Lutherans teach? To this speech I will answer simply, Do thou also
as Abraham did, and we will gladly give thee all things. In this it is
easy to follow Abraham, that you only take from others, yes, that you
run to and fro and raise money from people under the appearance of
prayer, but to follow the prayer of Abraham is truly not so easy. And
one who can pray as Abraham prayed is not only worthy to be entertained
and fed, but also to be held in great honor; as St. Paul says of the
ministers of the word, 1 Tim. 5:17, that they are to be held in double
honor; and Christ also says Matt. 10:10, \"A laborer is worthy of his
wages or his food.\"

It is said of St. Ulrich that he entertained and fed a beggar who had to
pray for him every day. It is said, however, that the beggar\'s
chamberlain missed one day\'s prayer and did not give him his share of
food; therefore, the beggar is said to have left the prayer. But because
St. Ulrich had suffered damage on the same day and was in danger, he
asked the beggar if he had not prayed for him that day. The beggar said,
\"No,\" and added the reason,

**[1364 L.v.ss-64. interpretation of Genesis 20, 17. 18. w. i, sv49-Msi.
1365]{.underline}**

The court master had not given him anything to eat that same day. Then
St. Ulrich punished the courtier for depriving him of the prayer the
beggar was supposed to have made for him with his barrenness. But the
courtier said to him: \"Dear, how highly do you respect that one prays
an Our Father? Then St. Ulrich sent him to Rome to ask how highly one
should esteem it where one prays an Our Father. The pope answered him:
An Our Father would be worth a penny. But when the courtier laughed at
him, the pope answered a second time: He considered it worth a penny;
and the third time he answered: The whole world is not able to pay for
an Our Father with all its money and goods.

This may have been written, but it is not without fruit and not in vain.
For this reason, if the papists wanted to hold and enjoy such rich
benefices or prebends, they should remember that they also prayed. But
since prayer also requires faith in Christ, but they are not only
without faith, but also hate and persecute the word to which faith alone
adheres, there can be no true prayer with them. Prayer with them is only
a work of the tongue: they shout and scream vehemently in their churches
without any understanding, and recognize neither their own sorrow nor
God\'s grace and mercy rightly. But in prayer, which is done without
understanding and devotion, there can be no heartfelt desire or longing.
For one says: ignoti nulla cupido, what one does not understand, one has
no desire for.

\(175\) Thus, the prayer of the papists is, first of all, a tedious work
and laborious work, which is not worth a penny in the sight of God;
indeed, it is an abomination in the sight of God, since they are without
faith and do not give God His due glory, namely, that He will forgive
our sin by grace and without our merit, and will also give us everything
we need for the sake of Christ Jesus His Son.

176 No monk thinks so, and yet they can compare their godless nature
with this scandal.

The church has commanded that one should shout in this way in the
churches, and that by the authority and power of the pope they are
exempt from prayer, and are only obliged to read psalms; just as in the
pope\'s decree this saying is highly praised, that in prayer one must
pay attention to nothing but only to the words.

Who then would not be heartily hostile to such worshippers? Therefore
their churches are in truth nothing but schools of the devil, and they
should be deprived of their prebends tenfold, because, first of all,
they do not pray; for they are without faith, and what they pray they do
not understand: then they make of prayer only a work of the tongue, and
of such clamor and clamor a service of God, when they truly blaspheme
the Lord Christ in all their prayer. But the sins of commission, peccata
affirmativa (for so we shall call them because of teaching), are much
more abominable than the sins of omission.

Because the monks and bullwhistles esteem their prayers so great that
they sell them to others, there can be called no worse wretches in the
world than they. But the true prayers are those who have God\'s word, as
Abraham had, and do not doubt it, they are children of grace; for they
are called by the Holy Spirit through the gospel, taught and instructed
in the knowledge of Christ, through whom they are heirs of God. Such
glory and confidence, which comes not from us but from heaven, must be
present if we are to pray. For if we do not believe that we are pleasing
to God, we cannot think of prayer as pleasing to God. But whoever doubts
this, as all papists must doubt it, will pray in vain.

But even if those who believe that God is merciful to them for the sake
of His Son do something else, they pray without ceasing, for they have
an inexpressible groaning that neither celebrates nor rests, but fills
the whole world day and night with its cries, yes, it even fills heaven
itself. The shameful papists do not see this sighing,

**[1366 D- V. \"4-W. Interpretation of Genesis 20:17, 18. W. 1.
2051-2055. 1367]{.underline}**

Therefore they publicly accuse us of not praying, but boast of
themselves that they pray day and night; yet they do not know what a
right prayer is, much less what a right prayer can do and how powerful
it is: and yet they know how to talk a great deal about the great merit
of prayer. They pray the Lord\'s Prayer with us as much as the words are
concerned, but they do not see or understand what they pray. They do not
know what the name of God is; they do not know how it is sanctified;
they do not know what the kingdom of God is. And how could they pray
rightly for the sanctification of His name and for the future of His
kingdom, because they blaspheme the name of God, that is, the pure,
sound doctrine, and persecute the Church?

180\. We, however, who have the word and keep it, understand the danger
that Satan brings to the poor church, and see the power of his kingdom
that he has in this world; therefore we cry out of right heartfelt
desire: \"Hallowed be thy name,\" that is, give us devout God-fearing
teachers in the church, who will reveal and make known thy name to the
world, namely, that thou art gracious and merciful, and wilt forgive our
sin and give us eternal life for the sake of thy dear Son, who was
crucified and died for us; that all men may rely on thy grace and mercy,
and call upon thee, praise thee, give thanks to thee 2c. For this is to
sanctify the name of GOD. \"Thy kingdom come,\" that is, give us the
Holy Spirit to rule us and sustain us, that we do not fall back again
into the kingdom of Satan, who presumes to utterly destroy the Word,
faith, and the right worship of God 2c.

181 If then we pray, we are prophets ourselves, or children and
disciples of the prophets; and it is not necessary that future things
should be revealed to us. It is enough for the office of a prophet that
we understand the Scriptures and can teach other people, and help one
another with prayer. For he that is not a prophet can neither teach nor
pray, neither can he do any other good work.

Therefore the name of a prophet is common to all Christians, and he who
denies it may also deny that he has been baptized and instructed in the
Word. There is only this difference, that some have the Holy Spirit more
fully, but others not so fully. For although he is not as abundant in me
as he was in Elijah, yet according to his measure he is also with me.
Therefore I also teach God\'s word and pray for the church. If Abraham
already had a greater measure of the Spirit, he nevertheless had no
other Spirit, had no other Lord and God.

183 Therefore the papists defend their avarice, robbery and stealing
with this example of Abraham in vain. For these are good works with
them, that they read and sing psalms in their churches without heart and
without understanding, wear a surplice, abstain from meat, but not from
fish and wine. They think that such works are worthy, that they may have
so much money and property, and so rich a prairie.

But the Holy Spirit and the Scriptures teach and preach much else
concerning good works, namely, that to the good work belongs faith, that
God is gracious to you for the sake of Jesus Christ. If the reason is
there, then everything is holy, if you teach God\'s word, or comfort
those who are distressed, or suffer your own weakness, or that others do
you wrong. Therefore Christ says John 14:12: \"Verily, verily, I say
unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also,
and shall do greater works than these.\"

\(185\) Now what works did Christ do? Answer: He did such works as
pleased his heavenly Father. He punished the Pharisees, he comforted the
miserable and the afflicted. These works were pleasing to God. But it
also pleased God when he slept in the ship, when he traveled, when he
ate and drank. In the same way, he says, it shall be the same for those
who believe in me.

Yes, say the papists, these are the common lay and bourgeois works. One
should see sourly, one should be aware of the ge-.

**[1368 \" V\'\"6-68. interpretation of Genesis 20, 17. 18. cap. 21,
1-3. W. I, MS5-20SS. 1369]{.underline}**

They deny that we do anything like the works of other people, and, in
sum, we should not do anything like the works of other people. Thus they
clearly prove that they know nothing at all about good works, of which
they boast and shout for and for, and accuse us as if we do nothing
good. They, however, enjoy the goods of this world, so that

they fattened and from it they become fat. Or their accident and
destruction will come suddenly. We pray for them, but in case they
themselves hinder our prayer with their impenitence, and like the
Sodomites must perish and be lost, our prayer will serve and benefit
poor Lot and his family.

**The twenty-first chapter.**

**First part.**

**Of Isaac\'s beard and circumcision, and of the banquet that Abraham
made about it.**

\(1\) I have often admonished that good attention should be paid to the
time as it is described in the histories of the holy Scriptures, so that
we may see which patriarchs lived at one time; for in this way the
history becomes very clear. So Abraham saw the whole lineage, which is
described in this first book of Moses in the 11th Cap. V. 10. ff. is
described. For he lived with Noah 58 years, and with Shem 31 years; and
Arphachad lived with Abraham 84 years; but Salah lived 3 years after
Abraham; and Eber 64. Peleg lived with Abraham 48 years; Regu 78; Serug
101; Naher 49; Tharah 135. But has not this been a very beautiful
glorious time, in which the word has been spread very abundantly by so
many of its teachers, some of whom, as Shem, have seen the first world,
that is, they have seen the fathers before the flood, as, Methuselah,
who saw the first man Adam; and yet Satan has had such great power in
the children of wickedness and unbelief. Therefore also Sodom was
destroyed, and the kingdoms of the world were destroyed in many ways;
even Abraham was destroyed by the Chaldean religion, which had a great,
glorious appearance.

The first one was seduced, but was called back by Shem and the other
fathers. And Ham, the son of Noah, had brought such idolatry into the
world. Therefore Japheth also fell away, and the line and order of the
lineage of Christ remained only in the house of Shem, from whom the
promise came to Abraham. So the description of the time of history gives
a light that it becomes clear when you look at the whole time and how it
happened in it.

I.

**V. 1, 2, 3: And the LORD sought Sarah home, as he had spoken, and did
unto her as he had spoken. And Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son
in his old age, at the time which God had spoken unto him. And Abraham
called his son that was born unto him Isaac, whom Sarah bare unto him.**

2nd Moses is very rich in words in this place and repeats almost all the
sayings twice, so that he may praise us especially the great, rich joy
of the holy patriarch, who not only received a safe place and a gracious
king after so many terrible tribulations he had encountered, but also
Sarah became pregnant and bore him a son, who is an heir to the promise.
Now if parents have great joy when children are born to them naturally,
without promise, how much more did Abraham rejoice when he was born?

**[1370 \"s-70. interpretation of Genesis 21:I-3. w. I, 2059-2061.
1371]{.underline}**

How could he have rejoiced when his son was born to him, for whom he had
waited for so many years since he was promised to him? What he had hoped
for and believed until now is now present in reality, and that I am
talking about it, the promise has now become a man and has been born.

\(3\) How great joy he felt there, we cannot sufficiently understand.
For what Abraham believed had been invisible and impossible until then,
but now it becomes visible and very possible; for us as an example, so
that we may learn that there is no real, lasting joy in this world,
except the joy that the word brings where it is believed.

4\. but that he remembers the definite and certain time, it is so that
he may impress upon us the promise, and that we may regard the word of
creation more than the work itself. Therefore Isaac was born on the same
day on which Sodom was destroyed a year ago, so that the pious and
God-fearing parents might have joy, so that their great sorrow and
heartache, which they had felt since that time, might be repaid. For God
does both: He leads into hell and out again, He also grieves and
rejoices again.

\(5\) The fact that Moses so often refers to and introduces the word of
God or the promise in this history is not because the birth, which is
common among us, is without a word. For the word that God once said,
\"Grow and multiply,\" is still today, powerful today, and sustains
nature in a wonderful way. But how many are there who believe or see?
Therefore, as Augustine says of the five loaves, John 6:9, that he who
at that time fed five thousand men still feeds the whole world today
with such a miraculous work, so we can also rightly say of the birth of
man that it is still as miraculous today as the birth of Isaac was.

6\. but these great miraculous works of God have come into contempt
among us, because

they are so common and happen almost daily. Therefore, God produces a
new work at times, not as if it were greater, but to show that the
common works that happen daily among us are equal to such special works
and come from one source, that is, from the almighty Word of God. For
the annual growth of grain, and the preservation of all things, animals
and plants, is as great a miracle as that in the wilderness the five
loaves were thus multiplied. And it is not in vain that Christ
everywhere in the gospel thus impresses the images or parables of the
creatures and holds them up to us; but we are deaf, blind and even
stiff-necked, and wonder at no things, but only at those that have a
special appearance and semblance.

\(7\) That the people of Israel passed through the Red Sea and over the
Jordan, Exodus 14:22, were great and glorious miracles: but who is
surprised that we also pass daily through the great sea? For what is it
but that, while the nature of the waters is to overflow and cover the
earth, yet by the power of the word which God said, \"Let the waters be
gathered together,\" Genesis 1:9, the earth exists, and both the lowest
and the highest waters are held up, hovering over us, and so in truth we
dwell all around in the midst of the waters.

\(8\) The same may be said of the birth of man. For what a great thing
it is, no one understands, and yet it is despised, according to the old
saying: Vilescit quotidianum, what is daily and common is not respected.
But original sin is one cause of this, from which shameful fornication
also came, as well as other disgraces, burdens and work, sickness and
other misfortunes. For where one feels and senses such things, there the
work of God is buried and buried at the same time as the Word, and
people begin to shy away from this holy state, which is wonderfully
blessed by God.

9 But that\'s the way it is with all the

**[1372 V. 70-72. interpretation of Genesis 21:1-3. W. I. 2061-2064.
1373]{.underline}**

God, namely, that they are covered and, as it were, sullied with many
troubles, miseries and misery. Whoever sits in the secular government,
help God! how much trouble and unpleasantness does he feel. The citizens
are disobedient; even severe punishment cannot maintain discipline and
order; but the envy and hatred that the rulers must bear for the sake of
punishment is almost an unbearable burden. In addition to this, there is
also the real enemy, Satan, who disrupts and agitates the rulers and
regiments with all kinds of ailments. But do you think that he who
considers all this right would allow himself to be used as a regimental
person? He who therefore wants to govern in such a way that he may keep
a peaceful heart, will have to put these aversions out of his sight and
look only at the Word and God\'s will. There he will see, as it may be
with everything else, that he is in such a state, which is pleasing to
God and into which he has stepped by God\'s command.

\(10\) The whole world has nothing better, nothing more delicious,
nothing more noble than the dear church, in which the voice of God is
heard resounding, and in which God is honored with right worship, that
is, with faith, right invocation, patience and right obedience. and yet
the same church is so darkened and covered with the cross, tribulation,
shame and contempt that the world judges there is nothing on earth more
shameful or harmful than the church itself. Yes, look at our Lord Christ
Himself: what can be more miserable and wretched than He has been? \"We
saw him,\" says Isaiah, Cap. 53, v. 2, 3, \"but there was no form to
please us. He was the most despised and unworthy\" 2c., \"that they hid
his face from him\": and yet he is the Son of God, a King of honors and
the Savior of all men.

011 What wonder is it then, that there are few men that regard aright
the glory of the marriage state, and the miracle of birth? For this is
where the proverbs came from, that they said: A woman is a necessary
misfortune in herself, item: She is a very vexatious thing. But if we

If we paid attention to the word, we would judge it differently. But now
we are blinded by original sin, so that we pay no attention to the word,
and only look at that which annoys us. Therefore, we should learn to
look at the word and God\'s will, and then we will suffer and endure
everything with a patient heart, no matter how hard and difficult it may
be.

\(12\) Moses separated the sin of fornication from the work of God, as
he often recalls and repeats how Sarah conceived and gave birth, as the
Lord had said; item, in that age of hers in which the heat of
fornication had ceased. In this way, we should also learn to separate
the infirmities brought by original sin from the creatures and works of
God. I am certain that I was created a man. Now the marriage state is an
order of God: \"It is not good that man should be alone,\" says God the
Lord in Genesis 2:18 2c. But there is a lot of unpleasantness, plague
and tribulation. But what is the matter with that? Is it not better that
I thus please God, that God hears me when I call upon Him, that He saves
me in anguish and distress, that He provides me with many benefits and
blessings through a pious wife and a faithful helpmeet whom I have given
myself? 2c. Whoever makes his reckoning in such a way, places himself in
the beautiful paradise. For, as the prophet Habakkuk says Cap. 3, v. 15:
\"Thy horses go in the sea, in the mud of great waters; yet thy chariots
retain the victory,\" 2c., so it is also in both the home and the world,
and also in the church. Everything is full of toil and labor, and yet
those who look to the Word keep a good peaceful heart, and feel help and
comfort. Your God often puts on a beggar\'s cloak, as is done in
comedies, when he is the King of kings and the Lord of lords.

\(13\) Therefore the prophet also calls him a hidden God, Isa. 45:15;
for under the curse is the blessing; where sin is felt, under it is
hidden righteousness; item, under death, life; under affliction,
comfort. But you must look to

**[1374 L.v, 72-74. interpretation of Genesis 21, 1-4. W. 1, 2064-2067.
1375]{.underline}**

see the word. For those who do not have the Word follow their feelings
and their reason, and remain without consolation in their weeping and
mourning. Why do the monks hide themselves in the monasteries? So that
they may be free from the unpleasure and toil with which the whole world
is overwhelmed. And this was also Pope\'s thought that he chose and
established celibacy and celibate status. Although in this way he sought
me, that for this reason he and his group should be held holy. But one
should not flee the unpleasantness and burden that God has imposed on
human nature for the sake of sin.

\(14\) Instead, one should consider the beautiful splendor of the divine
word, with which God has adorned the rule of the house and the world, as
well as the church: then it will follow that we will not let ourselves
be annoyed or challenged by displeasure, harm or accident: which did not
exist in paradise, but are necessary in the world to conquer nature with
it. And the monks, if they flee in the world, find this twofold in the
monasteries, for the devil also dwells in the desert. Therefore,
remember, and let this be of primary concern and command to you, that
you be in such a state of which you may certainly say that it is ordered
by God; which no monk can say of his monastic life, and no pope of his
celibate life.

15 This is the reason why Moses praises the birth of Isaac in so many
words and exalts it so highly, so that he may remind us that nothing
should be looked at so much as the word. Those who do this see that the
whole world is full of miracles. But the eyes must be pure, otherwise
even the most excellent works of God are held in low esteem, because
they are so mean and happen daily, and thus the honor of the word and
the works of God is even obscured. Physicians look neither at the word
nor at the glory of the miraculous work of the birth of man; but even if
they do not know the right causes, they must praise the work itself and
be amazed at it.

They do not. For they put off filthiness and sweat, or what is cast out
by the natural course, that is, fornication in the work of birth, and
look only at the work of birth as it is in itself: they consider how the
members are set in order to it, and how they are skillful; item, what
each one\'s office is in it, 2c., and do such things as they have not
such spiritual wisdom as the word indicates.

16\. but we see about their wisdom also on the will and word of God,
namely on the spiritual crown, so that God has adorned the marriage
state. \"He created them,\" says the Scripture Gen. 1, 27. 28., \"a male
and a female,\" and Cap. 2, 18: \"It is not good that a man should be
alone; I will make him a wife. He blessed them and said, \"Be fruitful
and multiply\" 2c. This is the golden crown that all pious, godly
spouses wear on their heads. And this does not prevent the impure world
from opening its mouth and eyes, like swine, to the dung and filth, and
considering only the unpleasantness and toil in the same state. On the
other hand, we should learn to understand our goods, which are true
goods, and then the desert will become a paradise, so that we may at
least tolerate and overcome any harm or accident that may befall us.
That is why Moses so diligently repeats and impresses upon us the word
of God and the promise.

**V. 4. And circumcised him on the eighth day, as God had commanded
him.**

\(17\) Abraham gave his son a name by divine command. For thus the angel
of the Lord had said that he should call him Isaac. He also circumcised
his son on the eighth day. And Moses adds: This was done \"as God had
commanded him. As Abraham therefore did all things according to the word
and the divine commandment, so we also ought to take care that we do
nothing without the word, and that we are not found in any such state or
work as we might yet doubt.

18 The papists accuse us harshly,

**[1376 \". V. 74-7\". Interpretation of Genesis 21:4-7. W. 1,
2067-2070. 1377]{.underline}**

that we do not accept their self-chosen works and services; but this is
a part of our doctrine, that we do not choose any way of life or work of
which we do not have an explicit word or command from God. But I am
speaking of such works as belong to the worship of God. For reason has
its own special course in worldly matters, which governs it without the
word: but no one can boast of divine service unless he has the word, and
that the same divine service is wrapped up in the word as in a little
cloth, and is as it were resolved and surrounded with it. Then there
will be no temptation or trouble in this world that we cannot overcome.
For even if we have to go through water and mud, we will still be
victorious and overcome, as the prophet Habakkuk 3:15 says, because he
promises us that the chariots of the Lord, even if they go through the
mud, will still be victorious.

\(19\) So we also have the most precious treasure that the holy
patriarchs had, namely, the dear word of God. Therefore we must take
care to preserve it, and not suffer the adversaries to lead us astray
from the right way, which is the right way, into the wilderness, which
is full of thorns, and accept their own chosen services. Let them first
prove their thing by word, and then we will follow them. But that they
speak highly of the authority and great renown of the Fathers, as of
Augustine, Gregory, and likewise of the Conciliar, we reply that such
things are of no concern to us. We want to have the word: Augustine and
the Conciliar are not the Word: therefore we will not walk in their
ways, according to the saying of Christ Matt. 10:5, \"Go not ye into the
way of the Gentiles. \"2c.

**V. 5. Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to
him.**

20 Moses wrote this not only because of the number of years, but more
because he wanted to praise the miracle, namely, that God had blessed
the old man in such a way that he was still able to live in the
hundredth year of his life.

The first year of his age he begat a son, because his body was outdated
and unfit. Here Moses also separates the pure work of God from the
impurity and disgrace with which original sin sprinkled the work of God.
For since Abraham is a hundred years old, everyone can easily see and
understand that he would not have gone to Sarah if God had not commanded
him to do so. About the counting of Abraham\'s years, whether he was the
firstborn or not, we have said a little above, and it is certain that
both the Jews\' and Lyra\'s reckoning is false and wrong, for it takes
away sixty years. But of this we will speak in another place.

**V. 6. 7. And Sarah said, God hath prepared a laughter for me: for he
that shall hear it shall laugh at me: and said, Who shall say of
Abraham, that Sarah bare children, and bare him a son in his old age?**

In this place, the grammarians quarrel very much with each other. For
the word sachak they draw on various interpretations, when it actually
means to play, laugh, joke 2c. As, in the other book, Moses says in 32
Cap. V. 6: \"The people sat down to eat and drink, and stopped
playing.\" In the books of Kings it says, \"Let the boys make themselves
out, and play before us,\" 2 Sam. 2:14, that is, let them attack one
another with their weapons, that they may wound and cut one another
down. And after this, Gen 26:8, it is written of Isaac: \"The king saw
Isaac playing with Rebekah,\" in which place, as the Jews interpret it,
Moses speaks of Isaac as having known his wife, as married couples are
wont to do. Therefore, there are many grammarians, but even more
grammarians, who cannot be counted. But among them all you will find
none of whom you would say that he is a learned Hebrew. For since with
them the things and things in themselves or the right truth is gone and
they have lost them, so now also the language or the words have fallen,
that they are also deprived of them.

22 Therefore, let us take the meaning out of the thing itself and stop
the bickering of the

**[1378 L.V. 76-78. interpretation of Genesis 21:6, 7. W. I, S070-2M2.
1379]{.underline}**

Grammatists let drive. So the correct meaning of the word is that it
actually means to laugh, ridere. Therefore, when Sarah says, \"God has
made me laugh,\" she is indicating that she is quite happy about it and
is heartily rejoicing that a son has been born to her, and that this was
not just a carnal joy, as other mothers tend to have, of whom Christ
says John 16:21 that after the birth they no longer remember the
previous fear: but Sarah\'s joy was a joy of the Holy Spirit, because
she had truly become a mother through God\'s blessing.

\(23\) For until now she had been considered a cursed woman because of
her barrenness, to whom God does not grant even the common blessing;
therefore, she will undoubtedly have considered herself a sorrowful and
miserable woman. Now, however, when the son is born to her, she also
boasts of the divine blessing and is completely joyful, saying: \"God
has now also made me laugh, so that I am joyful from the bottom of my
heart because of this blessing, which has happened to me quite unawares.

\(24\) This understanding is confirmed by what was everyone\'s opinion
at that time. And what wonder is it that those who have no regard for
such opinion still doubt the words? For all the time before the birth of
Christ, among the Jewish people, the blessing of matrimony was
considered a great thing, just as barrenness was considered a curse.

\(25\) But today this blessing is not considered so great, because the
pope has instituted the celibate state, which is to be a holy life. But
those who live in wedlock, though they lack this blessing, are not
afraid of God\'s wrath or of man\'s contempt: they are only concerned
that they would like to have children and heirs, but do not feel God\'s
wrath in their conscience. Because of this work and blessing, men have
begun to do differently than was right, the whole world has turned
around and changed at the same time.

At that time this holy matron lived in the greatest sadness, and the
more she felt that she was deprived of the blessing, the more she was
grieved about it. But now that the Lord has blessed her so richly that
she not only gives birth to a son, but to such a son who should be the
father of the Lord Christ, she has found in her, above the carnal joy,
also the exuberant joy in the Holy Spirit. Therefore she leaps for joy
and speaks such words, which are like sighing, so that she pours out the
great exuberant joy and gives it to the day. For she knows that from
this son of hers shall be born the one who shall redeem the whole human
race from the eternal curse. And these are not only joyful, but also
shameful words, as if she wanted to say: The Lord has not only caused me
laughter and exuberant joy in the Holy Spirit, but before men all who
hear this will also mock me. For it is fitting for young women to bear
children, who are sent to give birth because of their youth; but that I,
an old woman, who am now outdated and feeble, almost a dead body, should
give birth, is that not worthy of laughter? As she leaps for joy before
the Lord, so she is ashamed before men.

27 It is common in all languages, however, that the words sometimes have
their true meaning, sometimes also a figurative one. That is why the
word sachak, which \"actually means to laugh according to its proper
meaning, is used to mean something like mocking, called antiphrasia
after the figure of speech, which is very common among the Hebrews; just
as in the German language we call a bad boy a pious child, a noble
little herb, in just such a way. And in this way I also interpret the
laughter in this place.

28\. \"The Lord has made me laugh.\" This is actually spoken, for
laughter means joy. But that she adds, \"People will laugh at me,\"
means that they will reproach me as a lecherous, old, lewd woman.

**[1380 L V, 7L 7V. Interpretation of Genesis 21:6-8. W. I. 2072-2075.
1381]{.underline}**

But praise be to God, who has prepared this laughter for me! If people
laugh, I laugh too, and I know that the Lord has made this laughter for
me. So these words are of one who rejoices very heartily, and yet at the
same time also considers how the world would make a laughing and mocking
out of it.

29 The piece that follows: \"Who could tell it to Abraham himself?\" is
also interpreted in many ways: and here again I see many grammarians,
but no true Hebrews. Therefore we may rightly presume to be masters over
all rabbis and Jews. For the things spoken of do not come from words,
but words have their origin from things. As Demosthenes answered one who
asked him: How one should speak rightly? So, if you speak nothing, but
that you can and understand well. For where the thing to be spoken of
has first been well considered and rightly understood, the words to be
used for it are found of themselves, so that the things to be spoken of
can be rightly stated. Therefore, here too, the meaning must be deduced
from the nature and character of the things.

30 Sarah was happy and full of wonder that she could not sufficiently
express the joy she felt in her heart. If my son Isaac, she said, was
not already in the cradle, \"who would be able to tell\" my husband
\"Abraham that a son was born to him? In German, it can be given a
little more clearly: Who would be allowed to announce it to Abraham,
such a great glorious miracle? But the name of Abraham is better
interpreted as it is called in grammar materialiter, that is, that it
means the house or lineage of Abraham. As if it wanted to say: Who could
believe nevertheless always or who thirsts to say that to Abraham a son
was born, since he was hundred years old and his wife of ninety years?
Who could have thought that it was possible that a son should still be
born to these two? Therefore these are words of spiritual and bodily
joy; for where the heart rejoices in the right true God, the flesh
rejoices outwardly.

also. As we also see that the body is moved when the heart is sad. This
last mind, methinks, is somewhat more real than the previous one.

\(31\) Now here the Jews raise a question: Why did Moses say of Sarah
that she would bear children, when she had only one son, Isaac? and they
pretend that Sarah spoke these words at the great banquet, which follows
soon after in the text. For since the other women would not allow
themselves to be persuaded that Sarah had truly given birth, but must
have bought a boy from a poor woman and foisted him, Sarah is said to
have suckled many children at this banquet, so that all the women saw
this, and is thus said to have rejected the suspicion of a foisted
child.

32 Thus it is done for the sake of the Jews\' lies. But would it not be
much simpler to say that the plural is used for the singular? As if it
were said that he who has found money has found only a penny, and one is
therefore called a father because he has children, when he has only one
child. This is a very mean way of speaking in all languages; but because
the Jews do not understand the thing spoken of, they cannot handle the
words and grammar properly. Just as it happened with our sophists. Since
they lost the things that belong to theology and holy scripture, they
were actually in darkness like the blind. For this is always true, that
ignorance of things brings with it also ignorance of words; and those
who then want to argue about things from words must be lacking. For one
must have practice and experience in the things themselves; but those
who do not have it, it is impossible for them to be able to speak
properly.

**II.**

**V. 8: And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great
feast in the day that Isaac was weaned.**

Augustine asks here: Why Abraham had made a meal, and such a

**[1382 L. V. 7S-8I. Interpretation of Genesis 21:8. w. 1. 2078-2078.
1383]{.underline}**

great feast, not on the day of Isaac\'s birth or circumcision, but when
he was weaned; although the day of birth is considered more suitable for
feasting and rejoicing, as it is customary among almost all peoples that
they keep the birthday glorious: so also the day of circumcision was
commanded by God, none of which can be said of the day of weaning? And
so Augustine concludes that this question cannot be solved unless one
spiritually understands the joy that one has because of the birth of
Christ, since one does not need milk but strong food. I do not relate
this opinion of Augustine\'s in order to reproach or malign the good
pious man who alone has touched this point, but that it is good and
necessary that these holy fathers at times be found equal to us, that
is, that they be men, so that the glory of our God may stand firm, who
is strong in our weakness and wise in our foolishness and error. This is
not known to the papists, who make articles of faith out of every saying
and word of the Holy Fathers, which one should not contradict even in
the slightest. But God is strange in His saints, and so strange that He
shows us His wisdom through their fall and error. Therefore, one should
believe only the one Word of God, and not the canons, not the sayings of
the holy fathers, only as far as they agree with the Word, as Augustine
says of himself and of his books. For no one has power to burden the
Church with new articles. As far as this question is concerned, I will
leave St. Augustine his judgment and opinion, but it is not to be
suffered that he treats this history only spiritually. For one should
interpret the histories as they are in themselves; for they are not
without understanding, however bad and small they may be to be regarded.

34 Therefore we may think of this holy man Abraham that he did not want
to follow the use of the Gentiles, either because the Holy Spirit or the
holy fathers and forefathers, who

The Israelites, who were still alive at that time, remembered and
admonished them. As also Deut. 5, 18, 9. forbids that the Israelites
should not follow the way of the Gentiles and especially of the
Egyptians. Therefore it is also true that the time of the weaning was
very convenient and comfortable to have a meal. When Ishmael was
circumcised, he was already thirteen years old and was able to endure
the pain and circumcision because of his age: Isaac, however, was a
child of eight days when he was circumcised; therefore it was necessary
for him at that time that his parents should pay some attention to him.
For circumcision brought with it great pain, just as we see in the book
of Joshua, Cap. 5, vv. 8, 9, that the people of Israel kept silence and
rested until they were healed from circumcision. And it is told of
Simeon and Levi in chapter 34, v. 25. V. 25, that they attacked the
saints on the third day, when the pain from the wound was most intense.
We can say the same about the day of birth, because it often happens
that not only the child but also the mother is in danger after the
birth; so that these two days of birth and circumcision were not
convenient to prepare a banquet, so they postponed it until the time
when the child was weaned and was now fresh and healthy. This should be
my cause, where I should give an answer to such a question.

35 But we must also note the teaching here, namely, that the holy
fathers also held banquets. For Abraham undoubtedly invited the king to
this meal, as well as the priest Shem or Melchizedek with his household
and other fathers, and must have ordered the kitchen a little better.
For Moses did not say in vain that he had made a great feast. Therefore
the saints, especially when they are burdened with sadness and
affliction, may well be refreshed and refreshed bodily; as the Scripture
says, Proverbs 31:6: \"Give wine to the afflicted souls\"; item, in the
104th Psalm, v. 15: \"Wine gladdens the heart. For on this the

**[1384 L. V. 81-8\". Interpretation of I Genesis 21, 8. W. 1.
2078-2080. 1385]{.underline}**

The main purpose of the banquets is to make the heart joyful and to
revive the spirit after sadness. For God is hostile to sadness, and when
hearts are burdened with it, they cannot praise God or thank Him.

Therefore, at this banquet there were not bad, lowly people, but the
holy patriarchs, who thanked God for confirming and fulfilling His
divine promise, and not only refreshed the body with glorious food, but
also refreshed the heart with holy conversation; as Paul says in the
Acts of the Apostles, chap. 14, v. 17. V. 17, that our hearts are filled
with food and gladness through divine blessings.

\(37\) Therefore this text should be well remembered against the sad and
sour hypocrites, who with their strange and strange fasting torture the
body almost to death, and do not wait for the proper need that God has
given and ordained for them, but hurt themselves and wear themselves
out, so that they are neither good nor able to do anything. But one
should take the middle road, for that is the very best: \"Not in
gluttony and drunkenness, not in chambers and fornication,\" says Paul
in Romans 13:13, 14, \"but tend the body, but in such a way that it does
not become lustful\"; and lest that should follow of which the
Scriptures say in Exodus 32, Cap. V. 6: \"The people sat down to eat and
drink, and stopped to play.\" The Germans are still in the habit of not
having such banquets, since the cost is too high. The Christians,
however, hold their banquets to gladden their hearts and to give thanks
to God for His good deeds; as Moses says, Deut. 16:11: \"You shall eat
and be glad before God your Lord.

38 It is also to be noted in this place that God shows his grace to
Abraham so tangibly. He had promised him a son, but for a time he
withheld such a promise, leaving Abraham to be satisfied with the word
alone, believing the promise, and simply hanging on to that which is
invisible: but it will come in its time that the invisible will become
visible: we should also imitate this and take it upon ourselves. We

Believing that our flesh shall rise again at the last day, it shall be
as sure with us as if it had happened already: for we have the word, and
the same spiritual consolation which Abraham also had.

39 Therefore, just as we were nothing a hundred years ago, so when death
consumes our flesh, that same flesh will again come forth from nothing
and live. Thus the things which we now have tangibly teach us how the
things to come, which we are yet to have, will be. Therefore, let no one
particularly object that Abraham had the promise. For have we not enough
promise in holy baptism and in the Lord\'s Supper?

40 Without this alone being the difference between us and Abraham, that
Abraham believed the promises, but we do not believe them. Abraham by
faith made visible things out of invisible ones; we cling only to that
which is visible, and do not feel God tangibly in ourselves: as Paul
says in the Acts of the Apostles, 14 Cap. V. 17 ff. that God leaves us
some certain testimonies, so that He may testify that He is present with
us and wants to do us good.

41 However, Abraham had a special privilege, freedom and advantage, not
to be despised, which we do not have. For he was sure of his heirs and
descendants, that his sons would both live. For above (Cap. 17. V. 20.)
when he was reminded of God\'s word, he learned that from Ishmael twelve
princes would be born, and he also knew that from Isaac Christ would be
born. This example we see only in Abraham and his lineage; for there is
no one among us who could be certain that his children or descendants
should live so long. But this is only a bodily benefit. For as far as
the spiritual promise is concerned, we are either equal to Abraham, or
we are still a little higher than he: and if we could only believe as
Abraham believed, we would be in paradise, yes, we would be in heaven.

**[1386 \".v, 8s-\". Interpretation of Genesis 21:8-11. W. i,-oso-MW.
1387]{.underline}**

For we are not baptized into the house of Crassus the Roman or Julius
Caesar, but into the kingdom of heaven; to the same we are absolved, and
fed with the body and blood of Christ in the Lord\'s Supper: and yet we
lie there snoring at so many rich promises which Abraham did not have,
being quite sluggish, not thanking God, not rejoicing even in spirit.

\(42\) That therefore we lack not the promises, but the faith which
Abraham had. With the papists, however, the teaching has also fallen
away. For they teach nothing of faith, teach nothing of God\'s word,
which absolves from sins and comforts people; neither do they teach
anything of the promises, but teach only of the merit of their own
works. Baptism is quite dead with them; they absolve only those who have
repented of their sins and confessed them: but those who use the Lord\'s
Supper, they teach that they do such a work in it only that they may
show themselves obedient to the church: of the forgiveness of sins and
that one should go with right faith, they teach nothing. But it behooves
us to open our eyes and look rightly at the goods we have, thanking God
for them and rejoicing in them, as Abraham did, who rejoiced not only in
spirit but also in body.

**Second part.**

**As Sarah requires Abraham to cast out Ishmael with Hagar, and as**

**God commanded Abraham to obey in this.**

**I.**

**V. 9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had born
to Abraham, that he was a mocker.**

43\) Some are of this opinion that this happened on the same day that
Abraham had the supper, because it displeased Ishmael and Hagar that
they made such a fuss about the supper, and because of it they spoke
some abusive words.

have. But the circumstances indicate that this happened some years
later, since Isaac had already been weaned, and the quarrel lasted not
one day, but several years. And St. Paul indicates this when he calls it
Gal. 4, 29, the time of persecution. Nor was it a quarrel of little
things. Ishmael wanted to have the privilege of the firstborn, and his
mother, Hagar, was very hopeful because Abraham had become a father
through her. His brother advanced this to the boy Isaac, since he was
able to understand the injustice and persecution in his old age, and
perhaps he will have drawn the majority of the household to his side, as
if he alone were the heir to the promise. For that he had heard of the
twelve princes who were to be born of him, this will undoubtedly have
given the young boy courage, so that he will have puffed himself up and
become proud; he will have let himself dream that he will hold the reign
alone, and will have despised Isaac beside him. Which is what his mother
did to Sarah, who, though she was a holy matron, was somewhat weak
according to the flesh. For as I have often said, the saints are to be
praised in this way, so that we may have examples of patience and
weakness in them.

44 Therefore Sarah finally became impatient with such contempt and
unjust violence, after she saw that otherwise no help or advice could be
found, but that Hagar and her son would be expelled from the house. She
therefore let this matter come to Abraham, and as I also said above,
this quarrel lasted not only one day, but Sarah had to suffer such
unjust violence for several years and still kept silent. But it seems as
if Hagar had incited her son, and had always fostered and increased such
quarrels in the house, which is why Sarah attacks her with very harsh
words, as follows in the text.

**V. 10. 11. And said to Abraham, Drive out this maidservant with her
son; for this one**

**[1388 V, 8S-S7. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 10. 11. W. 1, 2085-2088.
1389]{.underline}**

**Maidservant\'s son shall not inherit with my son Isaac. The word
pleased Abraham very much for the sake of his son.**

\(45\) First she calls the mother, because she was the chief cause of
the protracted quarrel, but she does not call Ishmael by name, and thus
shows Sarah contempt by calling him the son of the maidservant. We have
just praised the holy matron Sarah, because she was obedient to Abraham
and called him lord; which is truly a very high, excellent virtue in a
woman, when she is obedient to her husband, honors him and fears him.
Yes, you say, where then is such reverence of Sarah toward her husband?
For her saying to Abraham, \"Cast out this maid,\" 2c., is spoken and
commanded in a domineering manner enough; and since, as the
circumstances indicate, this quarrel lasted a long time, Sarah will
doubtless have grieved her husband many times, and will have been
anxious for him, and will have desired that the mother should be put out
of the house with her son. For there was no improvement in either of
them, and they were able to decorate their things finely against Sarah
in front of Abraham and all the household. It is a very common custom in
the world for those who have wronged others to defend themselves and lay
the blame on those who have been wronged.

46 Because Abraham either believed too easily or was too slow and
lenient with the punishment, it can now be seen as if Sarah had, as it
were, commanded her husband what he should do and that she should make
him a servant, as she had now forgotten the previous humility and
complacency toward him.

\(47\) But the holy matron did not forget her duty. Therefore the words
should not be understood as if they were spoken out of pride, and as if
she wanted to command him what he should do: but Sarah was moved by
great and rightful causes to sue the mother and her son. For they were
very hopeful, and also wanted such a hopeful journey.

They were insolent and presumptuous beyond measure, which was not to be
suffered, that they might reign in the house and be Abraham\'s heirs;
therefore they despised Sarah and made a mockery of her son Isaac.

48 Therefore, Sarah\'s words should be understood as pleading, and that
she appealed to her husband for help with great reverence and humility.
Oh, my dear husband, she will have said, we will truly not be able to
have peace unless you intervene with your power and take Hagar and
Ishmael out of the house; for they are going about wanting to oppress me
and my son, who alone is the rightful heir. So she asks her husband for
help, and does not command him what he should do. For though she was the
matron of the house, she did not take so much authority that without
Abraham\'s foreknowledge, and without his counsel and will, she
submitted herself to expel Hagar: but let the matter first come to the
master of the house with due reverence and humility, and she showed what
was her counsel and way to unity. What she says about the inheritance
should not be understood as meaning that Ishmael should be excluded from
the inheritance, but simply that he should not be made an heir with
Isaac, but that Isaac should keep his inheritance separately.

49 And this counsel of his wife grieved Abraham greatly; for he loved
his first son as another man, and did not keep the promise as diligently
as Sarah did. And the fatherly heart prevented him from doing so. For
the saints also have their affections and inclinations, by which they
are hasty and carried away. Therefore he considered it unreasonable that
he should exclude his natural and right son from the inheritance. On the
other hand, Sarah makes an essential distinction between the son of the
maidservant and her son: and, as Augustine says, she was not moved or
angered in a feminine way, but she speaks from the Holy Spirit, and
keeps the certain promise of her son, which she had heard.

**[1390L. v, 87-89. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 10. 11. W. I,
2088-2091. 1391]{.underline}**

50 Ishmael also had his promise, for thus says the Lord to Abraham in
the 17th chapter. V. 30: \"I have also heard you concerning Ishmael.
Twelve princes shall he beget\" 2c. Sarah, however, paid more attention
to the words the Lord spoke about her son in the same place (v. 21),
namely, when he said, \"But I will establish my covenant with Isaac.\"
Abraham did not consider this part so diligently because of his great
love for his firstborn son, as Sarah did, who makes a very fine
distinction between her son and Hagar\'s son: first, that Ishmael is the
son of the maidservant, but she considered herself to be the right
housewife, as she was; second, that Hagar, as a maidservant, is not
powerful in her own right, but she is free, and therefore should not
suffer the maidservant\'s son to be considered equal to the free
woman\'s son. For this reason, it was unreasonable that a bondwoman
should be subject to oppress the free and proper housewife, and that the
son of the bondwoman should want to trample under the feet of the son of
the free woman.

These causes make the holy mother courageous, so that she freely and
unabashedly asks her husband for help; but Abraham, when he lets his
fatherly inclination for his son be forced upon him, opposes it as if he
did not hear it. Therefore, these pious spouses will undoubtedly have
come together not once or twice, but many times, and will have had many
fights together, since the father always excused Ishmael. Because Sarah
was upset by so much injustice and disgrace, she had reason to look at
the promise all the more diligently. For the saying of the prophet
Isaiah is true, when he says Cap. 28, v. 19: \"Affliction teaches to
take heed\"; item, that one says: Optimum condimentum fames: Hunger is
the best cook. For those who are burdened with affliction understand the
Scriptures the better; but those who are secure and without offense read
the Scriptures as if they were a poem by Ovid. But why this is written
is shown by St. Paul in Gal. 4:21 ff, and we have diligently treated the
same text in the same place in our interpretation of the epistle. For it
is not

in vain that this holy mother thus fights against the will of her
husband, so that Ishmael may not come to the same inheritance with
Isaac. She also called Ishmael her son; for thus she says of Hagar in
the 16th chapter above. 2c., and Ishmael also called Sarah mother, as
Abraham taught him; because she was his right mother, although she was
not the natural mother.

52 Therefore the Saracens used this word, that Ishmael was Sarah\'s true
son, and they boasted of the privilege of the firstborn. But Sarah makes
a distinction from the promise and does not want Ishmael to be equal to
her son in inheritance. And she certainly did not invent such a
difference out of feminine thoughts or impatience, but the promise
indicates it, since God clearly says: \"I will establish my covenant
with Isaac. Abraham did not think about such a difference and exclusion
as well as Sarah; therefore he will have become very unwilling to
Sarah\'s request and judgment, and considers it that one does not deal
with Ishmael properly, and does not want to allow Sarah to make a no out
of his yes.

053 For all the household were of opinion that Ishmael should be
Isaac\'s joint heir, and that he should be superior to Isaac, because he
was the firstborn. Because of this, the mother Hagar and her son held
themselves in high esteem, and Sarah and her son despised Isaac, which
then gave rise to a great disagreement between the holy spouses.

54\) But it is to be noted that this quarrel or disagreement did not
arise over small things, and that Sarah was not moved by feminine sense
or inclination; she had great and very just cause, namely, the promise
of God; about this she disputes, and does not want it to be taken away
and withdrawn from her son. Abraham, on the other hand, is also moved by
a just cause not to exclude Ishmael, for he recognizes that he is bone
of his bones and flesh of his flesh.

**[1392 L.V.SS-\". Interpretation of Genesis 31, 10-13. W. 1, 2091-MSS.
1393]{.underline}**

Did he then tolerate and endure that Sarah wanted him to be cast out of
the Zause?

\(55\) From these causes such discord arose in Abraham\'s house; and no
doubt, as it is wont to happen, each part had some who kept it with him
and always stirred it up. Those who therefore say that domesticity is a
common state can learn from these examples that in the married state
there are much harder trials and temptations of faith, hope, love,
patience and invocation than can be found in all monasteries. For the
monks do not see and feel such hard and severe trials, but they suffer
trials like swine, and begrudge others that they have better bread and
wine than they do.

\(56\) But these spouses contend with one another about the promises,
and do so in fear and obedience to God, and in right humility. But such
high virtues are obscured by the name, that they are works of the laity
and common to all husbands and wives. This, however, is said to be an
excellent virtue, that one lets oneself be locked up in a monastery,
tortures oneself with many fasts, sees sourly 2c.

But history serves to comfort the spouses, so that they do not think it
is a great miracle that even among dear friends, and those who are holy
and pious, quarrels and quarrels occur. One should rather consider that
in marriage there are so many exercises of faith and love, while the
self-chosen services of the monks are nothing but dirt and filth. For
what kind of holiness can that be, that you do nothing but what pleases
yourself? And yet the monks know how to boast that they have denied
themselves and what they have.

\(58\) But this is a right denial, when we willingly leave what we would
like to keep and defend with only right, as nature is assured in it by
divine command. So Abraham is a right natural father of Ishmael and is
also one flesh with Hagar. Such are the most profound\"

Therefore, he feels that the innermost part of his heart is being
attacked. In addition, there is also the commandment of God that he
should defend his wife and feed and care for his son: and yet Sarah asks
and desires vehemently that the mother and son be cast out; not that
they have angered Abraham (for they will no doubt have held him in great
honor), but because they have mocked Isaac.

Now this is the torture and the real suffering, of which the whole
papacy understands nothing at all because of the abominable and celibate
life, therefore they call the life of the married couple a worldly life,
although it deals with the highest exercises of a spiritual life; for in
married couples the highest affects are attacked and exercised, which
they have against God and men. As Abraham also feels such a challenge in
this place, who is forced by two different laws, namely, by natural and
divine law, to defend his wife and son. And his fatherly and natural
mind prevents him from seeing the promise so clearly; that is why they
came into such sharp conflict, and why such a hard quarrel arose between
him and his Sarah: for our example and consolation, so that if there is
any displeasure and disagreement among us, we may remember that this is
the way things are in this common life, and that this is the way things
should be done.

\(60\) We should also take another comfort from this, namely, that we
know that those who want to live a God-fearing and Christian life,
whether in the home or in the world, and also in the church office, will
not lack the cross and persecution. Abraham is a high priest in the
house of God, and has undoubtedly served God rightly: but what happens?
Here he is tempted by God Himself, and is commanded to obey Sarah. For
thus Moses goes on to say:

**II.**

V.12. 13. **But God said to him, \"Do not be offended because of the boy
and the maid. All that Sarah hath said unto thee, obey it. For in Isaac
shall thy seed be given thee.**

**[1394 \> 91-93. interpretation of Genesis 21:12, 13. w. I, 2093-2096.
1395]{.underline}**

**munt. I will also make the son of the maid a people, because he is
your seed.**

Now Abraham must simply renounce his opinion and chase out his most
beloved son together with his most beloved wife. Who would not
understand that this is a much heavier burden than for a monk to wear a
cap and a rope? So also those who are in the secular government and at
the same time God-fearing have many a devil plaguing them, many a
burgher they have. But those who are in the preaching ministry make
enemies of the whole world. Therefore they are fools who desire to be
married, or to be in the government, only that they may have good days
and live well. Therefore, the three celestial or divine regiments, of
which the gross asses, the sophists, talk so much and which they call
hierarchy, are nothing other than the domestic, secular and
ecclesiastical regiments: and those who live outside these three ranks,
they live in a self-chosen rank, which God has rejected and condemned in
all the prophets.

\(62\) Now Abraham has very holy thoughts, and his will is right and
good. For he understands from divine and human rights that he is
obligated to take care of his wife and son, and yet he is forced to
destroy them both. For there would have been no end to the quarrel if
God had not intervened. But God proves by His own testimony that Sarah
did not speak out of carnal inclination or irritation, nor did she
command her husband with any pride what he should do, but that she asked
him humbly and reverently, even though she already had a very good
thing. In sum, the whole history shows that Sarah behaved respectfully
and well toward her husband: but in this place she is forced by God\'s
commandment to do something against her husband\'s will. However, she
does not do this out of feminine impulse or anger, but because she had
suffered so long, and had been well exercised and tempted by humility,
faith, hope and love, she finally overcame herself, that she

She prefers the word of the promise to the duty she owes her husband,
for then each man must remain in his profession, so that he may not do
anything against the word to please any man.

This day we also do what our office entails, and pray for the emperor
and for the other princes also, who are very hostile to our doctrine:
but we see that our prayer is in vain, because they will not be
converted to the word. Then our faith is tested and tried, so that at
last we must conclude and say: If a part is to be lost, the world may
rather perish and perish than God and His dear church.

\(64\) Abraham had not been so diligent about the promise, so God
repeated it and now clearly says: \"In Isaac shall the seed be called
unto thee. Therefore, God does not condemn Abraham\'s good will and
rightful inclination to love his wife and son, but He only leads him to
the promise, which puts Ishmael off, that God also wants to make him a
great nation: but He has reserved the covenant for Isaac alone. The
pious, God-fearing mother pays attention to this difference, but Abraham
does not pay attention to it because of the great love he bears for his
son. Therefore, he is commanded by God to obey what Sarah, who kept the
word, had said.

65 And this was undoubtedly done either by Shem, or by one of the other
patriarchs to whom Sarah brought this matter: he pronounced this
judgment against Abraham. And because it agrees with God\'s word, Moses
rightly says that God Himself settled this dispute with His judgment.

\(66\) The promises were twofold: the temporal promise was made to
Ishmael, but the eternal and spiritual promise was made to Isaac.
Therefore, the judgment was easy to find, since Ishmael wanted to rule
over Isaac, that this would not be suffered, and as it is said
afterwards (Cap. 25:23) about Jacob and Esau, that the greater serves
the lesser before the world.

**[1396 2- V. S3-SS. Interpretation of Genesis 21:12, 13. W. 1:M96-20sg.
1397]{.underline}**

shall be. Thus she heard the interpretation of the promise in the 17th
chapter. V. 19, 21, which Abraham had received from the fathers who
lived at that time, namely, that an everlasting covenant had been
established with Isaac, who was not only born of the promise, but was
also to bring the blessing, that is, the Lord Christ Himself, who
blesses all those who believe in Him.

\(67\) Ishmael, on the other hand, had only a temporal promise, and
because he became puffed up and proud and despised Isaac, he was justly
cast out. This is written for our instruction, so that we may learn to
serve God in the most holy obedience, even if we are only husband and
wife, or, as the papists call it, even if we are already laymen.

**[For in Isaac shall the seed be called unto thee.]{.underline}**

\(68\) This saying should be diligently remembered to shut up the Jews,
who argue and conclude against us Christians: All who are Abraham\'s
seed are Abraham\'s heirs: we circumcised Jews are Abraham\'s seed:
therefore we are heirs also. But again, they that are not Abraham\'s
seed cannot be Abraham\'s heirs: ye Christians are Gentiles, and not
Abraham\'s seed: therefore ye boast in vain that ye are the church; for
that is called being Abraham\'s heir.

69 The Jews insist and defy this argument, and rely on it as on strong
battering rams, and thus boast against us and deceive our people with
it; just as I hear is to happen among the godless princes. Yes, this is
also the right reward for the fact that now and then they expel pious,
godly teachers and pastors and drive them into misery, leaving the poor
people completely defenseless and inexperienced and ignorant in
religion. Because they are deprived of the word, they cannot resist the
arguments of the Jews. For one cannot deny any of them, one must leave
the Jews this title and name that they are Abraham\'s seed: and can we
also

not deny that we are Gentiles and do not belong to the physical lineage
of Abraham.

70 But St. Paul, as a right experienced master, has finely resolved this
argument of the Jews Rom. 9, 6. ff. and Gal. 3, 16. ff, since he denies
the first proposition of the first proof and argument, namely, that this
speech is not true in general, that all those are Abraham\'s heirs who
are Abraham\'s seed: and sets against it what no Jew can deny, namely,
that Ishmael is a true seed of Abraham and born of his flesh, and yet is
rejected, having no part with Isaac in the right inheritance.

71 Therefore St. Paul answers the first sentence by making three kinds
of Abraham\'s seed: one is carnal and has no promise of Christ; such a
seed of Abraham was Ishmael, who was born of Abraham\'s flesh. The other
seed is also carnal, but has the promise of Christ. So Isaac also was
born of Abraham\'s flesh; but he had the promise, namely, that God would
say, \"I will establish my covenant with Isaac.\" Of the third seed Paul
says that it is not carnal, but is alone a seed of promise, which,
though it does not belong to Abraham\'s body or flesh, yet it holds to
faith, and accepts the promise made to Abraham.

Therefore the first sentence of the first argument of the Jews is wrong,
because they conclude: All who are Abraham\'s seed are also Abraham\'s
heirs; for this is not true of Ishmael. Therefore history compels us to
make a special proposition out of the general proposition, where the
argument is to exist otherwise, namely, that one says: Some and not
every seed of Abraham is Abraham\'s heir.

\(73\) Now if the Jews add the other proposition, and say that they are
the same seed, and Abraham\'s heirs, it is necessary that they also
prove it, as it is proper. For we can prove that they are Abraham\'s
seed, just as Ishmael was. But Ishmael is excluded from the promise;
therefore it follows that the Jews are also excluded.

**[1398 L. V.S5-S7. Interpretation of Genesis 21:12, 13. w. 1.
2099-2102. 1399]{.underline}**

\(74\) Therefore a proper definition and explanation must be given as to
which is the true seed of Abraham, who also has part in the promise.
Here the history shines before us, as St. Paul gloriously proves from
Genesis, namely, that those alone are heirs who are of the promise,
whether they are the fleshly seed of Abraham or not.

And here we see how the other argument of the Jews is to be refuted. For
in it the first proposition is not right either. For it is not at all
true that they say that those who are not Abraham\'s fleshly seed cannot
be Abraham\'s heirs, for the promise makes them true heirs of Abraham,
as can be seen in Isaac. Those who therefore accept the promise with
true faith are also true children of the promise and heirs of Abraham;
just as John the Baptist says in the Gospel of Matthew in 3 Cap. V. 9:
\"I tell you, God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these
stones.\" If they come from stones, they do not have to come from
Abraham\'s flesh and legs.

Therefore the text is clear in itself. Ishmael is the seed of Abraham,
truly born of his flesh; therefore he also called Abraham father, and
Abraham again called him his son, and yet he is cast out of the house.
But Isaac, who was born of promise, remains an heir in the house alone,
because the promised seed is given to him and he believes the promise.

The Jews do not think of this, for they have lost the true doctrine of
the promise and faith, and cling only to the fleshly birth, which in
itself is nothing unless the promise and faith are added to it. So
Absalom also is David\'s son according to the flesh, but because he does
not believe, he is lost and condemned. Likewise also the people that
died in the wilderness were Abraham\'s children: but because they
believed not, they were destroyed. Now it is impossible that a child of
the promise, Abraham\'s heir and God\'s people should be lost.

\(78\) Therefore, the true and proper means of inheritance is nothing
other than the promise. For this alone makes heirs even of those who are
not children of the flesh. But the fleshly birth is only a value and
cause, so weak and incompetent that even if you were truly born of
Abraham\'s flesh, you would still not be Abraham\'s heir. Therefore St.
Paul rightly says that the true heirs are those who hear the promise and
believe it, that they are the same as those born of Abraham. Flesh born
or not. For the promise, which is the word of God, is so powerful and
mighty that it calls to that which is not that it is, Rom. 4:17, and
that also, as John says, Matt. 3:9, out of stones children are raised up
for Abraham. The flesh or fleshly birth cannot do this; only the Word,
which is almighty, can do it.

\(79\) I have said before that there are two promises: one is the
passive promise that happens to us; the other is the active promise that
we accept with faith, which alone makes us, who are Gentiles by nature,
heirs of Abraham (Rom. 4:16), brothers (Matt. 12:49) and joint heirs
with Christ (Rom. 8:17). Therefore the Jews boast in vain against us
that they are Abraham\'s seed. It does not follow that they are
Abraham\'s heirs, unless they accept the promise and believe in Christ.

80\. they are indeed Abraham\'s seed, born of his flesh and blood, but
the same fleshly birth does not make God\'s children; as John 1:13. it
says: \"Who are not of the blood,\" that is, who have no fleshly birth,
or are children after the flesh of Abraham; \"nor of the will of the
flesh,\" that is, who are legitimate legitimate legitimate children, or
are adopted as children; \"nor of the will of a man,\" that is, who are
of the prophets, who have governed and taught; as the popes of today
boast of the order and succession of the bishops: \"but those who are
born of God\", that is, those who believe the promise and accept it with
firm faith.

**[1400 2- v, 97-ss. Interpretation of Genesis 21:12, 13. w. i.
2102-21\". 1401]{.underline}**

For it is not enough to be born of Abraham\'s flesh, nor would Isaac
himself have been an heir of the promise where faith had not been added
to it.

81 Therefore know that there are three kinds of seed: one is natural
without promise, the other is natural with promise, and the third is not
natural but has promise only. Of these three kinds of seed, the only one
that is rejected is the one that is carnal, without promise, as can be
seen in Ishmael. And this rejection takes place primarily so that, as we
learn from St. Paul, this difference may exist between the children and
the heirs; so that we are not led into the error of the Jews, who think
that it is enough that they have Abraham as their father. For the rich
man, Luc. 16, 24, also calls Abraham his father; but it is in vain. For
only those are considered Abraham\'s children who cling to the promise
that they are born of Abraham\'s flesh, as Isaac was, or not. So Christ
says Joh. 8, 39. 40. to the Jews: \"If you were Abraham\'s children, you
would do Abraham\'s works. But ye do the works of your father the
devil.\" Let this be said to refute the obstinate Jews, who boast so
highly that they are born of Abraham\'s flesh and blood.

But such a game still exists today, if one can speak of it, and it has
been like this from the beginning of the world among all peoples. The
Jews are stiff-necked and even stubborn because of their fleshly birth,
and boast that they alone are God\'s people. But look at the Turks, and
you will see that they also rely on such carnal comfort. For since they
are always so fortunate in their wars against the Christians, and have
greatly strengthened and increased their great power with many great
victories, especially in these last times, they first of all take from
us in the highest security this title or name that we should be God\'s
people, since we are so often slain and defeated by them: but to
themselves they ascribe this glory, that they are God\'s people, since
they are daily so fortunate.

especially against the Christians. For where the Turks war against the
Tartars and Persians, they have no such luck.

83 Therefore, since they are elevated by their fortune and fattened by
their victories, they consider us dogs and swine, as Sanherib did before
Jerusalem, Isa. 37:10. For there his fortune also makes him a
blasphemer, so that he boasts that his idols are stronger than the God
who dwelt in Jerusalem. After that, the idols of the Romans subjugated
almost the whole world to the city of Rome. Therefore, the Romans
believed that their religion was the best and most pleasing to God. Just
as the Jews now pride themselves on their fleshly birth, so do the Turks
today believe that there is no other people under the sun that can be
God\'s people but they alone. And if you ask them what the reason is and
how they want to prove it, they tell you about their great victories,
their fortune, power, money and goods: but they have nothing of the
promise of God, nor do they know anything about it. They do not
recognize the majesty of God, who also allows the kingdoms of this world
to come to the unworthy and godless. For the Turkish empire, as great as
it can ever be, is nothing but a morsel of bread which a rich
householder throws to his dogs.

The Turks do not know this, but the Christians know it well and
therefore consider the whole world with all its riches to be nothing.
For they wait for another life, which is also better, in which a star
will be more beautiful and more lovely than this whole world is. But
they have a good and certain reason for their judgment, namely, the
promise of God, which is revealed to us in the Son of God, while the
Turks have their stinking Alcoran, their victories and temporal power,
on which they rely. But I would also like to believe that in the places
close to the Turks, many poor Christians become fainthearted because of
this trouble and fall away from the faith, namely, because they see that
they are miserable, while the Turks are always in prosperity and have
great luck.

85 Therefore, such Christians should not be

**[1402 L.v, SO-IOI. Interpretation of I Moses 21, 12. 13. W. i,
2104-2107. 1403]{.underline}**

They need to have faithful teachers who can remind them that God\'s
goodness and grace should not be measured by perishable things, such as
wealth, great power and victories, but should be recognized by eternal
goods. For this is a small sign of divine majesty, that he gives great
kingdoms and great riches to this world, which goods he scattered in
general since he created the world. But this gift shows what the divine
majesty is, when we are raised again from the dead and will dwell in a
new world eternally. Therefore this is nothing at all: God gives me
great kingdoms, gives me money and goods, from which it follows that I
have a gracious God in Him.

86\. Rather, we should say: God gives us his promise, which concerns
eternal life; therefore he is also gracious to us in truth. And this
text is to be used by us for a proverb: \"In Isaac the seed shall be
called unto thee,\" that is, he shall be the rightful heir who has the
promise and believes it. Where there is no promise, or where the promise
is not believed, even though there is great wealth, honor and power, and
the kingdoms of the world, there is still no church, nor a people of
God. In sum, it is Ishmael who is cast out of the house, and is not
Isaac, the rightful heir. So does the pope with his own, wanting to be
the church alone, when we should know for certain that they cannot be
the church: Cause, because they are not children of the promise, that
is, they do not believe the gospel, but persecute it. Though they may
boast of succession, office, and proper authority, yet, if they believe
not the promise, they are no more than Ishmael in Abraham\'s house; that
is, they are not heirs, but children of perdition.

This difference, as can be seen from what has been said before, is made
by Moses, Christ Himself, John and Paul; indeed, the other commandment
proves it clearly enough, since it commands that one should not use the
name of God uselessly, that this is a false church which does not take
the name of God.

and yet abuses it so shamefully.

88\. But this is so that we may be comforted by it. For the name of God
is terrifying, to be feared. But because the false church leads them
against the members of the true church, they cannot fail to be
frightened. When the pope puts us under ban, he does so by using the
name of God: therefore it should be known from the second commandment
that those who abuse the name of God are the only ones who want to be
the church. For thus the church and the name of God must be
distinguished. The name of God is glorious and holy, but it is often
shamefully misused. There we should not fear, but be despisers, not of
the name of God, but of those who misuse the name of God and want to
frighten us with it. And so you should also judge the church.

\(89\) It is indeed a miserable and sad thing that we should be, as the
papists lie to us, rejected and dead members of the church: but let us
make a distinction between the right use of the name of the church and
the abuse. Ishmael also calls Abraham his father, but quite differently
from Isaac. But if this reason exists, as no one can deny, not even
Satan himself, namely, that this is the church, which has the promise
and believes in it, then it follows that the pope with his followers is
not the church, but that he misuses the name of the church. For he is an
enemy of the promise, and persecutes those who believe the promise.

90 Therefore it is certain that the name of the church is very often
misused. For not only heretics, but also Turks and Jews call themselves
the church. Whoever therefore simply says that he is the church, says
nothing at all, but must prove it, or we shall rightly despise the same
name of the church, for it is misused there. And again the other
commandment compels us to make a distinction. For just as the

**[1404 \". v, 101-103. interpretation of I Genesis 21:12, 13. w. i,
2107-2110. 1405]{.underline}**

name of God is misused, so the name of the church is also misused. For
the church is nowhere, but there alone, where the word is, and they that
believe the word; as this text saith, \"In Isaac shall the seed be
called unto thee.\"

91\. But the pope persecutes the word and uses the name of God
uselessly; therefore it follows that he is the Antichrist and the
abominable beast, Revelation 13:1, which has the name of blasphemy
written on its forehead, that is, which teaches nothing but blasphemy
and misuses and profanes the name of God forever. In the Gospel, John
14:23, Christ says: \"He who loves me will keep my word\"; therefore,
those who want to be God\'s people or the church must have the word of
Christ, that is, the divine promises, and that they also keep them, that
is, believe them. And these are the ones whom the Father loves, to whom
he comes to make his dwelling with them. But that the pope and his
followers should keep the word of Christ, the same is so far lacking
that they alone are those who stiff-neckedly hold and persecute the word
of Christ.

92\. But because they thus frighten us with the name of the church and
of God, let us make the distinction which the Holy Spirit makes in the
other commandment, namely, that some use the name of God rightly, but
some also misuse it shamefully. The right use of the name of God is
where the Word and the promise are: but where the Word is blasphemed,
there the name of God is misused. Therefore, this should not frighten
us. For we know that God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit have no
dwelling place with such people, but the devil himself dwells with them;
as can be seen in their foreheads, on which the names of blasphemy are
written, Revelation 14:9.

In sum, God\'s people are no other people than those who have God\'s
promises and believe them. But those who rely on and defy works, laws
and other gifts, as the Jews and Turks do, are not the Church, for
works, laws and such other things are not the promise.

But in our churches we keep the right confession of right doctrine,
accept the promise, and keep the word of Christ, so that even so many of
them have been killed over it, and still some will be killed, for the
word\'s sake alone, that they will not forsake the confession of the
gospel. These are the true signs that prove that we are the true church
and that the pope and his followers are the church of the devil. But
what shall we say to this? The papists baptize, administer the
sacraments, absolve people from sins; that is why they are the true
church: and we cannot deny that we have not come into the fellowship of
the true church through their ministry, that we have been baptized by
them.

95 To this objection I would answer: The outward sacraments, and
likewise the word, may well be administered by the ungodly. Judas did
not belong to the church for his person and yet he was also in the
church office, and those who were baptized by him were baptized
correctly. We may say the same of the papists, who are blasphemers and
ungodly in themselves, and yet their office is powerful when they
baptize, administer the sacraments, and absolve; but so far as they
retain the essentials which belong to the institution of the holy
sacraments. For though they be blasphemers, yet am I no blasphemer, who
use and believe their ministry, but truly obtain by faith that which is
offered me in divine promise, though he be ungodly who proclaims and
announces the promise unto me.

For this reason it is not enough that one has the name of the church,
that one is called a bishop, cardinal or priest. All this, as Paul says
Rom. 9, 6, is carnal and only refers to the person; God, however, does
not look at the person. And we are not to look at this carnal appearance
either, but are to look at the word and make a proverb out of this
history against the papists, so that we say: Abraham has two sons: one
is carnal and does not have the promise of Christ; the same one
persecutes the other.

**[1406 k. v, i\<\"-ias. Interpretation of Genesis 21:12, 13. w. i.
2110-2113. 1407]{.underline}**

the other son, who is the heir of the promise. This is still the case
today and will always be the case, and has been the case from the
beginning. For Cain, the firstborn, also usurped the promise and
strangled his brother Abel over it, Genesis 4:8.

\(97\) Therefore, I say, there are two kinds of churches, just as there
are two kinds of children of Abraham: one who is slain and suffers
persecution, and the other who slays and persecutes her brothers, just
as Cain and Ishmael did. But each has its certain fruits. The false
church blasphemes and persecutes the word; but the true church keeps the
confession of right doctrine and suffers persecution with patience. As
we stand today and confess the word before Caesar and before the whole
world.

The papists, on the other hand, deny the word of Christ, and they
subordinate themselves to suppressing it with their impious decrees and
commandments. These fruits of praise and blasphemy, confession and
denial, are evident. Therefore, we cannot doubt that the church of the
pope should not be the church of the devil, although the pious can use
their office, which they administer in the church, properly, if they
only keep the essentials, that is, what belongs to the holy sacraments
according to the institution of Christ.

99\. Therefore, we should diligently remember this text. For he contends
against all those who glory in the flesh. The Jews boast of their blood,
that they are the seed of Abraham. The Turks boast of their victories
and great power. The pope boasts of the succession, that the ministry
came to him from the apostles. But we say that they do not follow one
another correctly when they say: We are the successors of the apostles,
to whom the ministry was inherited, therefore we are also the church.
For here it is thus written in the text, \"In Isaac shall the seed be
called unto thee,\" and not in Ishmael. This is what is said: God\'s
people are not those who have fleshly succession, but those who have the
promise and believe it, they are God\'s people.

100\. for the name of GOD is written on

is used in two ways: once blasphemously, and the other time sacredly. In
the true church it is holy and to be feared:\' but in the false church
it is not to be feared. For this consolation should always be firmly
kept, and should also be daily impressed upon our minds, which the other
commandment teaches us, namely, that the name of God is greatly abused.

In schools it is customary to say that words, if they have more than one
meaning, do not serve to teach others. For those who use such words only
make their teaching confused and erroneous: therefore they teach nothing
at all. Thus the name of God, item, the church, is also not used in the
same way. For some use it well, but others use it wrongly and evil.

\(102\) Therefore, when the pope says that all who do not accept his
decrees incur the wrath of God, this is a terrible word in itself, but
it is an aequivocum, that is, it has more than one meaning and is not
properly used; therefore, I do not pay any attention to the pope\'s
threats and thunderbolts. Thus, according to the dialectic, the name of
the church also means nothing; for a dialectician accepts no word unless
it has only one meaning.

Therefore, this is the true church and congregation of God, which does
not take the name of God in vain, but hears and keeps the word of
Christ, that is, believes the promises of God. When I hear the name of
the same church, I fall on my knees in true humility and bow before it,
for I am certain that God the Father, Son and Holy Spirit dwell in it.
But if those want to adorn themselves with the name of the church who do
not keep the word of Christ, but pursue it and walk in their own chosen
worship, then the word, which by its nature has only one meaning,
becomes such a word, which must mean more than one thing.

104\) For this reason, it would be a great folly to be afraid of a
painted man holding a sword.

**[1408 v, ivk-107. interpretation of Genesis 21:12, 13. w. i, sns-sus.
1409]{.underline}**

It is also foolish to be frightened by the name of the church when it is
used blasphemously and unjustly. For it is only a painted church or a
larva of the church. But this is the true church, since Isaac is the son
of promise; there one should fear the name of the Lord; there is our
salvation and blessedness, and also our strength and stronghold, as
Solomon says, Proverbs 18:10: \"The name of the Lord is a strong castle;
the righteous runneth thither, and is protected.\"

In sum, where the word of Christ is and is kept, that is, believed, you
should not doubt the church, even if the one who gives the holy
sacraments or teaches and preaches is already ungodly and a blasphemer.
For the word of the Lord does not return empty, but brings forth fruit;
just as the rain moistens and makes fruitful 2c., Is. 55, 10. 11.

Therefore we say in our faith: \"I believe a holy Christian church\",
that is, the one that has the Word, by which all things are sanctified,
as Paul says 1 Tim. 4, 5. But this same church must suffer Ishmael,
their persecutor, until Sarah and Isaac begin to speak and to plead,
that is, until the right church with constant praying and crying obtains
from God that Ishmael must be cast out; although Ishmael cannot believe
the same until he experiences it by deed.

**I will also make the son of the maid a people, because he is your
seed.**

107 The Lord commanded Abraham to let Ishmael go out of the house. But
lest anyone should think that he had forgotten the promise he made to
Abraham of the twelve princes (Cap. 17, v. 20), and as if he had
regretted it, he now repeats the promise and adds that he will do this
for Abraham\'s sake, whose seed is Ishmael. Thus the natural son is cast
out, but is still set up as the mighty king of this world.

\(108\) For this reason one might say, Is this casting out, where one is
made king of a great nation? For the heirs

and descendants of Ishmael took the whole side or line at noon and the
Saracens are still a great nation today. Therefore, this history belongs
to the purpose that we should learn from it that God distributes the
kingdoms and dominions of this world even among those who are wicked and
rejected, not for their merit, which is nothing, but for the sake of
Abraham, that is, for the sake of His Church, which alone intercedes in
the world for the kings and dominions, so that they may have a quiet and
safe place to stay in this life, and that in peace the Word of God may
spread further and further.

But as the Turk persecutes the church, so he does not believe that the
prayer of the church should help him, which prays for all rulers; as
Paul admonishes 1 Tim. 2, 1. 2. He attributes this to his Alcoran and
his piety. For he boasts of the right true religion and the right
worship, namely that he is hostile to the images that are painted or
carved, but he hates and persecutes us Christians as idolatrous people.

The king Alexander also did not understand that he had such great
fortune for the sake of the church and congregation of God, and yet it
is nevertheless true that the prayer of the right church alone preserves
all kingdoms for the sake of the small group of the pious, which must
have its home in this life. So also what our emperor Carl has in this
world, he has for the sake of the church of Christ and through her
prayer. Therefore, this part of this text is well to remember, that God
says to Abraham, \"Because Ishmael is your seed.\" For Abraham\'s sake,
that is, for the sake of his virtue and piety, Ishmael is made emperor
and monarch.

Dear God, how unfair it is that all the kingdoms of the world are
sustained and flourish through the prayers of the Church, and yet the
poor Church is oppressed and so miserably trampled underfoot by them,
whom she so faithfully helps with her prayers; for it is the Church
alone to which God has commanded this diligence and care, that she may

**[1410 L. V, 107-109, Interpretation Of I Genesis 21, 12-14. D. I.
sus-Asa. 1411]{.underline}**

for the kings, as St. Paul exhorts 1 Tim. 2, 1. 2.; and the same for
having peace, discipline, good order and security to spread the word and
to gather a church by the word; as the histories of the first reigns and
monarchies of the Babylonian and Assyrian empires testify.

\(112\) Therefore, as far as this history is concerned, Abraham must
abandon his opinion: Sarah, however, breaks through and achieves what
she had set out to do, because she looked at the promise a little more
closely and understood it better than Abraham. For God also reveals
something to the small and lowly, so that the great may be humbled. Now
follows another battle, which belongs to the other table, as the
previous one belonged to the first table.

**Third part.**

**Of Ishmael\'s and Hagar\'s expulsion, and of their miserable state in
the desert.**

**V.14. Then Abraham arose early in the morning, and took bread, and a
bottle of water, and put it upon Hagar\'s shoulder, and the lad with
her, and let her out. Then she departed, and went astray in the
wilderness at Beer-saba.**

This is truly a miserable story, if you look at it carefully, even
though Moses described it very briefly. Now that Abraham is certain of
God\'s will, he hastens to obey God, gets up early in the morning, gives
Hagar no money, prepares her for an unknown and lukewarm way with no
clothing at all: but lets his most beloved wife, who had first made him
a father, simply go away with her firstborn son, and gives them only
bread and a bottle of water, or a sack of bread and a jug of water.
These are the goods that Ishmael the son and Hagar his wife received.

114\) But if it is not to be seen that it is an abominable thing that
the mother, who was burdened with the son, should thus miserably wander
about, and moreover to an un

to a place known to man, even to a vast and arid wilderness? He gives
her no servant or maid: the mother is driven naked and naked with the
son, who is also naked and naked, from the right father\'s house and
inheritance; they carry nothing at all away with them, but only a little
bread and water, which no doubt would have been food and drink for a few
days. If he had given them wine or provided them with money, their
misfortune would have been even worse.

\(115\) Now it can be seen according to reason that Abraham acted
somewhat tyrannically and cruelly; but that is to kill the fatherly
inclination toward wife and child, which are the two most violent
inclinations. For we are not to think that Abraham was a Wendish
peasant; he was a true God-fearing, pious, gentle, humble and merciful
man who also loved his enemies.

Why then did he treat his wife and son so badly and miserably, as if
they were his enemies? Where is the fatherly heart here? When the angels
came to him, and he had not yet recognized that they were angels, he
presented them with butter and a calf, and cakes: but here he thrusts
his firstborn son from his inheritance into misery, as if the fatherly
heart had died and gone out of him in a moment. For let each one of us
ask his own heart. If you had a pious and conjugal wife in marriage, and
a true natural son were born to you by her, and were not by nature a
hard unkind man, could you overcome or even drive away the paternal
inclination so that you should not at least give your natural son a
servant with him, who would at least show him the way and guide him?

Therefore Abraham would not have done this without great struggle and
great pain. For he was not a block or a stone, but let his beloved wife
go with great groaning and many tears, which he shed over her; for God
changes nature in the saints.

**[1412 L. v. ios. 110. interpretation of Genesis 21, 14. w. i.
2125-2123. 1413]{.underline}**

do not kill, also do not kill the affections. So it is also similar to
the truth and well to believe that neither Hagar nor her son Ishmael
will have laughed, but that they were frightened with all their heart
when they heard this new message that they had to go to misery.

118 Therefore this deed, that Abraham thus drove out his wife and son,
is described in a frightful and pitiful manner, though it is a few
words. And if Abraham had not heard the promise and comforted both
mother and son with it, he would have had to worry that they would have
been in danger of life and limb because of the wolves, bears and lions
in the desert. In sum, Abraham could not have dealt so harshly and
unkindly with the sodomites, who were nevertheless wicked, evil people;
for he had prayed for them and had, as it were, died over the prayer.

Now, if the monks who live in the monasteries are holy, what can you
find in them that is equal to this hard and difficult work, that he
overcomes even the two greatest inclinations against his wife and son
and gives way to the commandment of God through guilty obedience?
Therefore Abraham is an excellent example of obedience, faith and all
good customs, but especially of right obedience to God. For these things
did not happen so briefly as the words say, and yet they had to be
described in this way, so that we might learn from them that, according
to the example of Abraham, one should love God above all things, and so
completely that you should not love anything in the whole world in this
way, not even your wife or children, or even your own body and life. And
if Moses had wanted to describe everything that happened, he would have
had to have a big book just for this one history. For who could tell
what weeping and devilry both the mother and the son will have suffered?

For this reason they will have moved Abraham and Sarah themselves, and
finally the whole house, to have compassion on them and to weep for
their sakes. First of all, Abraham and Sarah are both admonished.

that they would suffer with patience, so that they would have to be cast
out. For the same would be the will of God, which He would have
specially expressed by a certain word, that Ishmael should leave his
father\'s house and his fatherland, and wait for God\'s blessing in
another place and not in the land of Canaan. Moreover, they will have
said that GOD is constant and \'true and will not forsake them, but will
abundantly bestow upon them what He has promised, namely, a very mighty
kingdom.

This I have not invented, but the circumstances themselves, and what
Moses also told above (Cap. 17, v. 20.), make it clear that one should
look at these circumstances. For the history of the Sodomites teaches
how gracious and merciful Abraham was even against his enemies. How
could he have refrained from weeping here, when he let his wife and
firstborn son go away with so little food?

My dear Hagar, he will have said, I have not forgotten what I owe to you
and your son, my flesh and blood, and would gladly keep you both with
me, and show you the works of love as I owe: but God\'s commandment is
there, compelling me and commanding me to do otherwise. Therefore, for
God\'s sake, suffer and endure with patience that both of you must be
cast out naked and naked. God does not want you to become rich from my
good, but wants you to feel his blessing in another place. 2c.

What could be more useful to us for the teaching and remembrance of the
great works of God than this very history? For it reminds us that one
should not delay or argue long when one has God\'s command and order.
For God delights in obedience, but He is hostile to delay. The inherent
inclination also made Abraham a bit misguided, so that he was distressed
and thought: Where will my poor wife and her son stay? Where will she
find a place to live?

**[1414 v. ui. 112. interpretation of Genesis 21, 14. w. i, 2123-212\".
1415]{.underline}**

Who will protect and defend her, if injustice and violence happen to
her? But faith, since it has been so assured and strengthened, has
subdued and strangled all these thoughts, though not without difficulty
and great pain, and has remained simple in this hope that God will
provide for them and have respect for them; for he has them, he thought,
better than I can have them, and will also be able to help them better
than I can.

124 Therefore, this is an example from which we should learn that we
should only do quickly, without delay and without much dispute,
everything that we know we are commanded to do in God\'s word. When
Christ says John 21:21, 22 to Peter, \"Follow me,\" Peter goes on as if
he had forgotten the command, and takes care of John, and worries about
him, saying, \"Lord, what is this?\" But the Lord rebukes him, saying,
\"What is it to thee? Follow me.\"

Therefore Abraham does right: he does not dispute where Hagar will go
with her son; he simply looks to God\'s commandment, which commanded him
to cast out the mother with the son. Such examples and practice are seen
in the holy men. The monks, as I said above, know how to boast much
about how they have denied themselves; item, about their mortification
and killing: but their killing is when they see that a brother sitting
with them is given better bread or better fish. But in Abraham we see
rightly how the flesh is crucified, and how his will, even as it is holy
and righteous, and assured of God\'s commandment, is put to death. For
this is God\'s commandment, that a man should love his wife, protect and
defend his children, and also gather them something so that they may
feed themselves 2c. Such a natural will and holy inclination to kill is
commanded to Abraham here, and thus to leave both wife and son, so that
they also do not have to take a penny from so much of his property. If
this is not an example of right killing, I do not know what killing
should be called. He loves them both, the wife and the son; but since he
is commanded that he should

When he is supposed to expel them, he obeys God without delay, who has
called him to do so, and cuts off all disputation and lets them go,
whatever the outcome or end with them in misery.

Thus it is described how Hagar and Ishmael were cast out, and how they
took their leave and had to go away. And as you see, this is indeed a
pitiful description, for no part of them was able to refrain from
weeping. It was almost a burden for Ishmael and his mother that he and
his mother had to leave his father, who was rich, pious and holy, and
his whole church: But it was hard for the father, that he had to let
them leave him, poor and miserable, and henceforth be deprived of both
their fellowship; which was also a grief to Sarah herself and Isaac. But
they both obey the will of God and kill the innate inclinations, even
those that are the strongest, namely, those that one has for wife and
children, for whose sake we also take the greatest danger and misfortune
upon us in this life. This means, however, to keep the vow of chastity,
of which the lazy bunch of monks, even those who want to be the most
holy among them, know nothing at all.

The last part that Moses adds, namely, that they went astray in the
desert, is also part of the reason why one should have had so much more
compassion for them. They had no one to guide them on their way, and
because they did not know where to go, they went astray in the desert.
But the same word, that they went astray, indicates that they were so
lost and troubled in their hearts that they themselves did not know
where they were going, as is the way when one is in fear and distress.
Now we know that women are by nature weak-minded, and are hardly
troubled even by a slight accident: what then shall we think of Hagar,
who thus miserably went astray in the wilderness with her son, having
had no one to guide her, having no sustenance on the

**[1416 L. V, 112-114. interpretation of I Genesis 21, 14-16. W. 1,
212S-2I2S. 1417]{.underline}**

Way, has had no human help. Now, however, a greater and more distressing
accident has also occurred, as follows in the text.

**When the water in the bottle was finished, she threw the boy under a
tree, and went and sat down opposite from afar, a bow shot away, for she
said: I cannot watch the boy die. And she sat down over against him, and
lifted up her voice, and wept.**

This history could not have been described in a more cruel and miserable
way, although Moses passes through it briefly and does not say much
about it, as is his way. The mother and her son had water for three or
four days to refresh themselves in the desert, but after that they had
no more water. Because of this, death was near to them both, and that
because of thirst, which is an unpleasant thing in nature.

Now whoever would bring a long charge against Abraham here could accuse
him of being a murderer of his own son and wife. For he has given cause
for it to come to this with them, as he casts out his own flesh and
blood as horribly as it can be seen. And Moses himself also uses such
words, which are horrible enough. He says that Ishmael almost died of
thirst, and that his mother threw him under a bush, and that she
overcame her motherly heart and left him so that she would not have to
watch him die. Who would believe this now, if Moses had not written it
thus? So one misfortune usually follows the other. This firstborn son
has been expelled from his father\'s estate, has been deprived of all
his father\'s goods; now the misfortune also comes that he is in danger
of his life in the desert because of hunger and thirst.

This is a terrible and miserable spectacle, that the mother lays the boy
down in the grass under the bushes. For her heart is so broken with fear
and sorrow that she cannot see her son die. Yes, you say, this accident
would have been a good thing for Abraham beforehand.

We should have thought and not rushed, especially in such a matter,
which was against all natural love.

Now I have said above that this example should be diligently remembered,
so that we do not argue long when God commands us to do something, but
that we obey Him in it without delay. And we will truly not be able to
easily imitate this obedience, which Abraham performed here. But what
the monks do, namely, that they wear caps, do not eat meat, and do not
touch money, all these things we could easily do.

For this reason Abraham was not a common Christian or a confessor of
God, but a martyr above all other martyrs. For who is there among us who
does not know how strong is the inclination that one has toward wife and
child? It is easier for a father to suffer death than to abandon his
own, or to suffer great violence or injustice.

And yet all things must and must yield to the commandment of God; and it
is not because you wear a black or gray garment that you want to be a
Christian, but you must put all that you have in danger, not only your
wife and child, but also your own body and life. For thus Christ clearly
teaches Matth. 10, 37: \"Whoever loves father or mother more than me is
not worthy of me,\" that is, when I come with my word and commandment,
then you must forget everything that you have and possess in this whole
world.

Now tell me, what have you ever heard or read of this denial in any
monk? They may write on the door of their dwelling: Deny thyself! but if
thou wilt estimate the matter according to deeds and works, this is said
by them nothing else than this: Leave a poor kitchen, for instance, and
go to one that is abundantly and well provided for; flee toil and labor
in this world, that is, as occurs in the house and worldly regiment, and
have good days in the monastery, mast thyself like a sow and begrudge no
one nothing. O how is this such an easy killing, how pleasant and
pleasing it is to the flesh!

**[1418 \"V, 114-us. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 15. 16. w. 1.
212S-A8I. 1419]{.underline}**

The more patient and merciful Abraham was, the more praiseworthy is his
obedience, namely, that he prefers God\'s commandment to all things and
loves God above all things, so much so that he drives his most beloved
son and wife out of the house as if they were his enemies. It is true
that this expulsion is miserably described, that the poor boy cries out
miserably, since he must now die of sheer thirst and his mother cannot
help him in the desert; for if you want to estimate it according to
outward appearance, you will consider it an atrocious deed and will
blame Abraham severely for it: but what else should he have done or
could he have done, since God had commanded him to do so?

\(136\) Although Ishmael is expelled from the house of Abraham and his
church, yet, as I have said above, that without a doubt many of Cain\'s
descendants have been converted to the church of God, I have no doubt
that Ishmael and his descendants will also be converted to the true
church of Abraham. For it is not the opinion of this repudiation that he
should thereby be completely excluded from the kingdom of God, but that
he should know that the kingdom of God is not due to him by natural
right, but that it comes to him by pure grace.

For God does not give anyone anything out of debt, according to the
saying Rom. 11:35: \"Who gave him anything before? It is also no one\'s
merit what he gives us; for ours would be ill-kept if God were to be our
debtor; indeed, we are all his debtors. Therefore, when he gives us
something, he does not give it out of debt and by right, but out of
grace, which he offers superfluously and abundantly to all those who
believe his promise.

Ishmael must learn this lesson with his mother, because they both wanted
to act against Isaac according to the law. But after this presumption,
that they thus rely on their law, has been killed by this hard
expulsion, I do not doubt that Ishmael will again have gone to Abraham
with his mother; for I will let

the Jews\' opinion that Keturah should be Hagar.

139 This history therefore serves to teach us that we have nothing by
right, but that everything we have comes to us only by grace. The Jews
want to be Abraham\'s heirs by right and possess the blessing, because
they are born of Abraham\'s flesh; but if they could give up this right
and forgive themselves of it, and have recourse to God\'s grace and
mercy in Christ, then they would become partakers of the blessing.

140 Thus the pope boasts on account of the succession, and with the same
right he ascribes to himself that he alone is the supreme bishop in the
church: but we must by no means yield to him this in the church. If he
wanted to be first or supreme by grace, we would tolerate him: but
because he insists on his right and insists on it so hard, we cannot
stand that. We say the same of his statutes. If they allowed them to
remain free, we would be patient with them; but because they make them
necessary, we reject them, and in that case we are harder than any anvil
or diamond can be, who would otherwise be softer than wax if we were
allowed our freedom.

The monastic life should be judged in the same way. The monks have their
rules and their special practice; they insist on these as their own
right, and consider that eternal life is due to them by right. But who
told them to do this? And is this not a great impiety, that God, by
grace, for the sake of His Son, promises us everything abundantly and
also gives it to us, but that we throw away His promise and are so
presumptuous that we may arrogate to ourselves eternal life as if by
right?

Therefore God declares Himself with this example of Ishmael that He is
not indebted to anyone. Therefore, let no one boast before him and be
presumptuous because of his righteousness or merit: but let all the
world be guilty of falling down before him and asking for mercy and
grace.

**[1420 v. IIS-IIS. Interpretation of Genesis 21:15, 16. w. i,
2131-2134. 1421]{.underline}**

Ask for kindness, and say with one accord with David Ps. 143, 2: \"Do
not go into judgment with your servant.\"

143\. all this is taught to us by Ishmael, who, after being killed in
this way, simply renounced his right and then came to the promised
inheritance as a sojourner; as St. Paul says to the Ephesians Cap. 2, v.
11. 12. says of the Gentiles. For I believe that the children and
descendants of Ishmael also joined the congregation of Abraham and
became heirs of the promise, not as of right, but by accidental grace,
as we said above about Cain\'s family.

This is the reason why the son is cast out of his father\'s house naked
and naked with his mother, who was also naked and naked, and why he is
cast out with her alone into the wilderness, even into death, hungry and
thirsty, so that the harmful animal might be killed in him, which is
called the presumption and false delusion of one\'s own righteousness,
right and merit before God.

For with God nothing is valid but grace and favor, and if the Turks, the
Jews and the pope with his followers would take hold of it and accept it
through Christ, they would be blessed. But now they are blinded and
reject grace, and rely on their right and merit; therefore they must be
eternally damned.

This text, about the trials and tribulations that Abraham and Hagar had
in this place, belongs entirely to theology and holy scripture. For, as
I have said, it was a great trial to Abraham that he had to drive out
his natural son and his legitimate wife so unkindly, that he did not
provide either the wife or the son with anything, but let them both go
away to certain death. For Abraham was not a hard stone, but he was full
of the Holy Spirit, who makes people meek, humble, kind, gentle and
willing.

147 Therefore, this is a strange history, but it is described by this
holy man.

The same patriarchs are an example for us, so that we may learn to love
and honor God above all things. So he was commanded above (Cap. 12,
v. 1) that he had to leave his father\'s country; and in the 45th Psalm,
v. 11, it is said to the church that was gathered from the Jews:
\"Listen, daughter, forget your people and your father\'s house\" 2c.,
and Christ also says Matth. 10, 37: \"Whoever loves father or mother
more than me is not worthy of me\".

In the other table the commandments of love toward the brethren are
understood; but when a new commandment comes, as when Saul is commanded
to kill the Amalekites, 1 Sam. 15:3, then we are to become their
enemies, persecute them and kill them, and forget all love, even if one
should slay his own son, as Abraham does. For this word, when God says
in Exodus 20:5, \"I am the LORD your God,\" cancels out the other word,
when we are commanded to love our neighbor and honor our parents.

Therefore we see two kinds of death in Abraham: the first belongs to the
first table. For there he stands in battle over the promise of God,
which Abraham wants to make common to his two sons against the word; but
this inclination of faith is killed in him, and Abraham must learn from
his wife which is the right understanding of the promise.

The other killing belongs to the other table. For there he must forget
God\'s command to love and do good to his wife and son. These examples
are to be taught diligently in the churches, for they are in fine accord
with the gospel, which teaches that the word of faith is to be preferred
to all things on earth. Abraham, therefore, having been taught by such
exercises, did not hope to obtain the promise in this life, but
understood them of other greater things than the goods of this world
could be, although he still had to be afflicted with such great and
severe trials and tribulations, since the inheritance of the promise had
already been given to him.

151: For the knowledge of the eternal life is a

**[1422 \" v. iis co-interpretation of I Genesis 21:15, 16. w. i,
2134-2137. 1423]{.underline}**

Faith in the future Christ and the hope of the resurrection of the dead
are the right true goods; he waited for them through the promise, and
did not let the serious accident he encountered prevent him from doing
so, namely, that he had to wander around in the wilderness, have no home
of his own, and drive out his wife and firstborn son. All these things a
carnal man regards as contrary to the promise, but in truth they are
good exercises by which faith is tested. Which exercises are necessary
to us, but to the flesh they are exceedingly heavy, yea, they are
impossible for it to bear.

The words that Abraham gave Hagar a bottle of water and bread are
briefly spoken, but they also show how it was such a wretched thing. For
if you only look at the circumstances, you will see that they are so
horrible that words cannot describe them enough. It was not Sarah or one
of the servants, but Abraham, the father himself, who prepared his wife
and firstborn son for the journey, put bread and a bottle of water on
their shoulders, and commanded them to leave the house.

This story is similar to the one where he was commanded to sacrifice his
son Isaac (Gen 22:2). For the heartache would have been somewhat more
bearable if he had ordered one of his servants to do this, but he would
have gone to another place at that time. But now he himself must prepare
them both for the journey, and must be present to see them go away:
therefore he will have to put aside the fatherly affection he had for
his wife and son, and express himself as a hard, unkind, cruel man, and
as if he had never known it.

Such immeasurable fear and great love for God Moses considered worth
recording, since Abraham not only looked at this misery, but also caused
it and brought it about. But if another had done this, and his wife,

If he had been a householder for twenty years, more or less, and had
thus been cast out of the house, what do you think Abraham would have
done? But now, because God so commands him, he himself executes this
atrocious deed. And wants to teach us with this example that one should
do everything for the sake of one\'s neighbor, but if we are commanded
by God to do something else, then we should have nothing in this whole
life that should be so pleasant and dear to us that we should not become
hostile to it, even our own life; as Christ says Matth. 10, 39: \"He who
hates his life will find it.

This means to forget his father\'s house, as the 45th Psalm v. 11 says.
It is truly a miserable description, which I can hardly read with dry
eyes, that the mother and son could thus patiently bear the fact that
they were driven out and that they must thus go into misery; therefore
either Abraham, the father, stood there and with weeping eyes spoke the
blessing after them and wished them happiness with his prayer, or else
hid himself away in some corner, where he alone wept and lamented his
misfortune and the misery of these wretched persons.

For he was, as I have often said, not a block or a stone, but had a
heart that was full of faithfulness and love in the highest degree
toward his neighbor, and much more toward his own household, namely,
toward his wife and his firstborn son. So where one temptation follows
another and tears over tears always flow down the cheeks, there is a
right death, and these are the right exercises of faith, which also
kills innate love. Therefore you may say of the monks\' and nuns\'
killing, of which they know how to boast, that it is all lies and vain
folly.

157 Bersaba, which place is thought of in the text, is situated near
Egypt. In the same place there may have been flocks of sheep and large
cattle; for the people of the place lived from cattle breeding and lived
in huts.

**[1424\* D.V, I2V-IW. Interpretation of Genesis 21:15, 16, W.
1:2137-214.\" 1425]{.underline}**

used to. There Ishmael and Hagar came into a new danger, which also
frightened the mother and made her almost nonsensical with impatience;
as Abraham may also be regarded for having proceeded too cruelly.
Although it had a different opinion with him; because he obeyed the
commandment of God\".

Ishmael is dying of thirst, and since the mother cannot watch such a sad
spectacle, she lays him down in the grass under the bushes and goes a
little further away from him, as if she wanted to leave the boy lying
there, who does not behave differently, but as one who now wants to die;
however, she remains sitting not far away from him, so that she could
hear the groaning of the dying boy. We learn, however, what a great
misery and accident it is when one has to wander around in misery
outside of his homeland among unknown people, since he does not have a
certain dwelling place. This misery and accident is even greater, which
is indicated by the circumstance in this place, namely, that Hagar is a
mother and a wife, and walks alone, moreover in the desert, since she
was so suddenly expelled from a large house, and now she lacks food and
drink, and her son lies there and must die of thirst.

She might well have had water from Bersaba, for there the shepherds
undoubtedly had their tents: but the poor wretched woman is quite lost,
not only outwardly in her body, so that she goes astray, but also in her
heart she is so distraught that she does not know what she is doing.
This is a theological rule and trial, that Satan always makes those who
are miserable and distressed even more distressed, and that he makes
those who are bodily lost also inwardly distressed and troubled in
heart. For so he is wont to do, as the German proverb says: Where the
fence is lowest, there he always wants to climb over; and on which side
the chariot hangs, there he also hangs himself, so that he may overturn
it.

Therefore, in addition to this misery and accident, very sad thoughts
have also come, which the devil can well prepare. Oh, where shall I go
now, she thought.

I, poor woman, who am so miserably expelled! There is no God in heaven
who would have mercy on us, nor is there a man on earth who would take
care of us. God will be hostile to us, that is why he will also let us
perish here and die of hunger and thirst in this desert.

This is the poisonous and harmful addition, from which Satan gets the
name, that he is called a Leviathan, because he can make a spiritual
accident out of a bodily one, and always puts on one burden the other,
which is even greater. Job says in 40 Cap. V. 20, that he cannot be
pulled or driven by any means, that is, he cannot be driven away by
human strength: he is a real leviathan, who always puts something on one
part of the cart and presses it down with it, and completely overturns
the cart that is tilted.

Therefore, this was a great challenge, much more severe than hunger or
thirst can be. Because of this, she became so distraught that she
herself did not know what to do, otherwise she would have looked around
for a well, for example, and thought that there must be people in such a
place; but she got so caught up in the additions and increases of
Leviathan that she thought that where there was only a grain of
tribulation, there were several hundredweight. Thus in the holy
revelation of John Cap. 12, 10, Satan is called \"the accuser of our
brethren. For those who are sure, he makes hard as steel, as our
antinomians are; but those who have a weak and fearful heart, he strikes
down with his terror, as if thunder were striking them.

163 Therefore Hagar is not only challenged because she was cast out
externally, but also because she was spiritually forsaken; and so she
despairs even unto death. The water was out, but not far from it was a
whole well, but Hagar does not think of this, for she is drowned in the
lying thoughts that Satan has given her, thinking, \"Behold, Abraham is
a man and a prophet of God, and in his house alone is the true church;
it is he who will keep you and your son.

**[1426 L. V, 122-124. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 15. 16. W. I,
2140-2142. 1427]{.underline}**

What more certain sign can you have than this, that you do not belong to
the church?

For my part, I would not like my heart to be struck with such arrows,
for I have experienced how dangerous wounds are caused when some
minister refuses to absolve me and rejects me from the holy sacrament;
whether it be for lesser causes, I believe that I would run away in
despair and give myself away as Judas did.

Now Hagar heard this judgment, that she should be cast out with her son,
not from a lowly servant, but from the most high patriarch himself, who
is the father of the promise: How thinkest thou then that she shall be
afraid?

We have just heard from Lot that he was so despondent and darkened by
his sorrow and grief that he did not see even with his eyes, and did not
know what he was doing; for his heart was so overtaken with great pain
and danger that all the senses in his body died as it were. Therefore
they call it *\^χστασις*, that is, a rapture, which is so violent that
Lot did not even know what he had done with his daughters. Hagar also
had such a hard struggle here, and Moses indicates the same with the
word, when he says how she went astray. For she was so sad that she
could not see anything; her despair made her deaf, dumb, blind and
completely forgotten, and even killed all her senses.

But thou seest that here the law is first spoken of, before the
consolation cometh; which is against our antinomians. Ishmael and his
mother Hagar were proud of Isaac, because they were also Abraham\'s
seed, and put off their inheritance because they were related to Abraham
in the flesh. This thought and sense therefore had to be killed in them,
namely, that they first learned the law and thereby were killed. But
those who are killed by the law must then be raised up again with the
word of God, and

comfort them, for they have repented of their sins and are not secure
and hopeful, as Ishmael was.

Therefore this text teaches us what the right practice and office of the
law is, and St. Paul calls these words of Sarah, when she says: \"Push
out the maid\", words of the law. He does not say, \"What does Sarah
say?\" but, \"What does the Scripture say?\" Although Moses with his
written law was not yet present, the law was nevertheless in his use and
practice; for \"to cast out\" is a word of the law.

\(169\) Therefore let us reject the antinomians, who would cast away the
law from the church, and teach repentance by the gospel. It is right to
say that people should be lifted up and comforted, but we must also say
who they are whom we are to comfort, namely, those who, with Ishmael and
his mother, have been cast out of their home and fatherland, and are
famished and thirsty in the wilderness; who groan and cry out to the
Lord, and are not far from despair. Such people are the right listeners
of the gospel.

But those who think that they are in grace, for the sake of fleshly
advantage, are proud and presumptuous because of their own righteousness
and holiness, do not believe that they are in the wilderness, but in
paradise; neither do they know what it is to err in the wilderness; they
are not humbled, not killed: they must be beaten and crushed with the
hammer of the law, yes, they must even be destroyed.

But this is done by the law, which says, \"Cast out the maid with her
son, for he shall not be the heir,\" Gal. 4:30, which is saying this
much: We are all by nature outside of grace. For as far as our nature is
concerned, we are children of condemnation, and it does not help that
the Jews are Abraham\'s seed, that when we are born we bring with us our
understanding, our reason and the law, and that we can to some extent
add our will to it: all this still does not help at all to salvation.
But from

**[1428 L.v, 124-126. interpretation of Genesis 21:15, 16. w. i.
2142-214°. 1429]{.underline}**

All that is of the law and of the will of the flesh and man, it is said,
\"Cast out.\"

For God cannot suffer or tolerate the pride and presumption of Ishmael,
that is, He does not want us to boast about our physical birth, or about
our powers, our free will, our wisdom and justice. For all these things
must be put to death, and we must despair of them all; as in this place
Hagar also despaired. When this has happened and we have been cast into
hell, then it is time that we are called again by the comforting and
sweet word of the gospel, which does not say: \"Cast out\", but: \"Be of
good cheer, \"no son, your sins are forgiven you\", Matth. 9, 2.
Therefore the scripture says that it is God\'s work to cast into hell
and to lead out again, to kill and to make alive again, 1 Sam. 2, 6.

And this is the reason why Ishmael had to be cast out with his mother,
that the horrible and shameful pestilence, the presumption of his own
righteousness, might be killed. For he thought thus: I am in the house
of Abraham, therefore I am also an heir. This confidence and presumption
is such a poisonous pestilence and harmful pestilence that it cannot be
killed, but only by the utmost despair, namely, that man is deprived of
all that he has, divests himself of it altogether, and almost despairs
of God Himself and His grace, and feels that he is rejected and cast out
by God. This is what the Father and true Abraham, that is, God Himself,
must do to us. For the Church and Christ Himself, as well as
righteousness, are of no concern to us. For the church and Christ
Himself, as well as justice, are of no concern to us unless the harmful
presumption is first overcome and killed.

For this reason, the antinomians are worthy of hostility from anyone who
wants to defend themselves with our example, since the reason why we
taught about God\'s grace in the beginning is now clear. The accursed
pope had even oppressed the poor consciences with his human statutes;
had all the right means, help and consolation, since

with which the poor despondent hearts might have been saved against
despair, taken away: what should we then do but raise up again the
oppressed and weighed-down hearts, and hold out to them the right
consolation?

We also know that we must speak differently to those who are full,
tender and fat. At that time, we were all outcasts and very afflicted.
The water in the bottle was out, that is, there was no comfort. We lay
like the dying, like Ishmael under your bush. That is why we needed such
teachers, who held up God\'s grace to us and taught us how to refresh
ourselves.

The antinomians want the doctrine of repentance to begin immediately
with grace, but I did not hold the trial that way. For I knew well that
Ishmael had first been cast out and despondent before he heard comfort
from the angel. Therefore I followed the example and comforted no one,
but only those who had previously repented and grieved over their sin
and had despaired of themselves, whom the law had frightened, the
Leviathan had attacked and even made dismayed. For the sake of these
Christ came into this world and does not want the smoldering wick to be
extinguished, Isa. 42, 3. Therefore He calls Matth. 11, 28: \"Come unto
Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden.\"

Ishmael was not such a man before he was expelled from the house, but he
was proud and sure, and an antinomian epicure. I, he says, am the lord
and heir in the house; Isaac and Sarah shall depart from me. Should this
hopefulness have been praised and tolerated in him, or should he have
been punished for it? How could he be punished in any other way than to
be expelled from the house together with his mother, and to take nothing
with him from Abraham\'s house except the reward of the law, that is,
bread and water? For this is what the law does: it leads the thief bound
to the gallows; but before he is strangled, it refreshes him with a
drink of water, but at last the water is lacking and death remains; that
is all the law does.

**[1430 L. V, 126-128. interpretation of Genesis 21:15, 16. w. i,
2145-2148. 1431]{.underline}**

Therefore let us learn that God is hostile to all the hopeful; but those
who are humbled and have felt the power of the law, He comforts, if not
by man, then by an angel from heaven. For he does not want such people
to be lost, just as he does not want the secure and the proud to remain
in Abraham\'s house.

\(179\) But a teacher and preacher in the church must be learned,
skillful, and experienced in both these things, that he may both
chastise and contriteize the unruly, and comfort again them that are
chastised and bruised, lest they be utterly despondent, and be swallowed
up of the law. If our nature were not so corrupt because of our sins, we
would not need the preaching of the law at all. But God cannot do
anything to us by His grace because of our hardness and deepest
security, unless He has first broken and crushed our iron and steel-hard
hearts with the law.

Therefore St. Paul interprets this text according to the letter and
says: \"All who are of the synagogue are such people. We also learn by
daily experience that not only the Jews, but also all men are of this
mind; as I said above about the Turks, who presume to be God\'s people
because they have such great fortune and so much victory; item, about
the pope and his church, who bear the name of the church because they
sit in high office and honor. In sum, this history depicts all of them
in such a way that they cannot be saved unless they are led to death and
despair. For they all presume to obtain God\'s grace and forgiveness of
sins through the fleshly birth and their ability to do so.

I still remember that at one time a godless man and a great enemy of the
gospel fell from a scaffold while looking at the building that had been
erected in that place. Since he felt no harm from the fall, for no limb
was injured, he cried out with a loud voice:

Now I know that I have a gracious God. This is what the world tends to
do. It misses itself in bodily benefits and creates such a delusion that
God is gracious and favorable to it; this is our nature and way.
Therefore, it is necessary that it be killed, which is done by the law.

For this reason, anyone who wants to be an heir of the promise must
abandon everything that is not a promise, just as St. Paul did to the
Philippians in chapter 3, v. 8, when he called the righteousness of the
law filth. V. 8, where he calls the righteousness of the law filth. For
nothing is valid in the sight of God except the promise and grace held
out in Christ. The flesh also has its gifts, but nothing is due to it
except bread and water. Eternal life does not come to the children of
the flesh, but to the children of the promise, that is, to those who
believe in Christ.

It is a glorious thing that God has given a blessing to husbands and
wives, saying, \"Grow and multiply\"; but this blessing is bodily, and
remains only to fill the earth. For however holy and pious the father
and mother may be, the same does not help the children born of them:
they themselves are not saved. But if they are to be saved, they must
become children of the promise and believe the promise themselves. For
this cause we all must be baptized: and that thou art baptized, I profit
not by it, but must myself also be baptized, and believe.

Thus, Ishmael\'s rejection is a proof that affects all men, the whole
Church from beginning to end: that the first birth does not belong to
the Kingdom of God and that without faith in the promise of Christ no
one can be saved. For this reason it is a foolish thing that the papists
cry out that they are the Church. For the church is not such a people as
is to be looked upon and understood according to the great multitude or
people, wisdom, power, wealth, honor, succession, office, and such like
things, much less according to the worship services of their own
choosing; but is a people of promise, that is, who believe the promise.

\(185\) If, then, they say, \"The pope is the head of the church,
therefore all that is

**[1432 \".V, 1S8-1S0. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 15. 16. W. 1,
2148-2UN, 1433]{.underline}**

he commands, divine and good; so you shall say that such does not
follow. For the pope knows and understands nothing of the Scriptures,
much less does he believe the Scriptures. He is an outward shell of the
church, but is not the church; indeed, he challenges the church and
persecutes it, as Cain persecuted his brother Abel, and does this for
the sake of the promise, which he usurps, even though he does not
believe. Therefore, let no one be frightened by the great and splendid
titles and names of ordinary succession, by their profession and office.

The Turks also boast that they are creatures of God and swear by God,
the Creator of heaven and earth. The pope boasts that he believes in
Christ, namely, that he is the Son of God and Redeemer of the whole
world. In the meantime, he establishes monasteries, masses, fasts, the
service of the dead saints, and other such things, but all in vain. For
these are the works of thine own creation, who art made of flesh; they
are the fruits of an evil tree. But if the tree is to become good, you
must become a member and person of the promise, that is, you must accept
grace and rely on mercy alone. Which cannot happen unless you accept the
word of promise with right faith. Ishmael is a true natural son of
Abraham, but he is not an heir.

This is St. Paul\'s argument and proof, which no man can overthrow. We
see and grasp that the papists persecute the children of the promise as
Ishmael persecuted Isaac. If therefore the false confidence which they
have conceived is not killed and destroyed with all the excellent gifts
which come from the flesh, they will never be saved. Look at the Turks,
how they are adorned with such great power and wisdom, and the pope and
his cardinals are also very wise men. So Plato, Cicero and Socrates were
also great men, but therefore they are not the church. Because they do
not have this essential difference, so that the church is separated from
the world, namely the promise. Therefore, we give the pope and his
people the well

that they have wisdom and great honor, and that they also have the
succession and the ministry, but they are not yet the church. For they
still lack the essential difference, which is that one must believe the
gospel. But those who do not believe the gospel are not the church, nor
do they belong to the kingdom of Christ.

Therefore, dear Squire Pope, your papacy must first be killed and you
must be destroyed before God, or else you will never become even the
smallest member of the church. These are harsh words and very unpleasant
to the papists; but it also hurt Ishmael that he had to be cast out and
separated from the church, and be considered such a member as would be
cut off from the church. And nothing harsher or more burdensome can
happen to us common people than to be deprived of all hope and comfort.

This temptation often plagues me myself, so that I almost look around
for good works to rely on, namely, that I have taught and preached a
lot, served many people and done good, and suffered a lot of injustice
without my merit: but when the right moves and battles come along, I
feel that all this is nothing, and I am driven to the point that I must
also say and confess with David, Psalm 32, v. 5: Lord, I am nothing, but
only a poor sinner; item, when he says in the 116th Psalm, v. 11: \"I
said in my fear, All men are liars,\" that is so much said: All men are
vain, who deceive and are deceived; item in the 143rd Psalm, v. 2: \"Go
not into judgment with thy servant.\"

\(190\) But with this hope alone do I arise, that I may see that in the
gospel comfort is promised to those who are oppressed and troubled by
their sin, and hope to poor despondent consciences; and that to those
who are led into hell, heaven is promised. And this is a certain sign of
this hope, that the Son of God, without our foreknowledge, sacrificed
Himself for us on the trunk of the cross to God His Father.

191\. where now the people in this way

**[1434 L. V, 130. 131. interpretation of Genesis 21, 15-17. W. 1,
2151-2156. 1435]{.underline}**

are first humbled and brought to despair, and as they despair of
themselves, so they also begin to be confident for Christ\'s sake; so
they become children and heirs of God. But many are found who do not
want to be humbled, but still intend to take revenge and grumble against
those who punish them; such are hardened and hardened in two ways.

Therefore, when you feel that you are being humiliated, lie down at the
feet of your heavenly Father and say: O dear Lord, if you deal with me
in this way, I will suffer it with patience and confess that I deserve
much harsher punishment; therefore have mercy on me: if you do not want
me to be an heir, then deal with me in such a way that I may remain a
servant: yes, as the Canaanite woman Matth. 15:27, I will not refuse to
be a little dog in thy house, that I may at least eat the crumbs, which
otherwise shall fall to the ground, and be trodden under foot. You do
not owe me anything on account of any right, so I will abide by your
grace and mercy.

This is the right way by which we come to grace and salvation, but there
are few who hear it, and even fewer who obey it, believe it and accept
it. The Jews recite these words daily in their prayers, and say: Praise
be to God, who sanctifies us above all other nations on earth; but this
is no prayer, but is the highest blasphemy, as the 109th Psalm v. 7.
says: \"Their prayer must be sin.\" For God is not such a God as accepts
persons, but holds out His word to all men, and wants them all to
believe and be saved; He makes no distinction between Jew and Gentile,
but wants to be one God of all men. Therefore, let no one make such a
claim or boast as the Jews do; but let us all humble ourselves and
confess that we are nothing; but what we are, that all comes from the
grace and mercy of God.

194 Paul also was puffed up and proud because of his righteousness; but
since he had the

When he heard the voice of Christ at Damascus, whom he had so surely
despised before, he trembled and was terrified, and said, \"Lord, what
do you want me to do? Where was his glory then, that he was Abraham\'s
child, of the family of Benjamin, a Pharisee, a disciple who had
diligently studied and learned the law? Just as Ishmael went from the
law to the promise, and from death to life, and from hell to heaven, so
did Paul. For this reason, he subsequently treats with such great zeal
and spirit this disputation on the promise and merit, on grace and good
works, namely, that the promise alone and nothing else makes heirs; that
fleshly birth, circumcision and other works of the law do not.

**Fourth Part.**

**How the angel appears to Hagar and helps her, and what happened to
Ishmael afterwards.**

**I.**

**V. 17. Then God heard the voice of the boy. And the angel of God
called from heaven to Hagar, and said unto her, What is the matter with
thee, Hagar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy as
he lies.**

He does not call him Abraham\'s son, but only a boy, which name is
common to all men, and says that his cry is heard. But Ishmael, since he
was so close to death, would undoubtedly not have claimed that he was
born of Abraham. For since the sorrow and fear of death are upon him, he
forgets it, and the Leviathan, of whom we said above, has also come,
that is, Satan, who has also killed him spiritually by the power of the
law.

Therefore, there was nothing left with him but the inexpressible
groaning of a despondent heart that he confessed that he was not worthy
of his father\'s house and inheritance; as the prodigal son says in the
Gospel Luc. 15:21, \"I am gone.

**[1436 L.V. 131-13S. Interpretation of Genesis 21:17. \". 1. 21SS-21S8.
1437]{.underline}**

no longer worthy to be called your son.\" God sees and hears this
groaning. He cried out with his mouth and lamented, but the anguish of
the heart and sorrow was the most prominent thing, which was followed by
the crying and deep sighing of the heart. To such music, which seems
very sad and miserable to us, God is more pleased than to any other
service; as He says Isa. 66:2: \"I look upon the wretched, and the
brokenhearted.\" For where one is secure, God is angered.

197 There is a story told of Anthony, the hermit who first began the
monastic life, that he desired to know what kind of companion he would
have for the great honor and glory in eternal life, because he was very
pleased with himself for the sake of the solitary life he led. Therefore
he heard in a dream that in Alexandria there would be a shoemaker or
tanner who would be his journeyman in the same glory. Then Antony
marveled at this comparison and went to Alexandria to see the same man,
who would be like him in holiness. For he thought that the shoemaker
must be an excellent and highly gifted man. When he comes to him, he
finds him at his work, so that he can feed himself and his wife and
children; therefore he says to him: \"My dear shoemaker, I know that you
have God before your eyes, and serve him faithfully and rightly: I beg
you, tell me, what do you do, what do you eat, what do you drink, how or
when do you pray, do you also keep watch and pray all night long? No,
says the cobbler, but in the morning and in the evening I thank God for
His gracious protection, that He has governed and preserved me, and I
ask Him to forgive all my sins for Christ\'s sake, after which I humbly
ask Him to govern me with His Holy Spirit and not to lead me into
temptation. When I have made such a prayer, I deal with my leather, and
see how I may feed myself and mine. I do nothing more about this, except
to take care that I do not act contrary to my conscience.

When Antony hears this, he is astonished and understands so much from it
that the self-chosen services are not proper services, and that for this
reason one should not rely on them. Such grace not only befell Anthony,
but it is also an admonition to all descendants, so that God would help
His dear church, that people should not give way to the self-chosen
services, which always bring with them this harmful pestilence, that one
should rely on them; which false trust must be killed in all ways.

For neither poor and insignificant clothing, nor hard and meager food,
fasting, long prayer, much watchfulness, nor any work whatsoever, can
help us to come to eternal life; only trust in God\'s grace and mercy,
or only the promise, is what makes us blessed. If it is without it, then
only confess freely and say: I am nothing, I do not belong to the
inheritance, I am driven away from my father\'s house. This is the voice
of the boy Ishmael, which the Lord heareth: and to them that cry unto
him he sendeth his angels from heaven.

200 Therefore this is a very great comfort to all those who feel and
sense that they are cast out, that is, who recognize their sin and are
terrified of God\'s judgment. For God will not and cannot reject such
wretched and afflicted hearts, Ps. 113, 6. And if such people had no
other comfort of men, an angel would rather have to come down from
heaven to comfort them. Therefore God is called a God of the miserable
and afflicted, who does not extinguish the smoldering wick, Isa. 42, 3.
But after the carnal trust in Ishmael was killed, he became a true child
of the promise, and what he had demanded before as by right, but still
did not obtain, the same now happens to him by grace in the utmost need
and despair.

This is a strange thing, and it is well worth noting. Since Ishmael
feels and senses that he has been rejected, he is closest to God and God
loves him the most, and he can hear the voice and the groaning of the
wretched Ishmael.

**[1438 L.V, 1W-1W. Interpretation of I Moses 21, 17. w. 1, 2188-2161.
1439]{.underline}**

Do not despise the afflicted boy. If God had not heard him there, he
would have been eternally lost. But this is impossible for God, for He
is gracious and merciful, Ps. 103, 8, who does not take pleasure in the
death of the poor sinner, Ezk. 33, 11.

\(202\) Therefore let us learn well this rule, that no other people on
earth can become Abraham\'s children except those who are broken in
spirit, and that by special and pure grace. Therefore let no man presume
on any thing, neither let him despair. But our nature is like this: in
times of peace, when things are going well, it is presumptuous, and in
times of war and strife it is even despondent; but since one should take
the middle road, and where there is trouble and danger, one should not
despair, but should rely on God\'s grace and mercy and call upon His
name, according to the saying in the 50th Psalm, v. 15. Psalm v. 15:
\"Call upon me in trouble, and I will save you\"; item, as he says in
Psalm 91 v. 16: \"I will show you my salvation\" 2c.

\(203\) But people must also be reminded that no one should think that
by repenting of sin, of which we have now said much, one can earn God\'s
grace, as the sophists falsely teach. For there are many who do not hear
the word; there are also many who hear the word and yet do not believe.
For the word is spoken to us all, and this is a common word, so at the
same time it concerns us all, since he says Exodus 20:2: \"I am the LORD
your GOD.\" But the presumptuous despise it; but those who despair do
not believe that it concerns them. Therefore one must take the middle
road, according to the common saying: In the middle is safest.

\(204\) For the sake of Hagar, it is reasonable to wonder that she was
not frightened and ran away when she heard the voice of the angel in the
wilderness. But I have said that her heart was so troubled and
distressed by great fear that she did not consider who he was who was
speaking. As it is also the case of St. Petro Ap. histr. 12, 7. ff. When
he is awakened in prison by an angel and led out of prison, he does not
know,

that it is serious, what happens with him, but means, something happened
to him in the dream. But there is no doubt that the angel of Hagar
appeared in the form of a man.

205\. Because the word of God is never preached in vain, Hagar is first
raised from death by the voice of the angel: Then she is enlightened by
a new light of the Holy Spirit, and from a handmaid she now also becomes
a mother in the church, who afterwards instructed her children and
admonished them with her example, so that they would not become proud;
For she had also been a proper wife of the holy patriarch Abraham and
had borne him his firstborn son, but the same fleshly advantage or
privilege had done her no good, indeed, the same honor had been a cause
that she had become proud and hopeful; but for the sake of such
hopefulness she had been cast out, and having thus been humbled, she had
finally come to grace.

\(206\) As in our time, we also who have lived in monasteries. We tell
others about our cross and torture, on which we relied and thought we
were sitting in God\'s lap; but now we have been enlightened by God\'s
word, we call the same righteousness all, on which we then relied, with
St. Paul Phil. 3, 8. vile filth and harm.

207\. Since Hagar was instructed in this way in the school of the Lord,
she then taught many disciples very well in the most important article
taught in the church of God, namely, that no boasting according to the
flesh is valid before God, for she lay in one bed with Abraham and was
nevertheless cast out of the house. If anyone wants to boast about this,
he should boast about the Lord, that he knows the Lord, 1 Cor. 1:31,
that is, that he has the promise and believes it, because without this
faith the rest is all in vain.

The words of the angel are very short in Hebrew, as: \"What do you lack,
Hagar? But they are not to be understood as if they were harsh words, so
that he would attack her, but they are words of comfort. Ah, he says,
why do you weep, why do you sigh, what do you desire? You have no reason
to feel this way.

**[1440 L. v, iW-ur. Interpretation of I Genesis 21, 17. W. i.
sisi-2is4. 1441]{.underline}**

fear. Stop crying, God cares for you and your son. He has thus willed to
chastise you. Now that this has happened, he wants you to hope in his
mercy and to take care of everything that is good for him. You also
prayed with your son before in the house of Abraham, but there God did
not listen to you, because at that time your prayer was in hope and
contempt of your brother. But in this place he has now heard you;
therefore believe that here is his church. For where God hears prayer,
there is the house of prayer, there is the church, there is the
inexpressible groaning of those who despair of themselves. So this,
which is said so clearly in the text about the place where Ishmael is,
must be understood as said emphatically.

And so the angel is sent from heaven to comfort the almost dying Ishmael
and his mother. Because the medicine and help is so delicious and
expensive, it is clear that the illness they both had must have been
great. For not a man, but an angel is sent to those who are afflicted
with misery and grief here, and we are also shown here why they were
also cast out in the first place, namely: Not that God was hostile to
Ishmael and Hagar, but that this false cause was invented by Leviathan;
but God\'s counsel and will is that they should be humbled and learn to
rely solely on God\'s grace and mercy, and not on any merit or carnal
worthiness.

Now this was written by the Holy Spirit, so that the whole world and all
descendants might learn that this sentence is universally and
undoubtedly true, namely, that we are saved by grace and not by merit or
works. For there was no other remedy or means to ward off the pride and
hope of merit and worthiness, except that Ishmael would be expelled with
his mother from the holy church of God that was in Abraham\'s house. But
since this could not have happened without great pain and many tears,
the fruit that resulted was nevertheless much greater, namely,

that through such a way they came to grace and became blessed.

This, I say, is the ultimate cause of this miserable and pitiful
exorcism, namely, that God wants to teach that we are saved by grace
alone, or primarily through faith, which grasps and accepts the grace
held out to us in the promise. For the natural children shall become
like unto them that are not natural children, and yet believe, that
there may be one God of the Jews and also of the Gentiles: that the Jews
may not boast of their carnal advantage, and the Gentiles may not
despair because of their unworthiness and sins.

And this is the highest article of our faith. If it is taken away, as
the Jews do, or falsified, as the papists do, neither the church can
exist, nor can God retain His glory. Which honor is that he is gracious
and merciful, and that he will forgive our sins and make us blessed for
the sake of his Son.

Therefore, this apparently sad history is a comfort to us who are poor,
miserable sinners and come to the church without any worthiness or
merit. But we have an equal place with those who are natural children.
For with God there is no respect for the person, and with Him alone the
promise is valid; for it is God\'s word that endures forever, Isa. 40:8.

214\. But what reason can our adversaries have to doubt this doctrine,
which they so vehemently dispute, when we say that we are saved by grace
alone and not by merit? What, after all, moves them to do this? For it
is much more certain in itself if we believe that we become children of
God by grace rather than by merit. For if it depended on merit, we could
never be sure when we had merit enough; therefore we could not be
without danger of eternal damnation. What, then, causes the papists to
prefer to rely on works and their own merit rather than on the promise
and grace of God?

The first cause is that they do not believe that God is a Creator of
heaven and earth.

**[1440 L. V, IM-U7. Interpretation of I Moses 21, 17. W. I, 21S1-21S4.
1441]{.underline}**

fear. Stop crying, God cares for you and your son. He has thus willed to
chastise you. Now that this has happened, he wants you to hope in his
mercy and to take care of everything that is good for him. You also
prayed with your son before in the house of Abraham, but there God did
not listen to you, because at that time your prayer was in hope and
contempt of your brother. But in this place he has now heard you;
therefore believe that here is his church. For where God hears prayer,
there is the house of prayer, there is the church, there is the
inexpressible groaning of those who despair of themselves. So this,
which is said so clearly in the text about the place where Ishmael is,
must be understood as said emphatically.

And so the angel is sent from heaven to comfort the almost dying Ishmael
and his mother. Because the medicine and help is so delicious and
expensive, it is clear that the illness they both had must have been
great. For not a man, but an angel is sent to those who are afflicted
with misery and grief here, and we are also shown here why they were
also cast out in the first place, namely: Not that God was hostile to
Ishmael and Hagar, but that this false cause was invented by Leviathan;
but God\'s counsel and will is that they should be humbled and learn to
rely solely on God\'s grace and mercy, and not on any merit or carnal
worthiness.

Now this was written by the Holy Spirit, so that the whole world and all
descendants might learn that this sentence is universally and
undoubtedly true, namely, that we are saved by grace and not by merit or
works. For there was no other remedy or means to ward off the pride and
hope of merit and worthiness, except that Ishmael would be expelled with
his mother from the holy church of God that was in Abraham\'s house. But
since this could not have happened without great pain and many tears,
the fruit that resulted was nevertheless much greater, namely,

that through such a way they came to grace and became blessed.

This, I say, is the ultimate cause of this miserable and pitiful
exorcism, namely, that God wants to teach that we are saved by grace
alone, or by faith alone, which grasps and accepts the grace held out to
us in the promise. For the natural children shall become like unto them
that are not natural children, and yet believe, that there may be one
God of the Jews, and of the Gentiles also: that the Jews, because of
their carnal advantage, may not boast, and the Gentiles, because of
their unworthiness and sins, may not despair.

And this is the highest article of our faith. If it is taken away, as
the Jews do, or falsified, as the papists do, neither the church can
exist, nor can God retain His glory. Which honor is that he is gracious
and merciful, and that he will forgive our sins and make us blessed for
the sake of his Son.

Therefore, this apparently sad history is a comfort to us who are poor,
miserable sinners and come to the church without any worthiness or
merit. But we have an equal place with those who are natural children.
For with God there is no respect for the person, and with Him alone the
promise is valid; for it is God\'s word that endures forever, Isa. 40:8.

214\. But what reason can our adversaries have to doubt this doctrine,
which they so vehemently dispute, when we say that we are saved by grace
alone and not by merit? What, after all, moves them to do this? For it
is much more certain in itself if we believe that we become children of
God by grace rather than by merit. For if it depended on merit, we could
never be sure when we had merit enough; therefore we could not be
without danger of eternal damnation. What, then, causes the papists to
prefer to rely on works and their own merit rather than on the promise
and grace of God?

The first cause is that they do not believe that God is a Creator of
heaven and earth.

**[1442 L.V.I37-M. Interpretation of Genesis 21:17. W. I. AS4-21S7.
1443]{.underline}**

and of the earth. For if they believed that they were God\'s creature
and God their Creator, they would never hold their merit or works
against Him, nor would they be proud or presumptuous on account of
anything. For how can the Creator be compared to the creature? The
creature is made of nothing; therefore, all that the creature is capable
of is nothing, namely, where one wants to rebel against the Creator, who
gave the creature its essence. Therefore Job says in the 4th Cap. V. 17,
18, 19: \"How can a man be more righteous than God, or a man more pure
than he who made him? Behold, among his servants there is none without
blame, and in his messengers he finds foolishness. How much more, they
that dwell in the lime houses, and that are founded upon the earth,
shall be eaten of the worms.\" Therefore, it is evident that the papists
neither believe that God is the Creator nor that they are creatures,
since they reproach God for their merits and works, and would rather
rely on their works than on God\'s grace. But what is it that that which
is nothing wants to argue with God, its Creator?

The other reason that the papists doubt the doctrine of justification by
faith is that God does not deal with us according to His majesty, but
takes human form and speaks to us throughout the Scriptures as one man
speaks to another. He asks Adam in Paradise Genesis 3:9: \"Adam, where
are you?\" as if he did not know, if Adam did not tell him. The saints
cry out everywhere: \"Arise, Lord, why are you asleep? Yes, Christ
himself says in the Gospel Luc. 6, 38: \"Give, and it shall be given
unto you,\" and establishes, as it were, a society and fellowship with
us, so that he speaks everything to us without majesty and, that I call
it, from the humble form of God. But it happens as it is said in the
common proverb: Where one makes oneself too mean, one is despised.

217\. But God condescends and humbles Himself because of our weakness,
for we cannot tolerate or tolerate our weakness.

that he should speak to us in his majesty. These are words of majesty,
of which St. Paul says Rom. 11, 35: \"Who has given him anything in
advance to be repaid to him?\", item Rom. 9, 18: \"He hardens whom he
will\"; item Job 4, 18: \"Before God no one is innocent.\" Who can bear
these words? And yet, when he lets himself down for our sake, that he
may speak to us as a householder speaks to his servants, he is despised
by us, and we take it that he needs our money, our fasting, our praying
and our watching. 2c.

218 Therefore, the kindness and fellowship that should reasonably
provoke us to accept the goodness and grace of God makes us presumptuous
and proud. He speaks to us of himself as if he were a man, like us; he
presents himself as if he does not know where Adam is; he presents
himself as if he were asleep; he rents out his vineyard and promises the
workers their wages. We abuse this kindness and humility of his, and
take him for a tailor or cobbler, who gives us nothing out of grace, but
does everything according to our merit. This is an insufferable
presumption and worthy of eternal death.

219 Yes, they say, nevertheless the promise is there Luc. 6, 38: \"Give,
and it will be given to you. What is that to you? Do you therefore say
that you do not celebrate a creature of God? But if you are a creature,
then you are nothing compared to the Creator, and it is in vain that you
reproach him with your merits and works. Do you not see that Ishmael is
driven out of the house when he becomes proud and hopeful because of his
fleshly birth, and that he must then almost die in the wilderness? But
the same is very useful to him, because through it he is redeemed from
arrogance and obtains grace.

The 100th Psalm says v. 3: \"He made us, and not we ourselves. Why does
the Holy Spirit remind us of this, as if no one knew? Answer: Truly the
whole world needs this teaching, for all who rely on their works do not
know that the Lord made them, and they need to be reminded that the Lord
made them.

**[1444 L. V, 1W-I4I. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 17. W. 1, 2167-2170.
1445]{.underline}**

they would humble themselves before the Creator and would not presume to
have any wealth. For all that they have, they have from God. The
ignorance of creation and the fact that God shows Himself to be so kind
to us makes us proud and presumptuous.

Therefore it is necessary that the Lord give us a master, as the 9th
Psalm v. 21 says, and kill us with Ishmael, so that the saying of St.
Paul Ephes. 2, 8. 9. may certainly stand: All that we are, we are by
faith and not of works, by grace and not of merit, even naturally, and
according to the body and flesh, how much more supernaturally and
according to the Spirit; that we may simply say: Have mercy on me, dear
Lord God. This is what Ishmael and Hagar learned in the desert.

The fact that Ishmael was driven out of the house teaches us how God is
so fiercely hostile to pride and presumption. Here again, learn how God
deals with those who are humiliated. Hagar sits and weeps very
violently, and is in the greatest despair; for she sees that she and her
son have been cast out and banished from Abraham, the father of God\'s
Church, which is truly an abominable thing. For the law does not joke,
but truly strikes down the hearts and humbles them, that with all their
strength and works they have earned nothing but eternal damnation.

Therefore the angel comes as a comforter, and brings nothing but vain
words of comfort from God Himself: but Hagar is silent, for she cannot
answer him because of weeping. For where the heart is taken up with
great sorrow, mourning and grief, speech also dies and remains silent.
Because she is silent to the angel\'s words, the angel absolves her of
her sins and tells her not to be afraid.

Therefore, you should know the difference between the Law and the
Gospel. She had previously heard a sad judgment that God wanted her to
be cast out with the boy. Such a voice of the law depressed her proud
spirit, especially since she was challenged in the wilderness. Where now
a heart

When a man is afflicted with such fear and distress, he cries out with
constant groaning: \"Lord, do not cast me out of your sight,\" Ps.
51:13. But what this is, to be cast out of God\'s sight, is understood
only by the saints, that is, by those who are well tried and humbled:
but those who still dispute about their merits and works do not
understand it. Therefore follows the right voice of the gospel, which is
thus, \"Fear not,\" that is, you who have hitherto been crushed by the
law, rejected and banished, shall now have good hope that you will be
helped. That you have been driven out and that the water is gone; item,
that you are in the vast wilderness, and your son lies there as if he
were about to die: all this frightens and distresses you, and it would
not be far from killing you. But God tells you not to be afraid. Just as
everything else frightens you and makes you fearful, so this favor and
grace of God shall raise you up again 2c.

But the fact that she is thus comforted by the angel shows that she was
in the highest fear, trembling and terror. For what else would it be
necessary to tell her that she should not be afraid, if she had not been
extremely frightened and distressed? The Antinomians and Epicureans
feast, play, sing and jump: therefore it would be in vain to say to them
that they should not be afraid. But Hagar, together with her son, is
extremely frightened and despondent, not only because the water in the
bottle has run out, but rather because there is a lack of spiritual
water, and she now feels that she is banished. She had well understood
that she had cried and prayed in vain until now, for she had been
hopeful and proud; but now her prayer is heard, because she has a broken
heart and is dead with her son. God is a God of the humble and lowly,
not only of the Jews but also of the Gentiles, but He resists the proud,
1 Petr. 5, 5.

226 But see how the angel knows how to moderate his speech so finely. He
says not that the voice of Hagar is heard, but of the son: and yet he
speaks not to the son, but to Hagar. For she as the

**[1446 \" v, 141-143. interpretation of I Genesis 21, 17. w. i,
2170-2172. 1447]{.underline}**

Mother was most grieved and distressed for the sake of her son, who was
now almost closer to death than to life. Now that she hears that he is
in grace and that he is promised a great kingdom or a great nation, she
is completely restored and comforted, and nothing prevents her from this
joy, so that she is not immediately reinstated or called to the former
place from which she was expelled. God,\" says the angel, \"has heard
the voice of the child\" in the place \"where he lies,\" as if to say:
\"You shall make no distinction before God between the house of Abraham
and the tree under which your son lies. Even though you are not in
Abraham\'s house, be careful not to doubt that you and your son belong
to the same church and congregation.

227 Abraham is the father of the promise, and in his house is the true
church; but that thou art now excluded from it, methinks it is a
wretched thing. Therefore you think that you would like to be a maid and
your son a servant in Abraham\'s house, but it is not necessary; it is
enough that you are humbled. For as far as the nature of the place is
concerned, this place where you are now is no less than the house of
Abraham. For here God speaks with you, in this place he hears the prayer
of your son, therefore he also has a church here 2c.

Thus does St. Paul everywhere. He makes the Gentiles and the Jews equal,
and makes no other difference between them, except that the natural
children of Abraham trusted in God\'s word. The Gentiles did not have
this advantage, namely, that Christ should come from their seed; and yet
they are compared to the Jews as far as the grace of salvation is
concerned, if they only believe in Christ.

229\. as we see here that God has an open ear to hear the voice of
Ishmael, who lies outside the house of Abraham in the wilderness under
the tree and cries out to Him, namely, that this reason and main
doctrine may stand firm and certain, that God will give glory to the
lowly and humble.

and that the Lord is well pleased with those who fear Him 2c., Ps. 147,
11. And as Peter says Acts 10, 34. 35. 10, 34, 35: \"Now I know with
truth that God does not look at the person, but in all people, whoever
fears Him and does right is pleasing to Him,\" whether he is circumcised
or not, for this is certainly the result of the circumstances.

For this reason, this text is worthy and necessary that we explain it in
so many words and at such length. For it is true that if our worthiness
and merit were to count for anything, we would already be lost.
Therefore, the papacy is worthy that everyone should be hostile to it;
for everything is done according to the person and the worthiness of the
people, that one is a monk, a nun, a priest and is in the celibate state
2c.

They all think: We are poor, we are not married, we fast and pray,
therefore we will surely enter the Kingdom of Heaven; but this is the
Ishmaelite hope, which God cannot suffer. And shall we thank God for it,
when He takes away this confidence in our merit through many a trial,
and teaches us that we are justified by grace through faith and not by
the merit of our works.

232\) For this reason it can be seen how God is so strict and serious,
and so cruelly dealt with Ishmael, this has been a useful and necessary
seriousness, first for the sake of Ishmael, who could not have been
humbled in any other way; then for our sake, so that we may have hope
and trust in Him, that we alone may be saved by His grace and mercy, as
the Jews themselves were; as Peter says, Acts 15:15. 15, 9. 11.

Therefore, God does not only hear those who cry out to Him in Abraham\'s
house, where the church is, but also under a tree, only that you humble
yourself and hope that He will be gracious to you through Christ. And
thus is confirmed the noblest article of our faith and our highest
wisdom, namely, that those are not children of God who are born of
blood, of the will of man, or of the will of

**[1448 v. Interpretation of Genesis 21:17, 18. w. i. 2172-217\".
1449]{.underline}**

but of God, John 1:13, that is, those who believe the promise. For by
this promise alone will he save those who are not proud and presumptuous
because of birth or merit, but who believe in Christ. Now this is the
preaching of the angel: but to this he also gives a command.

V. 18. **Arise, take the boy, and lead him by your hand; for I will make
him a great nation.**

Hagar was able to think like this: What shall I do now that I am
reconciled to God? Shall I go again to Abraham\'s house? Then the angel
says: No, I do not command you, I do not want you to be bound to any
place, go wherever you please: but only take the boy and lead him by
your hand, that is, see that you take care of him, teach him, instruct
him and govern him. So he absolves the poor afflicted woman from all
banishment and fear, and accepts her back into the fellowship of
Isaac\'s promise, leaving her free to go wherever she wants; he does not
want her bound to the house of Abraham or to any other place. As if to
say, \"It matters little where you will be, only that you fear and
worship God and govern, instruct and care for your son, and do not worry
about the city, time and person with whom you will be, nothing: do what
a mother should do, and know that God will take care of you.

Because of this, she was banished and, as it were, imprisoned, but now
she is set free again as a Christian. God could have spoken to her as he
spoke at Mount Sinai, but because she was already frightened before, she
could not bear the voice of the high majesty.

The Lord also uses such kindness toward us. He speaks to us through the
service of men in the ministry of preaching, and thus conceals his
majesty, which is terrifying and distasteful to us. But because such a
ministry seems too small and mean, first the pastors and church
servants, and then God Himself, will also be involved in such a
ministry.

The Lord has despised this ministry, and it does not take much for it
not to be trampled underfoot. But a time will come when God, who now so
humbles Himself for the sake of our salvation, will let His majesty be
seen, and will suppress and destroy the sure despisers. Therefore, let
us learn to recognize this supreme and immeasurable gift of his, namely,
that he has thus manifested his majesty and taken on human form.
Therefore, let us not despise the word, but fall on our knees and honor
and worship the holy ministry of preaching, through which God humbles
Himself to speak to us.

237\. for we are truly the people, who, as Moses, Deut. 4, 7. of his
Jews, have God near to us and dwelling among us; for by your mouth He
speaks to me, and by my mouth He speaks to you; yes, that is even more,
the Son of God Himself came down into the flesh and became man, for the
sole purpose of enticing us to Himself, and that we should draw hope
from this that He would be merciful, and not be afraid of Him, as we are
afraid of His majesty, which our nature cannot bear; as it is written 2
Mos. 33, 20: \"No man shall live who beholds me\"; item Deut. 4, 24:
\"God is a consuming fire.\" For this reason he takes upon himself a
weak form, which is like us, yes, which is even friendly, before which
we should not even be afraid, as we are not afraid of ourselves.

But all this is contrary to the infirmity of our nature, which cannot be
healed, namely, that we all look at our works and merits, and thus
forget that we are creatures, but God is the Creator, and thus despise
the grace by which alone one must be saved. In order that God might
prevent and control this affliction, He sent His Son into the world to
show us the Father, and the Son sent the Holy Spirit to show and teach
us that the Son became man for us and a sacrifice for our sins.

239\. that the angel has fulfilled the promise of the

**[1450 \".v, 1E-147. interpretation of Genesis 21:18-21. W. i,
2175-2178. 1451]{.underline}**

The repeated ban of the great people was very necessary because of the
serious ban in which Hagar was. For she will have thought thus: Behold,
I have been cast out with my son, and though God has promised me that
twelve princes shall be born of my son, yet He will repent of the same
benefit, and the promise will be lost, because I am thus banished and
cast out; for the ban takes all away. Therefore the angel comforts her
and tells her that the promise will be sure. You were cast out,\" he
says, \"only because you were humbled and learned that everything you
have, you do not have by any right, because Abraham was your husband,
but you have it by grace. This has been taught and held up to the whole
world by your example. This is the absolution, followed now also by a
bodily consolation.

**V.19. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water. So she
went and filled the bottle with water and watered the boy.**

240 Moses writes everything in a very simple way. I said above about the
great fright of Hagar, that she was so excited that she did not see the
well that was so close to her. But now, when she is awakened and
encouraged by God\'s word as if from a deep sleep, she opens her eyes
and sees the well of water; and since her feet were dull and tired
before from sadness of heart, she can now step on it again. For she runs
to the well, and fills the bottle with water, so that she again
refreshes the weary boy.

The fact that Moses says that God opened her eyes is nothing else than
that God, through His word, dissolves and takes away such terror of the
heart and agitation; as the 116th Psalm v. 7 says that the soul is
satisfied by the word, that is, it is refreshed and comes back to
itself, as it were. For in temptations, which are somewhat heavy, hearts
come as it were from themselves, that they feel nothing, nor do they
feel anything.

understand. In Terence, one says that he is so enraged that he cannot
direct his heart to any thoughts. If anger can thus mislead and grieve
the heart, what should not the great terror and excitement do, which the
feeling of the wrath of God and eternal damnation bring with it?

Augustine says that the heart of man is more alive when it loves than
when it lives, as can be seen in lovers; therefore, even in great sorrow
the heart is overtaken and crushed, and all the senses die. But this is
the power of the word of God, that it revives hearts that have thus
died; the word of man cannot do this.

243 But that she waters the boy, the same also belongs to it, that we
learn from it, how the affliction had been so great; because the sad
thoughts withdraw senses, strength and juice from the body, that the
tongue becomes dry, and the whole body of man feels that it becomes weak
and decreases. This is the reason for fainting and other distressing
accidental illnesses.

**II.**

**V. 20. 21. And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the
wilderness, and became a good shot, and dwelt in the wilderness of
Pharan. And his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.**

So far we have heard how Ishmael, after he was killed in the wilderness,
was accepted again by grace, and learned this reason, that those are not
Abraham\'s children who are born of his flesh, but who believe the
promise. For God also requires of us, above the fleshly birth, our own
or personal righteousness, which comes to us by grace alone, through
faith alone, so that all glory before God may be set aside, Rom. 4:2.

245 But these things are our comfort and doctrine, that we be not proud
nor presumptuous because of the grace which we have, nor despondent
because of our sin; but that we take the right middle way. For those who
are proud and presumptuous sin.

**[1452 \"V, 147-I4S. Interpretation of Genesis 31:30, 31. w. 1.
2178-2181. 1453]{.underline}**

They are against the first commandment and carry the blasphemy of Satan
in their hearts, saying, \"I am God to myself. But the others,
despairing, also sin against the first commandment and blaspheme God,
because they consider it that he is not merciful, thus depriving and
robbing him of the noblest honor of his divinity.

246 This then is the right middle way, that we should confess and
believe that, as it is said in the first commandment, God is our God,
and we are His creatures and works. Therefore we should not despair, for
we have only one God: nor should we be presumptuous or proud, for we are
creatures, and as Isaiah Cap. 40, 6. says, we are nothing and vain dust.

The fact that the text says that God was with the boy Ishmael is a
great, glorious consolation, which indicates that when we are humbled,
God will open heaven for us and abundantly pour out Himself and all that
He has. For not only is Ishmael brought back to the right path, so that
he does not continue in presumption, but since he is humbled, he is
again placed in the church from which he was cast out because of his
presumption; and God Himself sets Himself to be his guardian, governs
and blesses him, and is now pleased with everything he does.

For this reason, Ishmael undoubtedly became a skillful and learned
preacher, who was instructed by his own example and preached that God is
God to those who are humbled; for he used to humble his own, not that he
wanted to trample them down and destroy them, but that he might break
their blasphemous presumption and that we might be capable of his grace.

In the same way, Ishmael, when he became a husband, brought his wife and
his wife\'s friendship and parents to the knowledge of God; he
established a church among the uncircumcised Gentiles, which was like
the church of Abraham, without being separated from it in person and
place, but nevertheless recognized and confessed the same God, and the
same seed, which was promised to the house of Abraham.

\(250\) This saying, that Ishmael grew, is not to be understood of
natural or bodily growth only; for at the time he was under the spell he
was about twenty years old: but that God made him great and increased
him, first in the word, and in spiritual gifts; \"for God,\" says Moses,
\"was with him. After that, that he also blessed him temporally, that he
begat twelve princes. And there is no doubt about it, Ishmael will have
become richer than Abraham was. For he saw the twelve princes who were
born of him, but Abraham\'s descendants did not suddenly arise and
become great, although twelve generations came from Jacob, Abraham\'s
grandson.

Therefore we should learn from this how a broken heart is such a
powerful sacrifice and how humility is such a pleasing smoke offering to
God. For the 145th Psalm rightly says v. 19: \"God does what the godly
desire\"; for they offer a holy sacrifice to God. But in those who are
proud and presumptuous, God has an abomination; for he does not find in
them the inexpressible groaning.

252 It is almost frightening that it always happens that the descendants
fall away and do not prosper. Where the people of Israel have gone, this
shows and teaches many miseries and misfortunes, as well as the prisons
they have suffered. For the Ishmaelite presumption also affected them.
Because they had the word and the temple, they were safe and did not
fear the fall, and not only sinned freely without any fear, but also
always invented new services. It was the same with the descendants of
Ishmael, who, as we see, were drowned and swallowed up in the glory of
the fleshly birth, for that is why they called themselves Saracens and
not Hagarenes.

But now it cannot be omitted, such a case must follow where this
doctrine is annulled and extinguished, namely, that we are children of
God by grace alone and not by nature. For this concludes very finely
from this cause, that we are children of God by nature.

**[1454 L.V, 14S-1S1. Interpretation of Genesis 21:20, 21. w. 1,
2181-2183. 1455]{.underline}**

t all are children of wrath, Eph. 2, 3. and as the 51st Psalm v. 7.
says, we are conceived in sins, that is that the clot of the seed from
which we are born is corrupted by sin.

254 There are indeed in nature excellent gifts both in the body and also
in the soul; but what does God say about them? \"Man is hay, and his
goodness\" or righteousness \"is like a flower of the field,\" Isa.
40:6. Now where this teaching is not, hearts become puffed up and proud,
and let themselves dream of their own merit, boasting of the blood, the
flesh and the will of the man, as the pope does. For since he has the
office of baptizing, administering sacraments and absolving by the power
of the keys, he boasts that he is the head of the church. But it is in
vain. For although he boasts that he is an heir and successor of the
apostles, he does not have the faith of the apostles, and it follows
that he cannot be a part or member of the church. For children are not
those who are born of the flesh, but those who believe. That he now has
the name of the church, the keys and other gifts, I grant him, but he
does not yet have the Spirit of God.

255 Moses says that Ishmael was a right rabbi or master to shoot with
the bow, that is, a good archer. This is not to be understood as meaning
that he could aim finely and hit with certainty, but that he was a brave
man of war. For in those days they did not use bows, as is done now, for
spectacle and entertainment, but against the enemy; and the Arabs, who
are such warlike people, still use bows today, and no monarch or
potentate has ever been able to overpower and subdue them. For this
reason, the angel said in the 16th chap. V. 12: \"His hand against
everyone, and everyone\'s hand against him. For just as he did not
oppress them all, so he was not oppressed. It may have been his practice
that he first tried it by shooting harbors, deer and birds in the
wilderness, but the text is primarily concerned with how his kingdom was
increased and spread.

Therefore, the descendants of Ishmael fell again into the sin of their
father and forgot how to humble themselves before God. The same will
happen to our descendants. St. Paul says Apost. Hist. 20, 29: \"Out of
yourselves shall arise abominable wolves.\" Thus in our time the
Sacramentalists and Anabaptists arose, who in the beginning accepted our
teachings, but afterwards raved and raged against us as if they were
nonsensical. For Satan practices the same art and the same treachery at
all times. The Saracens, as I have said, boast of Ishmael, and do not
see that such glory has been destroyed by the ban and banishment: they
want to have the honor of their ancestors and not the spirit. So do the
Jews.

But it is decided that the descendants must also have the same spirit,
faith and promise, or they must not be children of God. I must have the
faith and hold fast to the confession that Peter had, or I am nothing,
even if I am already the pope. So the church has various gifts, but it
is one faith, hope and love that holds all believers together in the one
head Christ.

At the end Moses remembers the desert Pharan, so that he may show that
the expulsion was not caused for Ishmael\'s destruction; because Pharan
is located near Beer-saba and Gerar, at the borders of the holy land,
and also borders on the tribe of Judah, as can be seen in the fourth
book of Moses: therefore Ishmael did not live a long way from Abraham\'s
house. Therefore, this close location and neighborhood indicates that
Ishmael was reconciled to his father Abraham and his church, although
the descendants, as it happens, always fell away one after the other.

259\. it is also to be noted that Moses indicates with clear, explicit
words that Ishmael took a wife, and in this he did not follow his will,
but his mother\'s counsel; for the example of all young people, that
they also follow their parents\' counsel and will.

**[1456 V, 151-183. interpretation of I Genesis 21, 20-23. W 1.
2IW-S1SS. 1457]{.underline}**

The angel commanded Hagar to take care of her son, to teach him and to
govern him; therefore, he was commanded by the voice of God to obey his
mother, who gave him a wife. The angel had commanded Hagar to care for,
instruct and govern her son; therefore he was also commanded by the
voice of God to be obedient to his mother, who takes him a wife from
Egypt, and the son follows his mother\'s advice and will as is proper.

This virtue is praised here by the Holy Spirit, and God also gives His
blessing to it according to the promise in the fourth commandment, which
reads: \"That you may live long on the earth,\" Exodus 20:12. Therefore,
we should also know how to remember our office, and not despise the
services of men, which God uses as a means. He wants the children to be
governed according to the counsel and will of their parents: if you are
obedient to them, you are sure that you have been obedient to God
Himself. In the same way, preachers and pastors are appointed in the
church: if you hear them, you hear God Himself. Thus, the authorities
also lead the regiment because of God and by His command. Therefore, it
is Satan\'s masterpiece that he brings such external offices into
contempt.

It is true that the Holy Spirit alone enlightens the heart and kindles
faith, but he does not do this without the outward ministry and the
outward use of the holy sacraments. That is why Paul is commanded to
hear Ananias at Damascus, Acts 9:6. Just as we are commanded to hear the
word in the church, so we should not doubt it in the household: if you
hear the parents commanding or commanding something, you hear God
Himself and are certain of God\'s will. But if you deviate from the
proper office and follow your own delusions and whims, you will not only
be of no avail, but you will also seize and accept Satan for God, and
you will be quite uncertain of your thoughts, whether they come from God
or from the devil.

262\. Therefore, Ishmael now receives a great

and rich reward for his obedience in following his mother\'s counsel and
will in taking a wife. For God blesses him abundantly. On the other
hand, he curses the disobedient, as the examples teach and show, namely,
that in such a marriage, in which the children have entered against
their parents\' will, there is generally neither salvation nor
happiness.

**Fifth part.**

**Of the envy of the Philistines, Abraham\'s oath and covenant with
Abimelech. Item, from Abraham\'s remaining achievements.**

**At that time Abimelech and Phichol, his captain, spoke to Abraham,
saying, \"God is with you in everything you do. Now therefore swear unto
me by God, that thou shalt not be unfaithful unto me, nor unto my
children, nor unto my nephews; but do unto me the mercies which I have
done unto thee, and unto the land wherein thou art a stranger within.**

This is a new temptation, as I have said, that God leads His saints in
this life in such a strange way that one temptation always follows
another. But just as affliction, misery and distress arouse and provoke
to prayer and faith, so also the saints, when they are saved from
distress and affliction, are aroused and caused to give thanks, so that
they praise and extol the grace and mercy of God. Nevertheless, a
distinction must be made between these exercises of faith and faith in
oneself, just as works must always be distinguished from the promise and
faith because of necessity.

**I.**

For this reason, this temptation, which Abraham is being fanned of here,
is a very beautiful and lovely virtue of the devil, namely, envy and
dislike, as a tamed evil, which has always caused a lot of trouble for
pious people in the world. The cause, however, over which this envy
arose

**[1458 L.v. 1S3-155. Interpretation Of Genesis 21, 22. 23. w. 1,
2I8S-21S1. 1459]{.underline}**

The fact is that God had ordered and prepared an inn for Isaac in Gerar,
and that the king had allowed Abraham and given him the freedom to live
wherever he wanted. Because everything is quiet and peaceful, and
Abraham grows and becomes great through the blessing of the Lord, the
Palestinians envy him and begrudge him such happiness as a stranger.
Moses excuses the king, who still remembers his dream and speaks to
Abraham in a friendly manner and honors him as a prophet of God.

265 But the name of Abraham has somewhat increased envy. For the
Palestinians knew well, as the king himself had told them, that Abraham
had been promised the land of Canaan and Christ, the promised seed; and
since this reputation had gone forth throughout the king\'s court and
the surrounding towns of the Palestinians, the Palestinians in
particular did not like him. But when a son was born to him, an old man,
by his wife, an old matron, by an extraordinary miracle, they took it
for granted that this stranger would rule alone in the land of Canaan.

The devil had enough of this cause to be hostile to Abraham, and aroused
the Palestinians, so that they also envied him and became unfavorable.
For this is what the common rabble is wont to do: where they see that
someone is increasing in goods, honor and power, they become hostile and
envious. And when the Palestinians knew from the promise that Abraham
would be heir to the land, they feared on their account, even for the
sake of their children, and sought counsel how they might oppress or
hinder the stranger.

This council was founded by those who were the most distinguished at the
king\'s court. For it is not new that, even though kings and princes are
very pious, the court servants, or, as we call them, the councilors, are
deceitful, envious, unjust, stingy, and full of cunning and lies.
Therefore, what pious princes command and want does not always happen.
Today, our princes still maintain and nourish the

Church, and are favorable to the church servants; but what do those of
the nobility, burghers and peasants do? Is it not true that they hold
one another in contempt and are at enmity with one another for the
ministry? So that the devil always stirs up his members against the
pious, as he immediately began to do in Paradise.

That is why Abraham fights against envy in this place and shows that he
has a strong, undaunted courage. For he knows well that Satan is hostile
to all marriages ordered by God and tends to confuse them. Inexperienced
people think that the marriage state is such a life, in which there is
nothing but vain joy and pleasure; but you will find a lot of sorrow,
misfortune and discontent in it, to which a strong and patient courage
belongs. So you might find a pious farmer who is plagued by the envy of
his neighbors; the foxes and wolves sneak up on his cattle and want to
harm him; the servants are careless, lazy and thieving: here such a
farmer not only has ample opportunity to do good deeds, but also has the
opportunity to learn to be patient.

269\. The same thing happened to the patriarch Abraham: he was happy
that he had a young heir and sought an inn for him; God also blessed him
and made him grow and become rich, adorning him with priestly honor; in
addition, the sermon about the promise of the land of Canaan was spread
over all of Palestine: Therefore the envy is aroused hard, and as will
follow, it has happened daily that they have quarreled and quarrelled
with each other about the water, which he has not been able to get rid
of. But who could enumerate all the mischief that arose anew every day?
For envy and dislike give birth to much inequity and injustice.
Therefore he now departs from Gerar and escapes from envy. Therefore,
such a life, where one does good to everyone, and yet must suffer envy,
hatred, injustice and violence, both from the devil and evil men, is
very pleasing to God.

**[1460 L. V, 155-157. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 22. 23. W. 1,
2191-2194. 1461]{.underline}**

**II.**

270\. As far as history is concerned, it does not seem to me that the
king addressed Abraham by himself or on his own initiative: But the
great henchmen of the court have lain in the ears of the pious king day
and night and urged him that in such danger, if it existed, he would not
snore nor be lazy, and allow the stranger to snatch his kingdom from
him; for that was before his eyes, that he would improve himself, become
rich and strong, and also seek a kingdom,\' I do not know from what
promise. Therefore let king Abimelech be careful how he secures the
kingdom for himself and his descendants\'. But this could not be done in
a better way than by taking an oath from the stranger.

Such advice was given by Phichol, the king\'s captain, and with great
grandiose words, as courtiers are wont to do, he persuaded the king not
to let himself be seen for it, as if he did not respect himself and his
family. For this is the use of the courtiers, when one thinks that they
seek and promote the benefit and piety of their masters most of all, so
they mean what is useful and serves them, so that they may make a great
reputation for themselves.

272 Therefore, because the king does not believe that there is any
deceit hidden among them, or that this advice comes from hatred and
envy, he speaks to Abraham out of a simple heart. I see,\" he says,
\"that you are increasing, and that the promise made to you is being
fulfilled: therefore I beg you not to be harsh or unkind to me and mine.
You came to us as a stranger, we have dealt with you as kindly as we
have always been able: this I also desire of you, if now God will raise
you up, that you will not abort me, my son, my nephew, and you will
confirm this with an oath.

273 The good, pious king understands that he cannot resist the promise,
but because Isaac was already born, he is concerned that the promise
will soon be fulfilled, and he has such fears for him.

He has made it his duty to take care of his descendants so that they
will turn out badly, and for this reason he has caused God to curse the
ungrateful despisers of the word and to give the royal honor to others.
He is therefore satisfied that Abraham spares only his son and nephew.

274 But this history also belongs to us for consolation and teaching;
for we also have our Phicholite courtiers at the present time, who burn
with hatred and envy against the poor church servants, and they also
multiply wherever they can and may, so that they may cut off the ways
and means by which they think that we might increase something. For so
they are wont to say: We have enough, if we have only skirt and head;
therefore one must prevent many causes, so that the church servants do
not become rich. But it will come to pass that what they fear will
happen to them against their will. They now want to spare the poor
Lazarus the crumbs, when before they had turned and heaped all their
money and goods superfluously on the rich man; for they have given
castles and cities to the bishops, and have kept them all too well and
splendidly: but now, when those who teach the people rightly and
faithfully are to be nourished and maintained, they hardly grant them
the crumbs, who would otherwise have to perish.

This is the perverse wisdom of the world, so that it not only brings the
curse upon itself, but also gives cause that, just as before this time
the papal estates increased, so it must also happen today. For the
papacy has grown and become large, since these two causes have come
together, namely, first, that those who were to administer the church
offices were ambitious by nature and got involved in worldly matters;
and secondly, the nobility and other authorities were lazy and
negligent, fled work, waited for their pleasure, and left the care of
the regiment to the church servants. And this will increase the courage
and power of the priests today. For while lords and princes hunt and
devour and

**[1462 2 V, 157-159. interpretation of Genesis 21, 22-24. W. I,
2194-2196. 1463]{.underline}**

If they are not able to drink, gamble, dance, and be short-tempered, and
if they are not able to cope with these things, then the pastors must
finally keep them under control. But if they are thus burdened with
various worldly matters, they must, for necessity\'s sake, lay down the
Bible and abandon the study of the Holy Scriptures; for they cannot wait
on the worldly regiment and the church at the same time.

276 We teach diligently that these offices should be distinguished,
namely, the secular government and the church office, but it is in vain.
Therefore, it is not only the fault of the ambitious bishops that the
clergy are raised so high and increase, but also of the lazy and
negligent authorities, who want to float in honor, as it is fair, but do
not want to work. Because of this, those who are called to administer
the office do not want to do so diligently, and in the regiments there
are nevertheless always deficiencies and infirmities that want help and
advice, but the parish priests and church servants must also take such
care and burdens upon themselves: so such a regiment will finally result
from it, as was the case under the papacy.

For this reason, the authorities should be asked to undergo the work and
effort involved in the regiment, which is to be diligently maintained.
For the world must always have a regiment. One is wronged, another is
afflicted, a third is unjustly reviled: therefore it, being sick, needs
medicine. Where those who are in the secular government are negligent
and do not help, the matter comes to those who are in the ecclesiastical
office; and so the world\'s handiwork and labor have brought the clergy
to such majesty and honor in the church, and in this way the churches
have not only been weakened, but have even fallen into decay. It is said
in the proverb: Only after the damage one becomes wise. It is the same
with our people. Before, they spent too much on the building of the
churches and the bishops, but now they begrudge poor Lazarus even the
crumbs.

Such sin will not go away without great punishment. The good pious
Abraham

He does not desire to have the cities of Palestine, but lets them remain
with their king, that he may be lord over them; but he is gladly content
to have grass and water for himself and his cattle: yea, that is more,
he gives way to your envy, and dwells at Bersaba, which place was hard
by. But the envious courtiers do not want to suffer the same, but want
to have him even down, so that the blessing is hindered, and do not see
that the more willingly and abundantly Abraham helps everyone and does
good, the more he is blessed, but again, the more unwillingly and
meagerly the courtiers give, the more they are cursed.

But so it goes and so it shall go: those who give nothing to the Lord
Christ, who must be a poor beggar in the world, give superfluously to
the rich belly, and those who do not feed the hungry will die of hunger
themselves. I would not like to bring the secular government down on our
necks again; but because the authorities are sleeping securely and
commanding their office to others, the stones must finally cry out where
they are silent, Luc. 19:40. They make the world full of unrighteous
violence and injustice; therefore it is necessary that a diligent
physician come, who can advise and heal such afflictions.

280 Therefore I praise King Abimelech and excuse him that he did not
speak and act with Abraham of his own accord, but that he was driven to
do so by the captain of his court. For it is a sign of piety that he so
humbly asks the stranger to be kind to his own; he does not command him
to go out of the country, but honors him as a priest of God.

V. 24. **Then Abraham said, \"I will swear.**

The fact that Moses clearly says that Abraham swore can be seen as
contrary to the teaching of the gospel and the commandment of Christ.
But this is a necessary example, that Abraham did not refuse to swear;
and it teaches us by such his deed that the saints and the faithful

**[1464 L- V. 159-IM. Interpretation of Genesis 21:24-26. W.
1:219S-219S. 1465]{.underline}**

under the appearance of religion, we should not despise such external
and worldly things; and we should thank the Holy Spirit for describing
the histories of the holy fathers in such a way that they are examples
and models not only of faith and high virtues, but also of obedience in
this temporal life, against the senseless louts in the monasteries, who
express all friendliness and cheerfulness and in this way want to be
dead to the world, but still live in all kinds of sins and disgraces.
Therefore, Abraham here gives a living testimony against such idiots and
shows that this outward life and worldly order, customs and works do not
displease God.

282 As for the commandment of Christ, when he says Matth. 5, 34: \"But I
say to you that you shall not swear about anything,\" this can easily be
answered, if one considers the causes, which Moses finely shows in this
history. For one can answer rightly and simply that a righteous man or a
believer does not sin, even if he swears, but that he thereby does God
and man a pleasant service. But this becomes clearer from the causes.
For the fact that Abraham swears is the most important reason that the
king told him to do so. For here one does not have to disobey the
commandments of the authorities, as the mad, nonsensical Anabaptists
rave. And so the oath imposed on us by the authorities rhymes with the
commandment of God, who commanded that one should be obedient to the
authorities.

The other reason why he does it is also shown here, namely, that peace
may be established between the king and Abraham\'s household. For thus
says the Scripture Heb. 6:16: \"The oath puts an end to all strife,\"
that is, it puts an end to all strife and contention. Who would say that
this should not be a holy and good work?

But this belongs to the other commandment. For those who swear an oath
to the authorities honor the name of God and adorn the truth, but they
cancel out suspicion with it. Therefore, pious people do well when they
bear witness to the truth by taking an oath; but the wicked do nothing
at all.

right. For this title always clings to them, that they are people whose
hearts always want the wrong way, as the 95th Psalm v. 10 says.
Therefore we answer the question thus: Those who swear easily and in
vain and do not defend the truth, whose oath is made out of abundance
and misery, is also evil and unjust; but where one serves the truth with
the oath. But where the oath serves the truth, so that friendship and
unity may be preserved among the people, it is useful and good that one
swears right there; and thereby the name of God is not reviled, but
honored, namely, so that God may be feared and peace and unity may
remain among the people.

For this reason, the Lord also guides and governs the holy patriarch
externally, and protects and preserves him against envy, allowing him to
also use common laws and worldly order and custom, and to keep and give
himself according to other people\'s ways, in order to maintain common
peace with them. For the holy scripture is not against philosophy and
worldly rights or laws in this case, but confirms them and makes the
oath, as it were, a special sacrament; for it is connected with the name
of God, and belongs to it, that by it the hearts of the people may be
reconciled, and quarrels and suspicion may be abolished.

V. 25, 26: **And Abraham chastised Abimelech for the well of water,
which Abimelech\'s servants had taken by force. And Abimelech said, I
knew not who had done this thing, neither didst thou tell me, neither
didst I hear it, but to day.**

Here we have another example from the external and worldly life. Of the
authorities and their office, honor and obedience, we have written
enough; for it is certain that the gospel does not abrogate or forbid
the worldly rights and obedience owed to the authorities. Therefore it
is not only an impertinent thing of our adversaries, but it is also a
great wickedness that they accuse us as if we should be rebels, when our
books and writings teach and testify to the contrary.

287: So how do we want to get rid of the abra-

**[1466 V, 18I-I6S. Interpretation of Genesis 21, 25. 26. W. 1,
2ISS-2202. 1467]{.underline}**

ham, who is regarded in this place as one who does not deal with the
king as his royal majesty should? because he punishes him as if he had
not kept the covenant; yet the pious God-fearing king persists in his
piety, and truly testifies that he knows nothing of all that had
happened against Abraham. One could say that he had appealed to the king
for help and had done so without any evil desire, but such an excuse is
somewhat weak. Therefore, they are rather examples of this common life.
For though we may all fail and fall short in some ways, yet such faults
are forgiven the pious.

Abraham allowed himself to be deceived into thinking that it had
happened with the king\'s knowledge and by his command that the well of
water had been taken from him against the covenant they had made with
each other. So he also ran up there when he said that Sarah was not his
wife but his sister, Gen 20:2. But he did not intend to sin with his
will, but did it out of fear and terror. It would have been better if he
had not punished the king in this way, but since he is troubled by
suspicion, he cannot think otherwise, because the king must know about
it. And truly the authorities should not be so negligent in their office
that they should not know where their subjects do wrong. For although a
pious and God-fearing authority cannot know everything its subjects do,
but must not know many things, it is still not free from sin.

Yes, you say, I can hear that they are both guilty of this: Abraham
because of the suspicion he had, and that he punished the king a little
more severely than was due; and the king because he did not wait for his
office as diligently as he should have done? Yes, this is true; for God
wants us to be sinners, so that we do not become hopeful and proud, but
should sing with David from Ps. 19:13: \"Lord, forgive me my hidden
faults;

item: \"Who can tell how often he is absent?\" And it is good and useful
for you to know that you have such a ministry, since it is impossible
for you to do it enough at all times. Those who think otherwise and are
of a different mind become hopeful and proud, and by their hopefulness
they run hard and hardly sin. But this is what those are wont to do who
are newcomers and are just coming into the reign. For they, like the
inexperienced marksmen, often miss the mark by a long way.

For this reason, it is not the will of a pious authority that it would
like to harm anyone; it directs all its advice so that it may be useful
and serve its subjects. But her servants and advisors, who must help her
in the regiment, because they, the rulers themselves, are not able to
carry out so much business alone, do much in the name of their masters,
who, if they knew it, would not suffer such things. Thus the servants
also sin in many ways, of which the lord often knows nothing.

The same thing happens to the saints. They are not only challenged and
plagued with punishments and much persecution, but also often fall into
great misfortunes, so that they fall and err. But one must learn that
they will not be lost because of this, if only their will is pure and
good, and that they are not lazy and negligent in their office. For if
the common subjects cannot live without sin, much less will those who
are in authority be able to do so. But let every man take heed that
there be no evil in him, and that he be not ignorant of the things which
he ought in his office to know. So Abraham appeals to the authorities
for help, but with a penalty. For he thinks: This king should rule in
such a way that he would have obedient servants, who would faithfully
and firmly keep the blind and contract that he has established with
others. 2c. There was truly no ill will.

We learn, however, that this is still the case today at the courts of
the princes. It has often happened to me, because I have obtained
something from the prince with good graces, that the court servants, the
phicholites, have come to this.

**[1468 V. 163. 1\". Interpretation of Genesis 21:25, 26. w. 1,
2SV2-2A\". 1469]{.underline}**

and prevented what the prince himself had commanded from being done. For
this reason, we common subjects cannot avoid and prevent all sins, so
much the more diligently must we pray for the authorities, for they have
a large body, whose members are unruly and full of all kinds of errors.

293 But about this little sin, which Abraham did by casting suspicion on
the king, this text is also to be remembered against the Anabaptists,
namely, that Christians may well call upon their authorities for help
where injustice or violence is done to them by others. It would be good
for the authorities to do for themselves what is their duty, and not to
wait until they are called upon for help. But there are few of them who
do this, and it takes a lot of effort and work to get them to protect
those who are offended and to abolish injustice with many complaints,
petitions and pleas.

294 Such rulers are among those of whom I have said that though they
desire honor and obedience, they rejoice and are pleased to be called
gods; but when you look at and consider their manners and lives, they
are devils and tyrants, who not only have such sin upon them that they
are not diligent in their office, but are also laden with many sins
because of their persons.

Abimelech was not such a ruler, who sins out of ignorance. Such a sin
should be excused, and it should be made low with prayer before God and
not so highly exalted, much less should it cause a riot. Abimelech sins
not only as a man, but also as a ruler; for he cannot know what his
servants or subjects are doing in all places, and yet this is a sin
before God, namely, that no one should be hopeful and proud. For this
reason, I compare this sin with the sins that were committed against the
Law of Moses, or rather against the outward ceremonies of the Law. But
this is our consolation, that we do not think that the holy men are such
lumps as in the

The first is that they had been in monasteries, dumb and without all
sense and understanding, and had not felt any infirmities in themselves
at all. For these afflictions, as we see in them, indicate that they
were men, and that they had affections and aberrations like ourselves.
They may have been spiritual, but they still lived in the flesh.

The fact that Abraham appeals to the king for help because of the water
well that was taken from him is a clear example that we may also seek
help from the authorities and make use of their protection, which the
laws and court regulations in every place frequently and customarily
allow us. But where the authorities do not help us, we shall suffer
injustice. But we should know that even pious rulers often sin. For
though they may not lack good will, they often lack understanding;
though in many the will is also somewhat weak, yet they are to be held
in honor and their infirmities tolerated. But in those who are found to
have a perverse evil will, wickedness should be condemned and they
should be punished for it.

297 Abimelech excuses himself very finely and says: \"I did not know it,
I did not hear it, also you did not announce it to me. For a pious,
godly authority is not angry when it is admonished, but desires to be
informed by its subjects when something has been sinned against or done
wrong, for how can it know what is happening everywhere? But that there
are proud rulers who are angry when their subjects report something or
admonish them, as if it were a disgrace not to know something, they
little realize how it is with them, they never humble themselves before
God, nor do they call upon him and ask that he forgive them such sin.

But, as I have said, ignorance of authority is such a sin that it can
neither avoid nor prevent, and the same sin is inherent in authority,
just as evil desire is inherent in all men, without which certainly no
one can live. Therefore, let every man have his own

**[1470 k. V, 184-166. interpretation of I Genesis 21, 25. 26. w. 1.
220S-2207. 1471]{.underline}**

For it will follow that they will also humble themselves and not only
call upon God for help, but also ask Him for forgiveness of their hidden
sins.

That is why Bernard writes very finely to Pope Eugenius. You must, he
says, not know many things, and with many things that you know well, act
as if you did not know them. Ignorance is an error of the will, through
which we tolerate and suffer what we do not like. Abimelech is indeed a
king, but he does not know everything that his subjects do. For this is
not the praise of man, but of God alone, who knows everything and cannot
be deceived. Such praise is attributed to the hopeful tyrants, who do
not want to be tempted.

300 Therefore it should be known that God Himself, and then also the
law, has commanded that we should report to the authorities when
something has been publicly sinned against. For as the authorities sin
through ignorance, so do the subjects sin when they do not report the
wrong they know about. Therefore Abimelech again puts the blame on
Abraham for not telling him sooner what his court servants had done
wrong to him. And in truth Abraham is also to some extent to blame.
However, his anger and movement, which he had, was not entirely unjust.
He has seen that the minds of kings are strange and unstable and can
easily be changed, for they are in a wondrous office and the things they
govern are changeable. Since the court servants had done him wrong and
violence, he could not avoid the suspicion that the king should also
know about the matter. So they are both humiliated: Abraham because of
his suspicion and that he did not report to the king that he had been
offended; Abimelech because he did not know this. For in order that
Abraham might not have let the king err and do wrong, he ought to have
admonished him fairly; such is a work of love. Therefore Abimelech
complained that Abraham had not told him, and that he had not heard from
anyone else.

301\. help god! how is it but today\'s

It is a perverse thing that almost all subjects deny the authorities
this necessary service. For if someone reports a sin to the authorities,
he is immediately scolded by all for being a traitor, and this sin of
not reporting anything to the authorities is praised and considered a
great virtue. For what is an authority or ruler to do here if you refuse
to report to him what has happened? he need not know. Is it not true
that he is presumed innocent and well excused?

However, God wants him to be afflicted with the sin of ignorance, so
that he may know that he does not rule alone, which is impossible for a
man because of the sin of ignorance; but that he may have only a part of
it, and know God as the one who rules over all in general. For it is he
who has the common and whole eye, and sees all things, and is nothing
that he should not know. But however good and pious the authorities are,
they have only half an eye. Therefore one should help it, and where
someone sins publicly, everyone should run to it, as one runs when a
fire has gone out, so that one may help to extinguish it; for everyone
is obliged to help the common good in his measure.

Thus the Holy Spirit describes the saints according to what they do and
suffer, namely, that they have followed the outward and common usage of
other men, have sworn to the authorities and called upon them for help;
have also not only suffered injustice and violence from other people,
but, that I may speak thus, have also borne their own guilt and
ignorance, namely, that they had cause to pray: O dear Lord God,
hallowed be thy name! for why dost thou make me a ruler, a preacher,
when thou knowest well that I cannot do thy will enough? but be thou my
helper, and let thy holy angels also be with me: but wilt thou humble my
proud mind in this way, that I should not be like unto thee, who art
righteous, and knowest all things 2c.

**[1472 L. v, 1SS-I6S. Interpretation of Genesis 21:25-32. W. i,
2207-2210. 1473]{.underline}**

This is a noteworthy text, how one should call upon the authorities for
help, and report to them where robbery and other misdeeds occur:
although few keep this last piece. For no one wants to incur the envy of
neighbors, nobles and powerful people. But it must certainly be
considered that the authorities are in great need of this service of
ours, for otherwise they cannot carry out their office. But if you have
reported to the authorities the injustice or violence that has happened
to you, and you are still not helped by them, you must bear the damage
and know that you are not to blame, but have done what you were obliged
to do. But the authorities who are negligent in their office will not
escape punishment.

**(v.27-32) And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto
Abimelech, and they made a covenant together. And Abraham set apart
seven lambs. And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What are these seven lambs
which thou hast set apart? And he said, Seven lambs shalt thou take from
mine hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this
well. Therefore the name of the place is called Bersaba, because they
swore with each other there. So they made the covenant at Bersaba. Then
Abimelech and Phichol, the captain of his army, arose and returned to
the land of the Philistines.**

The Holy Spirit continues to describe the course and life of the holy
patriarch. Covenants and agreements made with others are not works done
to God, for which he has need, but are works of temporal things, which
concern only men, though the saints also deal with them. Now if anyone
desires to know how Abraham conducted himself in worldly matters, let
him study this history diligently. He does not flee from worldly works,
does not refuse the oath, he holds the king in honor, calls him for help
2c. And the king, as a God-fearing man who loved the prophet of God,
also swears to him willingly. Finally, they both confirmed the oath, as
if with a seal.

Abraham gives the king sheep and cattle; the king does not despise his
gift, and the covenant is confirmed by this as by a seal, not as it is
now used, that one makes long letters, for which one uses many words.
These two are satisfied on both sides that they swear as they have
spoken the words to each other; then a sign is added, namely, the gift.

This simplicity, which the ancients kept in their dealings and
contracts, is very sweet, and reminds us that we see how much customs
have declined in this evil age of ours, in which there is no more
faithfulness or belief: no contracts are kept, and neither manuscripts,
letters, nor seals help for this, but all contracts are broken with
cunning, and by force are broken up and disbanded.

307 Abraham does two things: first, he gives the king sheep and cattle;
then he gives him seven lambs in particular: not that the king needed
such a gift, but Abraham wants to testify publicly before all the
king\'s subjects that this well was made with his work.

In the law the gifts are forbidden, because therefore the text says in
the 2nd book of Moses at the 23rd Cap. V. 8: \"You shall not take
gifts\"; item Deut. 16, 19: \"Gifts blind and corrupt the judges. In the
writings of the pagans, gifts are also punished and condemned, as they
cause great harm to the regiments. How then shall we excuse Abraham, who
gave gifts, and the king, who took them? To this I answer, as above:
Everything that a godly man does, he does right, even if he errs or
lacks; for he has a simple good heart, which is what God looks to above
all. On the other hand, if an ungodly man does such a work, which is
good in itself, it is not pleasing to God, because he errs in his heart,
that is, he does not recognize, believe and fear God.

But here one must also consider the final cause, why the gifts are given
and what one seeks primarily with it.

**[1474 D v. 168-170. interpretation of Genesis 21:27-32. W. 1.
2210-2213. 1475]{.underline}**

When gifts are given in order to remove suspicion, envy and dissension,
and to establish and maintain friendship and peace, they are rightly
counted among good works. For what evil could the king think of Abraham,
since he is so generously given by him? He has no harm in mind who shows
himself generous to another. Therefore it is honest that you take gifts
from a pious man. For he gives out of a simple, pure heart, not that he
may make you his subject, nor that he may preserve and gain his unjust,
evil cause through you, but that he may thereby preserve friendship
between you and himself. Thus a bridegroom gives gifts to his bride to
testify his love and to win the more her affection. Therefore these are
the highest works, and are also very necessary for this life, that one
gives and receives gifts of this kind. But those who cause dissension
with gifts, or bribe the judge with them and pervert the court, abuse
the gifts. And one should follow the rule that is given to us in the
common proverb: One should not accept all gifts, not from everyone, and
not all the time. For just as it is impolite to refuse to accept gifts
from a good friend, so it is honest to refrain from accepting gifts in
evil matters.

\(310\) That the text speaks of the seven lambs and describes the
ceremonies or pageantry so extensively is for a special reason. The king
is a pious and holy man, but Phichol, his captain, and the rest of his
courtiers are wicked and envious people, miserly, thieving and
rapacious. For the courts of all princes are always tainted with this
unfortunate appendage, that they have Doeg\'s servants, who prevent what
the king has decided and ordered from being done, or who even do the
opposite without the king\'s knowledge. Therefore, Abraham, as a wise
man, wants the reconciliation and treaty established by the king with
the king\'s servants to be respected.

The king has given his consent to the oath, so that the common servants
of the court may be deterred from doing such things without the king\'s
prior knowledge.

311 It is nice to see how Abraham was so polite here. He was not allowed
to explicitly ask or demand that the king swear, for he is a stranger
there, but Abimelech is a king. Because it was therefore impolite that
he should demand an oath from one who was not his equal, he used a
special prudence and courtesy to do so. He puts seven lambs in
particular. Then the king asked him why he was doing this, since the
covenant had already been established between them. Abraham answered and
asked him to take the lambs from his hand: \"Not,\" he said, \"for your
sake, but for the sake of your court servants, namely, Phichol and the
others, who might try to rob you again and thus cause a new quarrel. So
that you may prevent this from happening again, I request that you swear
to me publicly. Although I am not allowed to demand the same from you, I
still ask and request it with these seven lambs as with a rough writing.

312 But one should also notice in this text the Hebrew word sheba, that
it has more than one meaning. For it means both, namely, seven, and also
oath, as in the German language the word hat means both, both head
covering and slit; the word wheel \*) means a rath and also a wheel on
the chariot. So now in this place the word sheba means both: they have
both sworn and, that I speak thus, besiebent. Item, he puts the seven
lambs in particular, thus publicly indicating that although Abraham does
not demand the oath, he nevertheless desires that the king should swear
to him.

313 So he wants to bring about the oath from the king with special
wisdom, by giving a subtle hint, because it was impolite to demand such
from him outright. He

> \*) Wheel. This is how Luther spelled the word \"Rath\". Editor\'s
> note.

**[1476 \".v, 170-172. interpretation of Genesis 21, 27-32. W. i,
2213-221.\" 1477]{.underline}**

He presented him with seven lambs, and since the word sheba means both
seven and oath, Abimelech understood what Abraham\'s will and opinion
was. As if some dumb man came to me and showed me a wheel on a chariot,
I could easily guess that he wanted good advice from me. For the German
word Rad (wheel) means both a wheel on a chariot and also advice, which
one gives to another. In this way Abraham reminds the king of the oath
by the word that means seven. For it would have been an impertinent
thing for him to demand an oath from such a person, who was of higher
rank than he.

314 Hence, I think, this usage has also come among the Germans, that
they are accustomed to have seven witnesses where testaments are made,
and the word \"seven\" is used for a certain testimony. For this is how
we use to say, \"It must be proved to him,\" that is, \"He is so
unbelieving that he will not believe unless he hears seven witnesses
beforehand. Therefore it is a special example of reverence to the
authorities that Abraham deals with the king in such a fine and wise
way, and it is also a special grace to the king that he yields to the
prophet and does not refuse to take the oath, since he was reminded of
it by such a sign and instruction.

It was common among the Egyptians before other peoples that they
indicated and spoke many things through pictures and paintings, as
hieroglyphics are found in Philostrotus. As when they wanted to speak of
the god Jupiter, they painted a scepter, which had an eye on top; as
still now the mathematicians write the name of Jupiter; because the
scepter, because it is straight, meant justice with them, but the eye
meant wisdom and understanding. For where justice does not have the same
eye, injustice is made of it, as the proverb testifies: All-stringent
justice is injustice. Such signs or images were used in the ancient
world.

The fact that these things are described so diligently is part of the
reason that we are learning.

The saints should remember how the holy patriarchs behaved in worldly
and temporal matters, how they showed such reverence to the authorities,
and again how the authorities loved their subjects and behaved so
graciously toward them. And what can be more noble and glorious in this
life than that one has pious authorities, and that the subjects also
hold their princes and rulers dear and valuable. Where this happens,
there is truly paradise, and God has promised to bestow His blessings
there. But if the authorities are blind and evil, and the people are
also evil and unruly, and do not want to be forced and governed, then
everything must be unfortunate.

317 Moses further says that of this covenant the place was called ber
sheba, that is, the seven bruun or well of the oath, which was brought
about and accomplished by the seven lambs. For the word sheba means both
seven and oath.

318 But if these things are thought to be common and worldly or external
things, or however else one wishes, they are nevertheless to be
diligently remembered and are also full of comfort, so that we do not
think, like the Anabaptists, that Christians must renounce and disown
such common works of this life. For God did not create the Church in
such a way that He would have abolished or rejected the domestic or
worldly rule by it, but rather confirms it through it. Therefore
Abraham, the father of the promise and the king of kings on this earth,
did not refuse to take an oath and make a covenant with the king and his
court.

319 Therefore, under the appearance and name that one is a Christian,
one should not refuse to engage in worldly affairs or offices, or avoid
and flee them, as the monks do, who hide themselves in the monasteries
because they do not want to serve anyone. Such are blind people, who are
given to a wrong mind. Therefore they pay no attention to either the
first or the second table. They also receive their just reward for their
wickedness. For because they have taken the trouble and displeasure of
governing the house

**[1478 L. V, 172-174. interpretation of Genesis 21, 27-34. W. 1,
2216-2218. 1479]{.underline}**

If they flee from the worldly and secular offices, they fall into the
most horrible and atrocious sins and disgrace more than other, worldly
people, as they call them.

For this reason, we are to consider the divine ordinances and examples
of the holy patriarch Abraham with a good mind and wisdom, who gives us
an abundant account of all things in the church and presents a true
picture of his piety, not only in the church office as a prophet of God,
but also in the world and household government. For there must be rulers
in this life, and the church was not set up for this purpose, that the
house and world rulers should be destroyed by this, but that such rulers
should be established and confirmed by this. Kings and rulers should not
forget their office, but should be pious, gracious and kind to their
subjects, and their subjects should also be obedient to them. At this
time, one can only wish and desire such things; one cannot have them.
But I am surprised that in this place of Bersaba the Jews have not made
a special idolatry, as it happened in other places where the holy
patriarchs lived. But we should have enough of this teaching for this
time, that we know that the pious serve God, even if they do outward and
vile works.

**III.**

V. 33, 34: **And Abraham planted trees in Babylon, and preached there
the name of the LORD, the everlasting God. He was a stranger in the land
of the Philistines for a long time.**

321 Whenever this is written in Moses, that the patriarchs called upon
the name of the Lord, preached it, or built and erected altars, it
indicates that they had appointed a certain place where God\'s word was
taught and heard. For where the church is to be preserved, one must have
pious princes who accommodate it, and give so much space and peace that
the teaching and the service of God may be spread and propagated. Such a
king was Abimelech at that time, under

in which the house of Abraham, in which the true church and congregation
of God was, had peace and rest, and the word was thus spread among the
Gentiles through Abraham, the true pope or bishop. For wherever he went,
he took the Word, the worship, religion and everything with him.

322 And Moses remembers here again an outward or domestic work, namely,
that Abraham planted trees. For the Hebrew word eschel is a common word,
like the German word \"Baum\" (\"tree\"), so that you do not understand
that he only planted and occupied a garden with fruitful trees, but also
forest trees for the benefit of the cattle.

But why, says a monk here, does Moses describe such mean things? why
does he not rather write of fasting and praying and of hard clothing?
But, as I have often said, Moses does this against the clods in the
monasteries, who despise and abandon the commandments of God, and go
about according to their own chosen religion and worship. Such clods do
not see the commandment of God, since he says Gen. 1, 28: \"Subdue the
earth and build it\". For this is God\'s will, that the earth be planted
and built, not only for the sake of mankind, but also that the cattle
and wild animals may have their food and sustenance thereon.

324\. Therefore this is also an external and worldly work, but it is
also a good and holy work, which not only befits a Christian, but is
also commanded by God that we should build the earth, and with it
provide for ourselves and our descendants according to need, yes, also
provide the cattle and wild animals with their food: that we are not
like the monks, who, like the loose and lazy wasps and caterpillars,
work nothing, but live only from other people\'s work and consume it,
and also shamefully revile those who work by calling this work, which is
commanded by God Himself, a bad layman\'s and farmer\'s work.

325\. it is more holy to Abraham than all the saints are in the New
Testament, and yet it deals with this lay work as well

**[1480 V, 174. 175. interpretation of I Moses 21, 33. 34. cap. 22. W.
1, 22IS-S22S. 1481]{.underline}**

not only for the sake of the strangers who came so that they might have
shade to sit under, as Lyra puts it, but also for the sake of the need
of his house, and especially for the sake of the commandment which says,
\"Subdue the earth and build it. And the third reason is also added,
namely, that when the income is somewhat richer and greater, he could
then also give alms from it and serve the poor with it.

326 Nevertheless, he also does his most noble work, building a temple,
not of stones as we do, but appointing and designating a special place
where he preaches the name of the Lord. This expression means to teach
and preach when the letter d is added to the word schem, name. But if
the letter *b is* not added to the word schem, but is simply put: to
call on the name of the Lord, then it means to pray.

327\) But also in this place the new name of God is to be noted: \"He
preached\", says Moses, \"of the name of the Lord, el olam\", as it is
written in Hebrew, that is, of the God of eternity or of the world. For
the Hebrew word olam also has more than one meaning and means eternity
or world. The word *el,* however, is also applied to the creatures, and
in Moses it is often said of the very best and most delicious fruits,

and commonly interpreted to mean strength.

Therefore it fills me that in this place God is called el olam, as if
one wanted to say, the power and strength of the world, which fills
everything in the world; as the poet says: In Jupiter the muses have
their origin; from Jupiter everything is full. Which saying he will no
doubt have taken from the old tradition of the fathers. For everything
that the world has, exists and is maintained by the divine word; for God
created the world and maintains the world. Therefore, this el olam is
the true God, the power of the world, through whom the world was
created, and everything that it can do, it can do through him.

This name Abraham gives to God, as he has learned from his own
experience; for he has seen that God is with his own with his help, so
that he also directs and judges the heart of the king and his mighty
ones wherever he wills: yes, he who turns the heart of all of them
wherever he wills, as the 33rd Psalm v. 15 says, that is, he gives
counsel to all men and inspires them to do what is right and good.
However, sin is excluded here, which is not conventional in God\'s
sight. We say that all works that are right and good come from him; but
sin is not a work, but a deprivation.

**The twenty-second chapter.**

**First part.**

**How Abraham is tempted by God and ordered to sacrifice his son
Isaac.**

Luther began this chapter on the 27th day of October 1539, since the day
before the respectable and renowned D. Sebaldus Münster of Nuremberg was
buried in the ground and shortly before him two fine young fellows
called Geuders, families of Nuremberg. He has therefore made the
entrance of the lection thus: Their

Do not think that I am reading that I want to keep you all together here
in this time, when there is concern about pestilence and death; but
advise you that if there is pestilence, everyone who wishes to do so
should leave, especially those who are otherwise cowardly and fearful;
for the Holy Scriptures also tell such to leave the camp, so that they
do not make the hearts of the brethren cowardly and timid. I do not
think that one has to worry about a death and a real pestilence at this
time, but I think that if something of this kind happens, it is only
because of great fear. Now follows the interpretation.

**[1482 D.v, 175-177. interpretation of Genesis 22:1. 2. w. i,
2222-222\". 1483]{.underline}**

**After these stories God tempted Abraham and said to him, \"Abraham!
And he answered, Here am I. And he said, Take Isaac thy only son, whom
thou lovest, and go into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a
burnt offering upon a mountain which I will tell thee.**

\(2\) In the previous chapter, we heard about the greatest trials that
Abraham faced when he had to cast out his son Ishmael; when he was cast
out, he had good peace under King Abimelech. Soon after that, however,
another temptation came, which was very great, while the previous
temptations were nothing. So the holy scripture agrees with itself
everywhere, and describes the right, true children of God in this way,
that they have been well exercised and tempted for and for, so that they
have both done much hard work and also suffered much, but without all
appearance and splendor of the ceremonies. This shows what the good
fruits of a good tree are, for they walk in right obedience to God and
in right love toward men, and yet they are always assailed with various
temptations and dangers.

3 Because Abraham is the noblest and greatest of the holy patriarchs, he
must also suffer true patriarchal affliction, which his descendants
could not have suffered nor endured. He is now quite happy and of good
courage, and is also carefree; for Isaac, the son of the promise, is now
grown and tall, and is now about one and twenty years old, and so strong
in body that he was able to carry a load of wood that was needed for the
burnt offering.

004 For this cause both his parents loved him dearly, because he was
born to them in their old age, and had the divine promise of the future
blessing of the whole world; and for this cause both of them were very
merry, and were at peace with one another in the house, after Ishmael
was cast out, and were at peace without the house, and were reconciled
to the king, and sought to do as they had done unto the king.

See, these beautiful suggestions and \"most lovely\" thoughts, how they
would like to make a husband out of their son, are overturned and
prevented with a single word, because the Lord commands that Abraham
himself should take his son and sacrifice him.

Therefore Abraham\'s heart was wounded much more severely than it was
above (Cap. 21, v. 14) when he had to cast out Ishmael. But we cannot
reach nor understand how great and severe this challenge was. The reason
is that Isaac had the promise of the future blessing, which is why this
commandment to Abraham to kill him was so much more difficult and so
much more grievous to him.

6 But in this text the word \"try\" is to be considered particularly.
For it is not placed in the text for nothing. One should not treat it as
coldly as St. James does in his epistle Cap. 1, 13, where he says that
no one is tempted by God. For the Scripture clearly says here that
Abraham was tempted by God Himself, not because of a woman, gold or
money, nor because of death or life, but because of the contradiction of
the Scriptures. For God is obviously speaking against Himself here. For
how does it rhyme that he says to him Gen. 21, 12: \"In Isaac shall be
called thy seed\", and: \"Take thy son and sacrifice him\" 2c. He does
not say that a highwayman will come and take his son away secretly, for
Abraham could still have hoped that his son would still be alive and
that he would finally receive him again, but now he is commanded to kill
him himself, so that he should not doubt that he has truly been killed.

Should he not have grumbled and thought against God here? This will not
be God\'s commandment, but is a deception of the wicked devil; for
God\'s promise is certain and clear, that in it he cannot doubt, since
he says: \"You shall take seed from Isaac.

**[1484 V. 177-I7S. Interpretation of Genesis 22:1, 2. W. I. 2226-2228.
1485]{.underline}**

have.\" How is it then that God now commands that he be killed? No doubt
he will be sorry that he has made such a promise to me, for otherwise he
would not speak against himself: or else I must have committed some
great sin, so that I have greatly angered God, that he must now revoke
his promise.

\(8\) For this is what we all do by nature: if we are oppressed by a
physical need, our conscience is soon there, which the devil always
urges and drives to read all kinds of circumstances together. Therefore,
such an anxious and distressed heart looks around and thinks where it
might have angered God the most. Hence it comes that one grumbles
against God, and from this also comes the highest temptation, namely,
that one becomes hostile to God in his heart.

\(9\) So Abraham also thought, \"Behold, God has promised me a son and
has also given him to me, therefore I have rejoiced over this with all
my heart and have been born again, as it were; but perhaps I have become
too proud and hopeful because of these gifts, and have not been as
grateful to God for them as I should have been; for this reason he now
regrets his promise.

\(10\) This challenge cannot be overcome, and is also much greater than
that we could comprehend and understand it. For it is a contradiction
that God contradicts Himself, which is impossible for the flesh to
understand; for it must necessarily think: Either God is lying, which
thought is blasphemy; or God is hostile to me, which gives cause for
despair. Therefore, one cannot sufficiently explain this text according
to the nature of such a great and important matter.

\(11\) We are also often challenged with heavy thoughts of despair. For
what man is there who can refrain from these thoughts, so that he
thinks, \"How if God did not want you to be saved? But we should learn
from this that in such a struggle of our thoughts and conscience we
should take hold of the promise made to us in Holy Baptism, which is
certain and clear. But when this happens, we hear

But because of this, Satan does not give up as soon as he has left you,
but contradicts you in your heart, saying that you are not worthy of the
same promise.

\(12\) For this an earnest and fervent prayer is necessary, that God may
give us his Spirit, that the promise may not be wrested from us and
taken away. I cannot resolve this contradiction, but this is our only
consolation, that in our distress and affliction we have recourse to the
promise; this alone is our rod and staff, to which we must hold fast. If
Satan takes it from our hands, we have nowhere to go. But we must hold
fast to the promise, and take it for certain that we shall be tempted of
the Lord, as the text says of Abraham; not that he would have it so in
truth, but that he would try us, whether we also love him above all
things, and can bear his wrath, as we gladly bear it, when he doeth us
good, and giveth us his promise.

13\. Thus Abraham could not believe that he would not be tempted;
otherwise he would have remained certain of the promise and would have
thought that God would do as parents sometimes do when they tempt their
children, and take the apple or something else that is dear to them from
their hands and give it back to them immediately: But since God commands
Abraham to take his son and kill him, he leaves him no hope that the son
will be restored to him, but rather simply leads Abraham to such
thoughts and doubts that he must think that God is against himself, and
he who before showed himself to be Abraham\'s highest friend now shows
himself to be his enemy and a tyrant.

\(14\) Therefore, Abraham is tried even more severely than the virgin
Mary, because she lost her beloved son in Jerusalem; for even though she
thought that she would thus be punished, because she had not preserved
her son diligently enough, she nevertheless had the hope that he would
still be alive. Here, however, God, who had given Abraham a son,
commands that the father himself should kill the son and sacrifice him.

**[14862- V. 17S-181. interpretation of I Genesis 22, I. 2. w. 1,
2228-2231. 1487]{.underline}**

What hope could the poor father have? He truly could not understand that
he would only be tempted with this, and that God would not have spoken
such things from his heart; as we raise ourselves up and comfort
ourselves with the thought, namely, that even though God may be seen to
be angry with us, he is not hostile to us, nor does he want to reject
us, but at times, as Isaiah Cap. 28, 21, and pretends to be angry with
us, so that he may kill the mind and spirit of the flesh, which is
against God; as Job says, \"Though he slay me, yet will I hope in him,\"
for he is sure that God thinks otherwise and is not angry in truth.

\(15\) Therefore all these things are written for our comfort, that we
may learn to hold fast the promises which we have. I have been baptized,
so I must surely believe that I have been transferred from the kingdom
of Satan to the kingdom of God. Another has entered the married state,
where he is confronted with all kinds of unpleasantness and
difficulties, as he is wont to do: therefore he should look at the
fourth commandment and consider that this state is pleasing to God, for
he has commanded that one should honor one\'s parents, and thus
indicates that this state is pleasant and pleasing to him.

\(16\) We should do the same in all other temptations. For if we find
out that things are different from the promise, we should consider it
certain that if God shows Himself to be different from what He promised
in the promise, it is only a temptation; therefore, we should not let
this rod of promise be taken out of our hands.

\(17\) Nearly all men are afflicted with despair, and the more pious
they are, the more often they are shot with this arrow by Satan. What
else should you do here but say: I know that I have been baptized and
that God has promised me grace for the sake of His Son. The promise will
not become a lie to me, even if I am thrown into utter darkness.
Therefore, this is not God\'s will, which Satan holds against me.

But God is tempting me so that it may be revealed what is hidden in my
heart; not that God does not know it without this, but that I myself do
not know it, and that through this cause He may crush the head of the
serpent in me; for the heart of man is unsearchable, Jer. 17, 9.And man
with such a carnal mind does not understand this, because only through
the word of the law the head of the serpent is killed, so that we are
made alive; as the Scripture says: \"God leads into hell and out
again\", 1 Sam. 2, 6.

\(18\) Now I have said what Abraham\'s temptation was, namely, that the
promise was against himself; therefore his faith shines forth most
gloriously in that he so willingly obeys God, who commands him to
sacrifice his son to him. And even though it is for Isaac and he is to
be killed, Abraham does not doubt the fulfillment of the promise, even
though he does not know in what way it will be fulfilled. Although he is
frightened and fearful (for how could a father do otherwise in such a
case?), he nevertheless clings firmly to the promise, namely, that Isaac
will still have seed.

Human reason would simply conclude: Either the promise must lie, or this
must not be God\'s commandment, but the devil\'s; for it is obvious that
there is a contradiction here. For where Isaac is to be killed, the
promise is in vain and in vain; but where the promise is certain and is
to stand, it is impossible that this should be God\'s command.
Otherwise, I say, reason cannot conclude; as the examples show even in
minor matters.

\(20\) The sacramentarians also say that this is contrary to one
another, that Christ says, \"Take this is my body,\" and that we say in
our faith, \"He is seated at the right hand of God\"; therefore they
conclude and say that only bread and wine are distributed in the Lord\'s
Supper, and not the true body and blood of Christ.

[**1488 L. V, 181. 182. interpretation of I Moses** 22, 1. 2. **W. I,
2231-2234. 1489**]{.underline}

Because Christ distributes his flesh in the Lord\'s Supper, his flesh is
not in the Lord\'s Supper. This is called falling into the holy
scriptures with unwashed feet and following the blind judgment of
reason.

\(21\) Abraham does not depart from the promise, although there is an
obvious contradiction, for there is no middle ground between death and
life, but believes that even if his son dies, he will still have seed.
We are also to learn this. Yesterday we buried our very dear friend D.
Sebaldus, for which reason it seems as if he were dead: but we know that
he lives; for since he is different in the right faith and confession of
the Son of God, and God, as Matth. 22, 32. says, is a God of the living
and not of the dead, he certainly lives. In this way Abraham holds fast
to the promise, and ascribes this power to the divine majesty, that he
would raise his dead son again. Just as he had seen before how he was
born of a dead body and of a barren mother, so he believed that he would
be raised again, even if he had already been buried and turned to ashes,
that he might still have seed from him; as the epistle to the Hebrews
says Cap. 11, 19: \"God is able to raise even the dead and make them
alive.\"

\(22\) Therefore Abraham well understood the article of the resurrection
of the dead, and by this alone he resolved this contradiction, which
otherwise cannot be resolved: for which cause his faith is justly
praised by the prophets and apostles. For he thought thus: Today I have
a son, but tomorrow I shall have nothing but ashes; and how long the
same shall lie scattered, I know not; but this I know, that it shall
live again, whether in my lifetime, or a thousand years after my death:
for the word saith, I shall have seed of this Isaac, which shall be
ashes.

23\. however, I have said that we should not

We cannot reach or understand it, but only see it from a distance and
think about it a little. But you can see that nothing is being said here
about any work, as Jacobus says in his epistle Cap. 2, 21; for it has
not yet come to works, but it is faith of which we justly marvel and
glory in Abraham.

\(24\) For this reason, one should keep this comfort, namely, that God
does not change what He has once said. Therefore, since you have been
baptized and since the kingdom of God is promised to you in baptism, you
should know that it is such a word of God that cannot be changed, and
you should not let yourself be led away from it; for it may well happen
that he presents himself, as with those who went to Emmaus, Luc.
24:28.For though it may happen that he appears, as in the case of those
who went to Emmaus, Luc. 24:28, as if he were going on his way, and lets
himself be seen to act and deal with us, as if he had forgotten his
promise, yet one should hold fast to the word with faith and always
insist on the promise, namely, that it is true and cannot fail, even
though we do not know the manner, time, occasion, place, and other
circumstances; for this is certain in all things and is not lacking,
that God cannot lie.

\(25\) When I am killed, I see the manner and circumstances in which my
life perishes, but I do not see the circumstances by which my life is to
return, nor do I see the time or place; why then do I believe that I see
nowhere? Because I have the promise and the word of God, I will not
suffer myself to lose hope, or to doubt the inheritance that is Christ,
through whom we are adopted as children of God.

026 Abraham had hitherto thought that his son Isaac would take a wife,
and beget children in the place where he was at that time: but all this
is lost; for it is the commandment of God that he should kill his son.
Even though the circumstances of the place and time have fallen away,
Abraham did not doubt the matter; he knows that his son will have seed
even after a thousand years.

**[1490 L. V, 182-184. interpretation of Genesis 22, I. 2. W. I,
2234-2237. 1491]{.underline}**

\(27\) And are such trials or temptations of the holy patriarch held
against us, that we may learn courage in our temptations, and say with
Abraham, Though my son Isaac die, yet, because he believeth in God, the
sepulchre wherein his ashes shall lie shall not be a sepulchre, but a
bed of rest and a chamber of sleep. Nevertheless, reason says, we see
the contradiction: the flesh passes away and becomes dust, and the worms
consume it. But still God\'s word can neither hinder nor cancel this;
for the two things are connected, that God says to Adam Gen. 3, 19:
\"You are earth, and shall become earth,\" and that he also says v. 15:
\"The seed shall bruise the serpent\'s head.\"

\(28\) The Jews say here of four revelations, which did not happen at
the same time, as Lyra says, to indicate the great obedience and the
great power of faith. But there is no need for such subtlety here, for I
believe that all these things happened at the same time and at once. God
the Lord does not say: your servant or maidservant, not: Ishmael, but:
\"this your own son Isaac, whom you love.\" With this he makes the
commandment harder and heavier. As if to say, \"You will not be the
father of such a son from now on, nor will you have such a son whom you
love; for I will have you sacrifice him to me, not as you used to
sacrifice the other firstborns you kept, but you will slaughter him.

29 Therefore Abraham has nothing more of the promise than before Isaac
was born; and yet he is willing to leave for God\'s sake not only his
son, his wife, his inheritance, his house and the church, but also his
own life. For all this includes Isaac\'s death, since the promise hung
on him.

30 The text does not say whether Sarah knew anything about this
commandment or not. Abraham may have concealed such a thing from her
because she was a little weak and could not have endured such a harsh
storm. For it is a hard and difficult thing

The thing that the text says, \"You shall offer your son to me,\" not
for an offering or thanksgiving, as the firstborn was used to be offered
in the people of Israel, but for a burnt offering, that he might be
turned to ashes, and that the father might stain and defile his hands
with his son\'s blood.

\(31\) But what do you think Abraham would have felt here in his heart?
For he had flesh and blood and, as I have often said, was not an unkind
man who had no natural inclination, compassion and soft heart. However,
it must have increased his pain that he was not allowed to reveal this
deed to anyone, otherwise everyone would have told him against it, and
the large number of people who would have told him against it might also
have moved him somewhat. Therefore, he sets out alone with some servants
and his son. It is truly a high, difficult commandment, and much harder
than we can imagine; and yet it is nevertheless full of consolation that
the text clearly says that God does this only as a trial. If Abraham had
known this, he would have been the less worried: but now he is
completely engulfed in the thought that his son must truly be sacrificed
and strangled, and that the promise will be fulfilled when and in what
form it will be fulfilled.

032 The LORD appointed and appointed him a certain place for it, without
his house, in the land of Moriah. The land is about ten German miles
from Bersaba, where geographers do not lie: that is almost three days\'
journey. For he went with a donkey, which had to carry the wood and
provisions; therefore they also went a little slower.

33 Now Moriah, as it is written in the other book of Chronicles, Cap. 3,
v. 1. V. 1, is the mountain that was near Mount Zion, where Solomon
built the temple, in the midst of the city of Jerusalem, toward the
north, as the city descends. This mountain gave the name to the whole
land, and it was called the land of Moriah. And even today the Turks
call the mountain by the same name and hold it in great honor. As it is

**[1492 L. v, 184-iss. Interpretation of Genesis 22, 1. 2. W. i,
2237-2239. 1493]{.underline}**

still often comes that a mountain or place gives the name to a whole
country; as the whole Saxony has the name of the castle Sachsenburg. So
also at the time of the mountain Moriah the same whole country was
called Moriah, in it Jerusalem was situated, which at that time Salem,
item, also Zebus was called, and the patriarch Sem ruled over it.

34 But the word moriah is written with a double *i*. And the Hebrews
dispute very precisely about the origin of this word. Jerome has not
taken it here as a proper name: Vade, in terram visionis (Go to the land
of seeing). But this etymology is rejected by all teachers, as it does
not agree with the grammar. Others say that this word takes its name
from the word myrrha, and that moriah means: myrrha mea dominus, the
Lord is my myrrh, that there he should have myrrh, that is, his worship;
for there grew myrrh and frankincense, from which they made the incense.
And this is true; for the word *mor* is as much as myrrha; *i is the*
enclitic pronoun *mea*, my; but *jah* is the words one, so that GOD is
called.

\(35\) Though I do not dispute this etymology and characteristic of the
word Moriah, I do not follow it, especially for the reason that the
Jews, according to their ways, have accepted only the outward worship of
the incense, but the right and inward worship they do not understand,
nor do they keep.

\(36\) Therefore it seems to me that it is better for those who say that
moriah comes from the word jarah, which means to teach; therefore the
law is also called thorah, which may also be called an instruction or
teaching. So that the meaning of this word is: moriah, that is, the Lord
who teaches, because on the mountain God teaches and is heard there; as
the prophets say: \"From Zion the law will go out, and the Lord\'s word
from Jerusalem\", Is. 2, 3. This etymology seems to me to be finer and
more convenient to the understanding and grammar; however, I do not
subject myself to any mastery in this language, fall in this also

no judgment. And Burgensis is here also one with me; for he has given it
in Latin thus: Doctor, seu docens me Dominus, the Lord who teaches me.

37 The third etymology pleases me the most, but I do not reject the
others. For they say that morijah comes from the word jare, which means
to fear. For there are testimonies throughout the Scriptures that to
fear God means as much as to serve God. For fearing God and serving God
coincide and point one to the other. For God does not respect the myrrh
or the smoke if there is no fear of God with it. This is what the Holy
Scripture urges most everywhere, namely, that we be obedient to the word
of God; as it says in the prophet Jeremiah in the 7th Cap. V. 22, 23:
\"I did not tell your fathers the day I brought them out of Egypt, nor
command them burnt offerings and sacrifices; but this I commanded them,
saying, Obey my word, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people:
and walk in all the ways that I command you, that it may go well with
you.

38 Therefore, the honor and fear of God is the right true worship that
is pleasing to Him. For if Abraham had killed his son out of his own
foolish zeal and contempt for the word of God, as King Ahaz did, it
would have been myrrh, that is, a hard and bitter sacrifice that hurts
the heart; but God does not look at the outward work, but at the heart:
if it is righteous and fears God, then everything that man does pleases
God.

39 Therefore I believe that this word moriah actually means the honor
and fear of God. Therefore also Isa. 29, 13, where according to the
Hebrew text it says: \"They fear in the commandments of men\", the
seventy interpreters, as Christ also states Matth. 15, 9, gave: \"In
vain do they serve me, because they teach such doctrines, which are
nothing but the commandments of men. In the same prophet Isaiah Cap. 11,
v. 2. the service of God is also called \"the spirit of fear\", that is,
of the service of God. So both the land and also the mountain

**[1494 V, 138-188. interpretation of I Moses 22, 1. 2. w. 1, 22M-2A2.
1495]{.underline}**

had the name of the right true worship, which is nowhere but where God
Himself teaches.

\(40\) And it may be considered true that the Jews say that Adam, Abel
and Noah also sacrificed in the same place. Certainly Shem had his seat
or dwelling place there, from which the true service of God was spread
throughout the world. With it also that is correct, which we have said,
that before the Flood the paradise was around this country, and since
Adam was pushed out of the paradise, he lived with the mountain Morija.
For this reason this place was famous before the Flood for the worship
of God, and has remained famous until Christ. For after the sending of
the Holy Spirit, the gospel was spread from the same place into the
whole world, and neither the service of God nor the church itself has
been established in the same narrow corner of the Jewish land.

41\. Therefore I gladly follow those who think that Mount Moriah has its
name from the Hebrew word that means to fear God, to serve and honor
God: as if one wanted to say in German, Heiligstadt, a holy place, the
house of the Lord, because this place has been a temple and house of God
from the beginning of the world and was thus honored by Adam and Noah
themselves, and also the highest patriarch Shem dwelled there: As today
is Moriah, as far as the world is, as also Jerusalem, that is, God is
now worshipped and honored not only in a certain and appointed place,
but over the whole world, where there is only a gathering of God-fearing
people.

\(42\) How God revealed the commandment that Abraham should kill and
sacrifice his son is the subject of many opinions. Most say that it was
done in the night by a vision. The others think, as it was usual at that
time, that this revelation happened to the patriarch Shem; because he
had commanded Abraham this by God\'s command. But be it as it may, it is
to be understood from Moses that this was God\'s will.

The commandment that Abraham was to be tempted with.

But as far as Jerome is concerned, who in his Latin interpretation has
made a generic word out of the proper name, one must give him credit for
this. For this is the way of the Hebrew language, that it looks
completely at the origin of the words, also in the proper names. As he
has therefore left the proper name of the same place in the other
passage of the Chronicles, so it should have been left here as well. But
the following text deceived him, because it is written: \"And Abraham
called the place, The Lord looketh. So he also gave it here: Go to the
land of beholding, or, where the Lord beholds.

44 But those who want to follow the allegory and secret interpretation,
may interpret the word Moriah, that it is God\'s word and the faith in
the word. For these two things always coincide; for where there is no
word of God, there can be no true faith or worship; again, where there
is the word, there must also be some who believe the word. Where these
two things are, the third soon follows, namely, the cross and the death.
The Christian life consists of these three things. But we will say more
about this at another time.

45 Now we are to pay particular attention to these words in this text:
\"There you shall offer your son to me as a burnt offering. For it was
not permitted to sacrifice or worship in all places according to each
one\'s pleasure, but only in the place which God had chosen. Therefore,
the prophets severely punish the Jews for sacrificing in other places
more than they were commanded to do by God. And not only is the place
expressly mentioned here, but also the person, item, who is to be the
priest. \"You\" Abraham, says God, \"sacrifice to me\" not an
unreasonable animal, but \"your son\", Isaac, and not Ishmael. Which
words are thus set, that one may see and understand from them what God
wants to have and not to have.

46\. for god does not want us to have

**[1496 L. V, 188-ISO. Interpretation of I Genesis 22, I-3. W. 1,
2242-2247. 1497]{.underline}**

To serve him with the works we have chosen for ourselves: for this
reason he has determined everything so precisely in his word and
commandment, which is so certain and serious that if there were another
person, or another place, or another time than he has prescribed and
commanded you, you would err and not only do him no service, but you
would also anger him and cause him to be angry with you and hostile to
you.

\(47\) So the Jews were not Abraham, that is, they had no commandment
like Abraham, that they should sacrifice their children; indeed, the
fifth commandment forbade them in general all manner of death. And if
Ahaz nevertheless thought that he would be doing God a great service by
letting his children go through the fire and be burned, he would also be
letting the word that was spoken to Abraham and not to him, namely, as
if he also had to kill a son for the sake of God like Abraham:
therefore, he says, I will also kill my son. But this does not follow,
for there is an inequality. Abraham was commanded by a special and new
commandment to sacrifice his son, which command Ahaz did not have;
therefore he should not have done anything against the clearly expressed
commandment of God: \"You shall not kill.

**Second part.**

**How Abraham is willing to follow God\'s command and sacrifice Isaac.**

V. 3 **Abraham got up early in the morning, girded up his donkey, and
took two boys with him, and Isaac his son.**

\(48\) This history is worthy of careful consideration and consideration
of every word in it. The text says here that Abraham got up early in the
morning. He did not tarry long, did not argue with himself, nor did he
ask as Adam did in Paradise: Why does God command me to do this? He did
not obey his own flesh, nor the old serpent, nor did he speak of this
matter to his Sarah, nor did he say anything to her about it; but

When he heard the commandment, he did not doubt it at all, but hastened
to fulfill it.

49 This is a perfect example of righteous and perfect obedience, that
Abraham so soon and at once departs from the world and kills everything
that was dear to him in this life, namely his house, his wife, his son,
for whom he had waited a long time and had such a great rich promise.
Therefore we wonder in vain at the saints in the New Testament, and read
of their fasting and fasting without understanding. For they may have
been as holy as they ever could have been, yet, if they are to be
compared with Abraham, they will be lowly, and stink as it were, however
high and holy they are to be regarded. For they do not know what it is
to kill his only son, in whom he had received such a great promise from
God, and in whom the old father had placed all his hope, and in whom
alone his prosperity and well-being were attached, all of which will
soon be gone in a moment, when his son is to lose his life; this is
called denying oneself and leaving everything. We read elsewhere in
history that others threw away gold and silver, money and goods: item,.
Others have put their wife and child, even their own life and limb, in
danger for the sake of the true confession of faith: but there has never
been an apostle, patriarch or martyr who could have rendered this
obedience with such constancy.

50 We are to remember that in this whole history we are to look
primarily at the word and commandment of God, which makes all the works
of the faithful glorious and great, however small they are in
themselves, just as, on the other hand, the works that are done outside
of and without the command of God, although they outwardly appear to be
very holy works, are nevertheless vile filth, as are the works of the
pope or other swarming spirits.

51\) After that it is also described here how Abraham was so willing and
joyful in his heart to obey God in His commandments.

**[1498 2 V, 190-192. interpretation of I Genesis 22, 3. w. 1.
2247-2250. 1499]{.underline}**

Moses says, \"Abraham arose early in the morning,\" did not delay, did
not tarry long. For if we are sure of God\'s will, and believe that He
has commanded what exists, then we should be undaunted, not tarry long,
but cheerfully take up the cause early in the morning, even if we should
put ourselves in many great dangers and even in death. For God\'s word
cannot be in vain; but if we obey God when he commands us to do
something, the end must surely follow, as he has determined and decreed,
even if the gates of hell themselves were to oppose it. So David says in
the 119th Psalm v. 50: \"Thy word is my comfort in my affliction, and
restoreth me,\" which means that while I had thy word, I was satisfied
in my heart, and was glad to put myself in all manner of danger, and thy
word restored me.

For this is certainly true, if one in his profession is certain in his
heart that God wills that which he intends and does, and has commanded
him the same in His word, then he will feel that such divine commandment
has such great power as he will not find in any great orator\'s words,
even if it were Demosthenes or Cicero himself. For God\'s commandment
explains and indicates all circumstances, namely, what is useful and
good in the matter, and enters into the heart of man that God sees
innumerable benefits, which far surpass all our understanding and sense,
which He wants to let follow from it. When the heart is prepared and
equipped with such comfort, it continues joyfully and does not care
whether it will be possible or impossible, easy or difficult to do; as
St. Paul has described this comfort and joy of the godly in a wonderful
way.

\(53\) If Gideon and Samson had not had God\'s word, they would never
have accomplished such great things, but would have remained under the
burden and such great, heavy things. But because they believed the word,
they thought thus: I am called and commanded by God to attack the
Philistines, Midianites and other nations, so I will go on confidently.

drive. For it is faith that does these great miraculous works; as Christ
says John 14:12: \"He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he
do also, and shall do greater works than these.\"

We do not see this in the pagan histories, nor do we Christians
understand it enough, because we are lazy and lazy, and do not believe
God when he commands, threatens, punishes or promises something, but are
without sense and understanding. But these holy fathers and great
heroes, Abraham, David 2c., believed him, therefore they also
accomplished such great things. It is also told above (Cap. 14, v. 14
ff.) how Abraham overcame four kings with a small people; he did not
achieve the same victory with anything else but with faith, which kept
to the commandment and divine calling.

55 In this story, he also overcomes the temptation by faith, which he
undoubtedly had very strongly. He knows that God has commanded him to do
this; therefore he hastens to do it and does not ask for it, if Sarah or
the servants in the house or any other creature would think otherwise.
For this is deep in his heart, which in the 119th Psalm v. 50. David
says: \"Thy word is my comfort, and restoreth me.\" Therefore, he who
has a sure word from God, regardless of his status, should believe it
alone and freely dare to do so, and God will undoubtedly give him a
blessed outcome.

\(56\) We have no command about such special works, which are done
outside the common order, and perhaps we would not believe it even if we
already had it; as a similar example is described in Isa. 7:1 about the
unbelieving king Ahaz. Two mighty kings fought against him, namely, the
king of Syria and the king of Israel: but the Scripture says of this
king in the same place, v. 2: \"Then his heart trembled, and the heart
of his people, as the trees of the forest tremble with the wind.\" Then
God the Lord sent the prophet to Ahaz with a new command, telling him v.
4: \"Beware, and be

**[1500 v, 192-1\". Interpretation of Genesis 22:3. w. i. Wso-2W2.
1501]{.underline}**

Be still, fear not, and let your heart be undaunted before these two
smoking fires\" 2c. As if the Lord wanted to say: These two kings are
not kings before me, but smoking fires, yes, they are only leftover
pieces of smoking extinguishing fires; you be calm and do not fear.

57 The Lord tells him to ask for a sign, so that his heart and his faith
may be strengthened and assured. But what did Ahaz do? He said v. 12:
\"I will not require it, lest I tempt the Lord.\" We would also be such
people and would not accept it if God would give us a new commandment.

58\. Now, in this present danger of pestilence, we are as fearful and
despondent as if we had no command to live and call upon God. We have a
firm and certain word, which the Son of God Himself spoke with His mouth
John 11:25, 26: \"I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in
me, though he die, yet shall he live. And whosoever liveth and believeth
in me shall never die\": but who asks much about this? Who pays
attention to such words? In the same way, everyone can be sure of the
divine word in his profession, whether he has a profession in the
secular office or in the church government. But we do, alas! nothing
less, than that we wait diligently for our office, each in his
profession. Everyone knows how lazy and negligent the authorities are;
the bishops and parish priests keep quiet about it like dumb dogs, do
not believe that they are such people as they are by God\'s will; they
only seek great good and great honor in the world, but do not do the
works that belong to such an office; meanwhile, they go along nicely and
complain: \"We have no cause to do good works.

59\. we have a commandment that concerns us all in general, namely, that
we should love god and fear no one, neither the devil, nor the Turk, nor
the pestilence, where we walk in our ways according to god\'s command,
even if we are already in danger of life and limb; according to the
saying in the 27th Psalm, v. 14: \"wait for god.

O Lord, be of good courage, and do not fear, and wait for the Lord. But
who is the one who keeps this? Oh, no one keeps it, for no one believes
that God has commanded trust and that He has condemned despair.

\(60\) Therefore, I say, this text is well worthy of careful
consideration, that we may learn from it right obedience to God, and how
much is at stake when one is so sure of God\'s commandment, as it brings
great comfort to the pious in their hearts. We should seek such comfort
at the end of the world, but we must not run far nor search anxiously
for it. For our house, our body and our heart are full of God\'s
commandment, and yet we do not believe it; therefore we do not rejoice
in it, feel and find in ourselves nothing at all of the spiritual joy,
courage and comfort that God\'s word and commandment bring with them.

\(61\) Therefore the examples of the fathers should be exalted and
diligently remembered by us and others, because we see in them such
great power of the word of God and of faith; as David boasts in Ps.
119:50: \"Thy word is my consolation. He relied on this word, and slew
the bear and the lion, and Goliath the Philistine, and did other great
and valiant deeds: he kept the same comfort even after his son Absalom
drove him out of the kingdom, thinking thus: I am a king by God and by
divine command set in the kingdom, not for my own pleasure, but only for
God\'s glory. Because I am sure of this, I will not let myself be
challenged, I will not be frightened. And with such confidence he calls
upon God, and says in the 7th Psalm v. 7: \"Arise, O Lord, and restore
me to the office which thou hast commanded me,\" as if to say: \"If thou
wilt reject me, it is well; but if thou wilt have me to be and remain a
king, then I will have the rule, though the gates of hell be set against
it. With the same words he overcame and killed both his son Absalom and
his wicked unfaithful counselor Ahithophel.

**[1502 6. v, 194-196. interpretation of i. Moses 22, 3. w. I. S2S2-WSS.
1503]{.underline}**

\(62\) So this was Abraham\'s only consolation in this great and severe
trial, that he knew he had a command from God, and would certainly not
have fled from any pestilence, not even from many thousands of Turks;
for his heart had kept this confidence firm: I believe in the almighty
GOtt. But what are ten thousand Turks against the Almighty GOD?
Therefore, he did not delay, but accepted the commandment immediately
and was ready to perform the sacrifice.

We are to learn to understand this power of the Word of God, which the
Holy Spirit so highly exalts that he makes it greater than all creatures
are, hell, death, the good and evil angels; yes, he also compares it to
God. As it is also equal to Him in truth, as St. Paul Rom. 1, 16 calls
the gospel a power of God. Which then is to be understood from the oral
word. Abraham understood it very well, which is why he did not doubt
that even if Isaac died, he would be raised again and still keep his
seed, so that God would not let his commandment and promise be in vain.

64 Thus it is written in the 91st Psalm, v. 7, 11: \"Though a thousand
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, it shall not fall
upon thee. For he hath commanded his angels concerning thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways.\" Whoever holds fast to this promise and does what
is due to him in his office, waiting for his calling, knowing that God
has called him, and yet there is danger and hindrance, nevertheless does
not doubt that what he does will progress well and turn out well. For he
is certain in his heart that all the angels from heaven would have to
come to help and protect him before what a God-fearing man undertakes
according to God\'s word should be in vain. Summa, it must go through,
what you start on his word, and no angel should remain in heaven. For
this reason, the histories of the holy Scriptures surpass the stories of
the pagans, for here everything happens out of God.

Command, but there everything goes about and according to the advice of
the people.

65 And now this is the meaning of the words, that Abraham rose early in
the morning. He did not dispute long how it would go out, but thought
thus: I am sure that something better will come of this than I now see
or understand, not by my power or mine, but by the power of God\'s
command. Therefore I will follow the Lord, who commanded me to do this
and called me to it; as Joab says to his brother Abishai in the 2nd Book
of Samuel, 10th Cap. V. 12: \"Be of good cheer, and let us be strong for
our people, and for the cities of our God; but let the Lord do what
pleases him.\" Such people are ready and skillful for all good works,
the others are all good for nothing and are rejected; for even slow
obedience is no obedience.

**And girded his donkey.**

\(66\) All this is described so diligently that it may be seen that even
because of the delay his faith was somewhat exercised. He, the father
himself, had to search for and cut the wood, and for this purpose he
loaded it onto the donkey to burn his son with it. In the meantime, he
will no doubt have felt great anguish and temptation of his flesh, for
he did not have an iron heart, but was of a tender nature. The thought
of the burnt offering was always in his heart, and that his only
begotten Son, who was promised to him as a hope of the future seed and
many descendants, should be slain and burned with the very wood that he,
the Father himself, had gathered.

\(67\) Should he not have thought longer about such a sad and
frightening business, someone might say? Should he not have consulted
with his Sarah, the child\'s mother, about it? All this is shown in
these useless words, as they can be seen, otherwise it could have been
explained in very short words. But Moses wants to show what Abraham felt
in his heart every moment for great shocks: to this without doubt also

**[1504 L- v. iss-ivs. Interpretation of I Genesis 22, 3. W. i.
2255-22-8. 1505]{.underline}**

The unspeakable groaning and the bitter tears came, so that he, as a
father, would have shed them. But he himself girded up the donkey and
did not command the servants to do so: he was so distraught that he
wanted to give God his honor, to fear him and to serve him properly,
that he hardly felt and understood what he was doing.

**And took with him two boys.**

\(68\) The Jews dispute here who the two boys might have been. Ishmael,
as we have heard, was expelled from the house, and yet they say that
Ishmael was one of them, and the other Eliezer, his steward, who was
also mentioned above. Whoever they may have been, they have truly been
very faithful, for they follow their lord and honor him without
contradiction. But the Saracens have invented terrible lies from this
text, namely, that Ishmael was sacrificed instead of Isaac, but Isaac
ran away and disobeyed his father. And therefore they say and boast that
they are children of Sarah; for Isaac was not sacrificed, but Ishmael
instead of his brother.

\(69\) This is what all heretics do, for and on behalf of all, to draw
to themselves the honor that belongs to the church and to God\'s people,
because everyone wants to be next to God. And this challenge among men
has always been granted from the beginning of the world; as today the
heretics and the pope also want to be the church. The Turks also want to
be God\'s people; thus the true Christians are deprived of their right
name and honor, which is due to them. And this is the course of the
world from the beginning to the end. Cain started such a game first, and
it will last and remain for all times. The false church always wants to
arrogate to itself the title and name of the church. The idols steal
God\'s name and honor by force; therefore they sin more against the
first table than against the other. For this reason it is also said of
Isaac that he became disobedient and a fugitive.

**[And his son Isaac.]{.underline}**

\(70\) After he received the command from God, he saw nothing else but
that alone: but he forgave himself and forgot everything, Sarah, the
servants, the house and Isaac also. That is to say, he is killed, and
sits in the ashes and in the sack. Therefore always away with Antonius,
Hilarion and other such hermits, who may have done great and heavy
works. But the same works have not been all the killing of the
serpent\'s head, namely, of the reason and the will of man. Which
snake\'s head the monks and such other hypocrites rather make alive and
multiply, because they are so puffed up and proud on account of their
own righteousness, merit and other works.

\(71\) This is a great and very sorrowful heartache, that Abraham should
lose the son whom he had obtained from God with so many supplications
and tears, and in whom all hope and glory was that through him he would
become a father of the seed that would be given. In such heartache, he
nevertheless straightens up and still believes that he will have the
seed, if not during his life, then at his death; just as in the 16th
chapter Sarah straightens up and thinks: I will not be the mother of
this seed, I was not worthy of it, so now let it be another, namely, my
maid Hagar, that only the Lord gives a seed. This is the right killing,
which does not happen in the wilderness, where one has no fellowship
with any people, but in the house and world regiment. From this, then,
the great obedience of Abraham, which he also performed out of his
marrow and legs, can be seen.

**And he split wood for the burnt offering, and arose, and went to the
place whereof God had told him.**

\(72\) This is all to show Abraham\'s delay. He may have three hundred
and eighteen servants, but he himself is the servant of all servants,
which is said to show and praise his great and remarkable obedience. He
commands no one, judges everything himself

**[1506 V. 1SS. 1S9. Interpretation of Genesis 22:3-8. W. 1. 2258-2261.
1507]{.underline}**

and this in haste; for the commandment of God, which rules and lives in
him, urges him on.

**On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and saw the place from
afar.**

Seventy-three: I consider that the place where the sacrifice was to be
made was not farther than a quarter of a mile from the place where he
called the boys. For although Jerusalem or Mount Moriah was somewhat
high, it could not be seen very far, for there were mountains all
around. I am very surprised that the poor father did not die from such a
great and long heartache, for he had to travel for three whole days. But
if this fight had lasted an hour or two, he could have overcome it all
the more easily. Therefore, this delay makes his obedience greater and
greater. He also thought, \"Behold, I am coming with my son, who is a
boy, for whom I have great hope; he must now die. He endured and
suffered such death of the flesh for these three days, along with other
arrows of Satan, and yet he had to eat it into himself and keep quiet
about it for the sake of the commandment on which he relied, and was
thus strengthened and preserved.

**V. 5 And said to his boys: Stay ye here with the ass; I and the lad
will go thither; and when we have worshipped, we will come again to
you.**

If the servants had been at hand, they would not have allowed what the
father intended to do to happen, or they would have thought he was not
in his right mind. In the event, however, since they could not have
prevented it, they would have cried out, closed their eyes and run away
from such a terrible deed.

**V. 6. And Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering, and laid it
upon Isaac his son.**

\(75\) This is another endurance and delay, and the heartache is ever
new and greater, because he put the wood on his son.

load. O my dear son, he would have thought, if you knew what wood you
were carrying, or if your mother should know! You think you are carrying
it for sacrifice, but you do not know that you yourself are to be the
burnt offering.

**But he took the fire and knife in his hand.**

There was no sword, and the picture of Abraham about to sacrifice his
son is not usually painted properly. It was a knife that the butchers
and priests used to use. Isaac lay on his back on the woodpile and
raised his face to heaven. So Abraham wanted to strike him in the
throat, just as the butchers used to strangle the calves. Before that,
the donkey carried the wood and the servants carried the fire. He took
it from them and loaded the wood onto his son, who was not a little boy
but a youth of about five and twenty years old. He carried the fire
himself. But many thoughts must have occurred to the servants.

**And went the two with each other.**

These two have been alone and have gone about in the desert. The whole
world does not know what is going on here, nor is there anyone who could
speak a word of comfort to the sorrowful father. But the son does not
know that he will be killed there. And such a passage as this is nowhere
else described in Scripture. The text says, \"they both went.\" Yes,
which both? The dear Father and his most beloved Son. Dear, how did
their hearts stand? Well, Isaac did not know about the deal, and yet he
is willing and ready to obey his father: Abraham, however, certainly
decided to sacrifice his son and burn him to ashes.

**V. 7. 8. Then Isaac said to his father Abraham, \"My father! And
Abraham answered, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold, here is fire
and wood; but where is the sheep?**

**[1508 v. 19S-20I. Interpretation of Genesis 22:7-9. W. i. sssi-WW.
1509]{.underline}**

**for a burnt offering? Abraham answered, \"My son, God will provide him
with a sheep for a burnt offering. And the two of them went to each
other.**

These are very moving and violent words, which Moses did not want to
omit. Isaac, who is the victim, addresses his father and reaches into
his fatherly heart, as if he wanted to say: You are my father. And the
father says to him again: You are my dear son. The words have
undoubtedly gone through his fatherly heart. For the son says to him,
\"Behold, here is wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?\"
From this it seems that he was concerned for the honor of God, for he
knows that his father wants to make a burnt offering, which he wants to
see: therefore he reminds him that he might not forget the offering
because of his great devotion. \"Where is,\" he says, \"the sheep for
the burnt offering?\" Then the father should have answered: You will
have to be the sacrifice. But he is silent about it and thus answers
him, \"God will provide it.\" In which word he also grasps the
commandment of God.

79 He does not want to distress and torture his son for long, so he does
not yet tell him that he must die. Nor does Moses say that his father
reminded him during the three days they walked together, so that he
could get used to the idea of dying; rather, it seems as if he kept
silent and waited until he had to attack his son\'s throat.

80 And one must wonder how Isaac was able so soon to forget all thoughts
of this life, and to forget his father and mother, the house and the
promise he had, and finally his own life, into which he had hardly
stepped. All this could not have been overcome without great heartache
and mourning. For the saints are not lumps or without all feeling, but
are human beings, and have all longings. They have all the compassion
and inclinations that are implanted in human nature, more intense and
more than others. Therefore, it is truly a

It was a good faith that enabled him to forgive life so soon and to go
to death, for he thought of nothing else and saw nothing more certain
before his bodily eyes than that he would have to die.

**V. 9 And when they came to the place which God had told him, Abraham
built there an altar, and laid the wood upon it.**

So far, Moses has described the example of the obedience of these two,
namely, the son and the father, and has always kept the reader waiting
until he was fed up, where such a game would end. Since Abraham has now
prepared the altar and it has now come to the meeting, he is silent, as
he either does not dare to talk about such things (because they are much
too big in themselves, so that they should be described with words), or
else he could not write it because of weeping. So he leaves the great
astonishment in the hearts of the listeners, and wants them to think
about such things and to judge, since he cannot reach them with words.

For when the altar was prepared, the knife was prepared and the fire was
lit, there must have been a talk between the father and the son, so that
Isaac could be told about the will and commandments of God. The father
will have said: You, my dear son, whom God has given me, are ordained
for a burnt offering. Since the son was undoubtedly frightened and
terrified, he would have reminded the father of the promise again,
namely: \"My dear father, remember that I am the seed who is promised
kings and nations and a great lineage. 2c. God has given me to my mother
by a great miracle. How then will the promise be fulfilled if I am
killed? Let us first talk and act with each other about it.

83 Moses should have described these things here, but why he omitted
them I do not know, but I have no doubt that the father gave his son a
good speech, which contains

**[1510 L.v, Au-2os. Interpretation of I Moses 22, 9. 10. W. i.
2263-2266. 1511]{.underline}**

and the main part will have been the commandment of God and the
resurrection of the dead. He will have said: God has commanded this,
therefore we must obey him; and because he is almighty, he can well keep
his promise, even if you have already died and turned to ashes. And
Isaac will undoubtedly have been instructed in this doctrine beforehand,
and will have understood and believed as well as Abraham. For these are
examples of faith: but faith understands in itself the promise which was
told above in chapter 15, v. 5, 11 ff.

84 Therefore this was such a speech of the Father to his Son, in which
these two pieces, which are straight against each other, were compared,
namely, Isaac shall be the seed, and a father of many kings and nations;
and: Isaac shall die, and shall not be a father of nations. These
sayings, which are in direct conflict with each other, cannot be
balanced by any human reason or philosophy: but the Word balances these
two pieces, namely, that a dead man lives and a living man dies. So we
also live, and yet die nevertheless. For if we live now, we are counted
dead because of sin; and if we have died, we are counted alive. Such
things have been spoken of here between the Father and the Son. And not
only Abraham believed this, but also Isaac; for he dies believing in the
promise that he will be a father. Therefore Isaac dies and yet lives: he
becomes ashes and yet becomes a father of many nations.

The sophists and Jewish rabbis do not understand this text, for they do
not see the true essence of the sacred Scriptures, which speak of the
resurrection of the dead, of life, of the conquest of death, and of the
destruction of sins, and not of things perishable and void. Here also it
is to be seen whether faith can be without good works, and whether good
works are rejected and condemned, where the righteousness of faith is
taught. For behold, how much the

most beautiful\" works and very holy obedience meet in this some
example.

**V. 9, 10: And he bound Isaac his son, and laid him upon the altar upon
the top of the wood, and put forth his hand, and took hold of the knife,
to slay his son.**

This strange and astonishing story is understood by Moses in so few
words. Now the father wants to cut off the throat of his son, and the
son holds out the throat and lifts his eyes to heaven, and waits that he
now becomes ashes. Thus, both of them are put into the utmost danger of
life and limb by God. If there had been no faith, or if God had
slumbered for a moment and not watched, Isaac\'s life would have been
lost. For the knife was prepared, the son was bound and placed on the
top of the wood, and now his neck is cut. These are the works of our
Lord God, to show that he cares for us in our greatest need and danger,
even in the midst of death.

\(87\) But the Jews dispute about this binding, what kind of binding it
might have been. I think Isaac was bound as a butcher binds a sheep or
goat with a rope, holding the sheep in one hand and the knife in the
other. In this way Abraham also wanted to slaughter his son at the same
moment.

\(88\) But why bindeth he him? Not because Isaac would have run away and
disobeyed his father, but to keep the way of the burnt offering. For
Abraham must have been of a mind to make such a offering, as a priest
making an offering of a calf. That is why he made the same offering and
did it in the same way. He lays Isaac on top of the wood like a calf
that is to be slaughtered, and at the same time puts the knife to his
neck. So this binding does not indicate compulsion or necessity, but
only the way and manner that a priest or butcher uses.

89\. I could not have watched there, will

**[1512 L.V.SM-A\". Interpretation of Genesis 22:9-11. W. 1, 22S6-2SS9.
1513]{.underline}**

Let alone that I should have been the death and butcher. It is a
terrible thing that a dear father puts a knife to the neck of his
dearest son. And I gladly confess that I cannot reach such thoughts,
concerns and fear, which the father must have felt in his heart, neither
with reflection nor with words. No one should have interpreted this text
in any other way than St. Paul. We do not let such thoughts and concerns
go to our hearts, because we do not desire to feel or experience the
same or the like. So the son is obedient, like a sheep that is led to
the slaughter, does not open his mouth, Isa. 53, 7. He has thought: The
will of the Lord be done. For he was brought up in the discipline and
obedience of his father. And we have no more such examples of obedience,
except the example of the Lord Christ.

**V. 11 Then the angel of the Lord called to him from heaven, saying,
\"Abraham, Abraham!**

How the divine majesty jokes and plays so surely and contemptuously in
death and all the power that death can prove in us, you see here. God
plays here with his patriarch and with his son, who stand here at the
same time in the highest fear of death and in the highest victory over
it. For not only Isaac was ready to die, but in truth the father Abraham
also dies seven times in that he deals with the thought alone that he
now wants to sacrifice and kill his son.

Natural death, which is nothing other than the soul separating from the
body, is a simple death; but where one feels death, that is. But where
one feels the terror and fear of death, there is the real true death.
Where terror is not, death is not death, but sleep; as Christ Jn. 11:26.
says, \"He that believeth on me shall not see death.\" For where the
terror is gone, there is also the death of the soul gone.

Therefore, let us describe death thus: Death has a soul and body. The
body is the destruction of death for the soul; but the soul death is
just the terror and fear of death. Where now the

If the soul died of death, the death of the body is only a sleep. In
this case, Abraham\'s soul was dead, because he did not doubt it, but he
certainly thought that his son Isaac would have to be sacrificed and
killed at the same moment. But when a man is afflicted and distressed
with the terror of death, and is now certain that he is to die, he truly
feels such great violence of the right death that he cannot withstand
it: and then he also truly dies, and then not when the soul separates
from the body. Such two miraculous deaths are here placed side by side
in the highest patience and obedience. For it would have been much more
grievous to Abraham if he had also died seven times of natural death,
than if he had had to watch the death of his son, even to slay him
himself. So they are both killed because they see or feel nothing but
death, and yet they have not died in the sight of God, as we will hear
later; for they consider death to be a child\'s game and a joke, no
different from the way we play with a ball or an apple.

The victory, so that Abraham and Isaac and all the saints overcame
death, is faith. He who has it overcomes the terror of death, overcomes
and triumphs forever; as St. Paul says in 2 Cor. 1:9: \"We hope and put
our trust in God, who raises the dead. Of faith we have scarcely a
little spark. For as long as we believe, as long as we do not feel
death; but if it peeps out a little and lets itself be seen, fear and
terror immediately follow.

Therefore, this is a wonderful thing, and impossible for reason to
believe that God can and will erase death and change it into life**.**
But this is even more wonderful that Abraham and Isaac thought it was
certain that this whole action was only a short time and not death. And
that death is a joke in the eyes of God is easily believed by everyone:
but that I should also believe the same for myself and in my body, that
death is not death,

**[1514 L. v, Ms-M. Interpretation of Genesis 23, II. w. i, 2M-S272.
1515]{.underline}**

no doctor, no philosopher, no lawyer will ever persuade me.

95 For who will be able to rhyme and unite this, that it is said: Death
is not death, but is life? Moses himself says the contradiction. For if
you listen to the law, it will tell you what the old and Christian song
says, when it is sung in church: \"In the midst of life we are embraced
by death. But this is only a law song: but the gospel and faith turn
this song around, and sing thus: In the midst of death we are in life:
we praise you, dear Lord God, who are our Redeemer, have raised us from
death and made us blessed. For the Gospel teaches that in death there is
life, which is unknown and impossible to law and reason. Hence it is
that St. Paul is so triumphant, and says of Christ Col. 2:15: \"He hath
taken off principalities and mighty men, and hath made them to appear in
public\" 2c.; item 2 Cor. 6:9: \"As those that die, and, behold, we
live.\" This is the power of faith, which thus mediates between death
and life, and changes death into life and immortality, knowing that it
is given to us through Christ.

God wanted to indicate this with this work as a special spectacle,
namely, that death is nothing else before Him, but only a child\'s play
and a vain horror of the human race, yes, only a test and temptation; as
if some father plays with his son, takes an apple from him, and thinks
how he wants to leave him the whole inheritance and hand it over. But
this is hard to believe: therefore the Gentiles, who do not know this
will of God, which he reveals in his word, have no hope at all; as St.
Paul says 1 Thess. 4, 13.

97\) Christians who have the word should hear and consider it with all
diligence, so that their hearts may be awakened, that though they are
weighed down with the burden of sin and hindered by Satan, they may
nevertheless be encouraged and comforted by the glory and knowledge of
divine life and immortality, so that they may believe that this saying
is true and true.

It is constant to say that death is a child\'s play. Which Abraham
believed and thought, and with such faith overcame death; for he thought
in his heart thus: My son Isaac, whom I now strangle, is a father of
promise, and such promise is true in itself; therefore my son shall live
forever, and shall also be the heir: though he must therefore now die,
yet shall he truly not die, but rise again.

So faith is able to unite things that are directly opposed to each
other, and is not a bad, mere and cold delusion or thought, as the
sophists say, but its power is that it strangles death, condemns hell,
is a sin to sin and a devil to the devil, so also that death is not
death, although all men\'s sense and feeling testify that death is
present. Abraham is quite sure of this, and so he remembers: I will now
reduce my son to ashes, but he will not die; indeed, these ashes will be
the heir. Is this not a child\'s play in such a great and important
matter, in which all men are otherwise doubly childish?

Now this is not written for the sake of Abraham, who died long ago, but
for our comfort, assurance, strength and courage, that we may learn that
death is nothing before God, and that we may sing: In the midst of death
we are in life: whom shall we praise but thee, our God, alone? This is a
Gospel song, but the other belongs to the Law. And the patriarchs and
spiritual men understood such things gloriously and well. We teach these
things daily and clearly, but how many are those who believe them and
pay attention to them!

\(100\) And there is no difference between these and others who do not
hear; indeed, with hearing they do not hear, for they are dead in their
sins and in their covetousness. In the Old Testament, the scribes,
priests and other wicked men who did not understand these things were
like them: David, Isaiah, Samuel and Jeremiah have the understanding of
the Holy One.

**[1516 L.v, M7-20S. Interpretation of Genesis 22, II, W. I, 2272-2275.
1517]{.underline}**

We have seen that Isaac and his father Abraham, even though they die,
still live. Abraham is killed seven times and still remains alive in a
bodily way: so that Abraham, the father, and Isaac, his son, are dead
and alive in one moment.

We cannot achieve such things with our intellect, and we must be careful
to understand as much as we can. I realize, however, that I am almost
inert to do so; my donkey resists below and cannot climb the mountain.
So they all remain asses, who are not instructed in the doctrine of
faith, and cannot grasp the thought that death is life. So when Peter
denied the Lord Christ in the danger of death, he was also a lazy ass,
indeed, he was not yet like any ass; for he does not remain alone at the
bottom of the mountain, but runs back and flees away.

Therefore, let us often think of this spectacle described by Moses and
the play of divine majesty in death, so that we may learn to believe
that death is life. For how many do you think there are who know this?
See what we do when we look at those who are with those who are now
struggling with death, or when we are in danger of our lives. If we were
of the same mind there as Abraham and his son were, we would say, I will
not die, but live. 2c. The Lord chasteneth me, but giveth me not away to
death: though I be buried, and though I be eaten of worms, yet shall I
live. Yea, saith the flesh against it, thou shalt nevertheless die.
Answer: No, I do not die, but such death is only a chastisement for me.

Abraham and Isaac saw and knew nothing else, and the thing itself and
the whole action was not different from what their thoughts were: and
yet they consider that there is no death, but only a child\'s play; as
St. Paul defies death and rejoices against it, saying 1 Cor. 15:55:
\"Death, where is thy sting?\"

104 Let us also learn this, that we may say in the midst of death:
Goodbye leaves and grass, I will not die but live; as Isaac thought when
it was his neck. But if we are still afraid and frightened when we think
of death and see it coming, let us recognize our ignorance and not boast
that we are theologians. All men can see death, and even the heathen and
the ungodly understand that death itself is death: but the wisdom of
Christians and the special doctrine of the church is this, which Abraham
can do, namely, that he concludes thus: Even though I have already
killed my son, I still have him alive; and just as Isaac also concludes:
Though I die, yet will I not die, though thou cut off my neck, and make
me ashes; though I be ashes, yet will I live, and beget heirs unto the
whole world.

But Moses says rightly before: \"And they both went with each other. For
this thought of death was nowhere else in the whole world, but only in
these two. He who is now to be strangled has thought: Dear God, \"Into
your hands I commend my spirit\", Ps. 31, 6; \"I will not die, but
live\", Ps. 118, 17, and will come again; for God will not lie: I am a
son of promise, therefore I will have to beget children, even if the
heavens should break. But see if this has not died a certain death and
yet live in a still more certain life? Therefore the prophets in the
holy scriptures everywhere praise the resurrection of the dead, and this
text clearly shows the resurrection also into this temporal life, how
much more into the life to come!

All this flows from the first commandment. For therein is understood the
doctrine of faith and resurrection of the dead, since God says: I, the
Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, am your God. This is said: You
shall live in the life in which I also live. For if he had spoken this
to oxen, they would live forever. But unto us, I say, is this said, and
not that: Thou shalt eat chaff, corn, and wheat.

**[1518 \". v, 2os-\"n. Interpretation of Genesis 22, 11. \"8. 1,
2275-2277. 1519]{.underline}**

and eat grass, but this: I am your God. But to be a God means as much as
to deliver from all evil and misfortune that oppresses us, as there is
sin, hell and death 2c. For this is how the prophets viewed and
understood these words. The pagans know God no further than that He is a
Creator. But as soon as you read the first commandment, you will also
find Christ, life, victory over death and the resurrection of the dead
to eternal life, and finally the entire Old and New Testament. Only
those who have the Holy Spirit see these things and diligently pay
attention to what God says and does; others, however, even though they
always hear these things, do not pay any attention to them.

Therefore let these two, Abraham and Isaac, be examples of this article
about the resurrection of the dead. For they both believe that God not
only can, but will certainly raise the dead, and deal with men about how
to kill death again, which is not death before Him, but sleep, which is
as it were a brother and blood relative of death; for where a man is
buried, he has not died to God, but sleeps.

\(108\) So it may be said of Isaac, when he is turned into dust, from
which he was also taken, He is not dead ashes, but is a son of promise,
who begets kings. In the same way we should think of our dead and of our
bodies, namely, that even though they are crushed by worms, they will
not always remain dust, but will live again. For we hear that the
Scripture says that death is but child\'s play in the sight of God, as
it is to all Christians who believe in the God who gives life to the
dead and considers the dead to be alive.

This is the Christian teaching and wisdom of God, an art of the saints,
and very high knowledge above all reason and understanding of this
world: \"Death, where is your sting? Hell, where is your victory?\" 1
Cor. 15, 55. In the midst of death we are in life. \"I will not die, but
live,\" 2c. as the 118th Psalm v. 17. says. Whoever can do this art,
thank

GOD. But we should make an effort that we do not only have it in our
mouths, speculate and speak about it, but that we have it in its power
and effect and with all our heart, and that we may adhere to it. But
when it is asked, \"Where did the fathers get this wisdom?\" St. Paul
answers 1 Cor. 10:4: \"They drank of the spiritual rock that followed
with them,\" that is, they got it from the knowledge of Christ, the
promised Redeemer.

But the law and the wisdom of the flesh do not understand this; just as
at the same time this spectacle of these two persons was hidden from the
whole world: But it was well known to God and the holy angels, very
funny and pleasant, but horrible and frightening to men and devils. For
where the devil sees that a man lives in faith, he is terrified, as St.
Paul says 1 Cor. 4:9: \"We have become a spectacle to the world, and to
angels, and to men.\" Now if this is understood by the evil angels, it
is a horrible spectacle; but if it is understood by the good angels, it
is an airy spectacle, as St. Peter says 1 Epist. 1, 12: \"Which also the
angels desire to behold.\" For God and the holy angels love to behold
these wonderful works, namely, the overcoming of death, destruction of
sin, and how Isaac comes forth again, from the ashes, raised, and from
nothingness, has become a father of many nations. For in this young man
there was a great light of faith. He believed in God, the Creator, who
calls that which is not to be, Rom. 4:17, and commands the ashes, which
are not Isaac, to be Isaac. For he who believes that God is a Creator
who makes everything out of that which is nothing. makes everything,
must conclude from necessity and say: Therefore God can also raise the
dead. \"Why,\" says Paul in the Acts of the Apostles in 26 Cap. V. 9,
\"is this judged incredible among you, that God raises the dead?\"

111 Therefore, in these examples, Scripture deals with the fact that we
are to learn

**[1520 v, 211-213. interpretation of Genesis 22:11. w.i,W77-Wso.
1521]{.underline}**

Believe that life and death are the same for believers: if they live,
they die; and if they die, they live. As it is taught throughout the New
Testament, and is also shown and proven that all the works of Christians
are miraculous; as the 4th Psalm, v. 4, says: \"The Lord leads his
saints in miracles\"; item John 14, v. 12, Christ says: \"He who
believes in me will do greater works than these; for I go to the Father,
that I may be omnipotent in you. These marvelous works terrify the
devils, but delight the angels and comfort the pious. But always away
with the wicked, that he see not such honor and glory of God. For \"the
world seeth not the Spirit of truth, neither knoweth he: but ye,\" saith
Christ John 14:17, \"behold him; for he is in you, and abideth in you.\"
The Jews have seen that Christ raises Lazarus from the dead, John 11:45,
and that St. Peter heals the sick with his shadow, Acts 5:15.Just as our
adversaries see that we want to serve, counsel and help all people with
the gospel, they also see our works of love, humility and patience, but
they are blind with their eyes; although the Holy Spirit presents such
works, which are seen and heard publicly, so that they could be grasped
with their hands, they do not see them. Therefore they blaspheme us, and
the Spirit that speaketh and worketh in us, and cry out that it is all
the devil\'s work that we do.

Now the Holy Spirit is clearly before their eyes; His works and miracles
are seen in the Word and Sacraments, so that even the stones, if they
were not without senses and understanding, could see and witness it; yet
they do not see it. But why is that? Because, as Christ says John 14:17,
the world cannot know the Holy Spirit. But whoever can believe,
according to the first commandment, that God is the Creator of heaven
and earth, will not dispute or doubt about the resurrection of the dead:
but again, whoever does not believe that God can and will raise the
dead, will not believe that God is the Creator of heaven and earth.

believes nothing at all; just as the pope, his cardinals and bishops do
not believe in the resurrection of the dead. Therefore, one can
irrefutably conclude that they do not believe that there is a God,
because they deny His works, do not believe anything about His majesty
and power, which is seen in the resurrection of the dead.

Whoever can do so, should only take this history in great consideration
and look at it with all his heart, so that he may have it as a masterly
and beautiful example to strengthen the faith with; then also that he
may refute with it the foolish thoughts that the papists pretend about
obedience and monastic vows, which they praise highly, but scornfully
despise this history, because Abraham was a householder, a common layman
and a husband. For thus they say: These are vain and worldly works, but
we do spiritual works, forsaking the world.

But if anyone should persuade the monks that Abraham was a priest and
bishop, they would soon pronounce him a heretic. For they describe a
priest as such a man who wears a long skirt, has a bristled head and
reads or prays the seven times; outside of this form they know of no
priest. As if God were pleased with such priests, who can\'t cry in
church. Such are the devil\'s priests. Abraham, however, is a true
priest, for he does not only sacrifice sheep and other animals, but also
his own son; and it is described here in what way he sacrificed him,
namely, that he bound him and wanted to slaughter him like an animal.

\(115\) But this they do not respect, nor do they take much notice of
it, because Abraham has no plate on his head, has no chasuble or greased
fingers, but grows a beard and is a husband. But if he had had a whore
or whoredoms, they would rather praise him.

But we also curse and condemn them as idolaters and devil priests, and
say that these are true priests who believe the word of God.

[**1522 L. V. 21S-21S.** Interpretation of **Genesis** 22:11. **W. l,
228V-2285. 1523**]{.underline}

and offer sacrifices of thanksgiving, and for God\'s sake bear the cross
which He has laid upon them; not walking in long robes, but in the gifts
and beautiful ornaments of the Holy Spirit, as in faith, in patience
when death comes, and in hope, that they may wait for another and a
better life. That is enough of this history, which is quite spiritual:
which I, as a carnal and one of the asses\' feet, who does not go with
you to the mountain, cannot fully understand or interpret; but I have
tried to teach and show as much as I could think of and understand
according to my weakness and small understanding.

**Third part.**

**How the angel appears to Abraham and stops him from offering Isaac,
and how Abraham offers a ram in Isaac\'s place.**

**I.**

**V. 11 Then the angel of the Lord called to him from heaven, saying,
\"Abraham, Abraham! He answered, \"Here I am.**

How the saints are marvelous before the angels and are God\'s spectacle
can be seen from this, for they themselves are God\'s work. At this work
an angel from heaven was present and watched Abraham in this whole
action, yes, God Himself in heaven and all His angels were watching. For
the angel did not fly far from the end of the world, but stood over
Abraham and over Isaac, and watched with his eyes as Abraham bound his
son and put the knife to his neck, and as the son proved his obedience
and willingly waited for the stroke. There is no doubt that tears flowed
down Abraham\'s cheeks when his son lay on his back and raised his eyes
to heaven, which the angel saw.

118 Because Abraham has already drawn the knife, he calls him, saying

him by his name. Thus, the holy angels stand close around us and look
straight at us with their eyes when we are godly and pious. Such
obedience has pleased God exceedingly; for of all sacrifices the most
pleasing to Him is to kill sin, to live in righteousness, holiness,
obedience and the killing of the flesh. This is painful and difficult
for us, but we must learn and become accustomed to the good and pleasing
will of God, as St. Paul says in Romans 12:2.

We speak only of these things, but Abraham and Isaac proved it by deed,
and this God\'s will is perfect, but with us it has not even begun; it
is pleasing and good to God, but to us it is evil and unpleasant. For
there is nothing more sour and hard than the killing of the flesh and of
sins. Therefore it seems to us to be horrible and impossible, we flee
from it and are enemies of it; however, one must get used to it and
raise oneself to it, as Abraham does here, who does not flee, but waits
for it with the highest inclined will, and therefore is there that his
son is slain and that life follows such death.

This is a work done in faith, which the angels are pleased to rejoice
in, even among us, where we are in the Christian ministry and works. Now
if the righteousness and obedience of the papists is contrasted with
this, it is not only obscured, but seems quite shameful and abominable,
because they are all works of their own choosing; just as many kings and
nations have also wanted to follow Abraham\'s example, but have hardly
sinned in doing so and have not understood the right killing.

In the book of the saints\' lives, called Vitae Patrum, there is a story
about a hermit who wanted to go into the desert with his only son and
thus leave the world. When the boy cried there, he wanted to throw him
into the nearest water and drown him. The monks praise such a work very
much, almost exalt it, and compare it with the work that Abraham did;
but it is actually equal to the work of the devil, which he did in
paradise.

**[1524 ü. V, 218-217. interpretation of Genesis 22, 11. W. I, SLW-228S.
1525]{.underline}**

has done. And if the hermit had killed his son, he would have been a
death-slayer, and all those who ever followed his example or put up with
it. And this is the cause that without the word of God no obedience can
please.

\(122\) But the papists, the Baal priests, do not accept this cause, but
cry out stubbornly against it, saying that we condemn and reject good
works. But we say that this is a good work, which is done in faith and
godly obedience by such a man, who believes that God is a Creator and a
Beatificator, and raises the dead. But tell me, whether a monk, a Ba as
a priest, a Turk and a Jew also walk in divine obedience? Not at all,
for he has no command from God for his status.

Thus Ahaz did a great work, but all against God and His word. Therefore
in the prophet Micah in the 6th Cap. V. 7: \"Shall I give my first son
for my transgression, or the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
No, says the prophet, for you are not commanded or commanded. Abraham
had a special commandment from God that the others did not have. For God
does not say in general: Whoever will offer his son to God, in him he is
pleased.

\(124\) We cannot all do the same kind of work; for in the body of man
there are various members, each of which must have its own effect. The
feet do not do manual labor, neither do the hands walk. But there is One
obedience, and One Holy Spirit: but obedience is to be sure of faith,
which is nothing and vain where there is no divine promise, neither do
works please God where there is no commandment or commandment of God.
The Papists or Turks are full of faith, but it is a fictitious and false
faith. For they say: I will believe thus, therefore I will also please
God thus. But this is a self-chosen and presumptuous thing, which is why
it is such devotion and holiness that does not belong to God but to the
devil.

Therefore, this special commandment that Abraham had should not be taken
to mean that we want to follow him, but we should follow the obedience
and faith of the resurrection, according to how sin was put to death in
his son, and death was also seasoned and overcome; then let each one
remain in his office and profession in one faith and be obedient to God
in it, so that we will be companions of the holy angels and sojourners
in the kingdom of God.

By the way, it can be asked at this place: Why did the holy angels
appear more rarely and less everywhere in our country and in the New
Testament than in the Old Testament? To this I answer that this is
because the Son of God and heir over all has appeared and been sent. It
is true that the servants and messengers were sent before. messengers
were sent beforehand, as kings and princes in the world are wont to do,
who are to remind the people of the future of the Lord; but now that the
Lord himself is present, he has no need of servants and messengers.

For after God sent His Son, He revealed all things through Him. He
revealed all things and filled the world with heavenly wisdom, to which
the signs and wonders Christ performed testify; as St. Paul says 1 Tim.
3, 16: \"God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
appeared to angels, preached to the Gentiles\" 2c. Therefore, one must
not desire the appearance of angels.

After the future and the birth of Christ, the devil deceived the world
by sending ghosts, poltergeists and evil angels many times, as the
examples of the time before us testify. But this was a punishment for
the ingratitude of men, because they despised the Lord even in his
presence, and sought and desired new revelations out of vain conceit.

129 So it happened also in our time, in the beginning, when the gospel
came to light again, when Thomas Muenzer, Carlstadt and the Sacrament
enthusiasts appeared, who spread the gospel that came down from heaven
through the Holy Spirit.

**[1526 L. V. 217-219. interpretation of Genesis 32, II. w. 1,
2268-2291. 1527]{.underline}**

and waited for special enlightenment, of which also some have fallen
into such nonsense that they have boasted that they had heard the voice
of God, that he had spoken to them from heaven. Here, the truth of the
light of the gospel should be held up against such enthusiasts, and
against such red spirits, who think that one should investigate the will
of God without a word, one should fight with seriousness; as such lying
spirits were the enthusiasts, item, Manichaeus, and all heretics, who
wanted to be like the patriarchs, to whom God\'s word and promise was
revealed ever more brightly and clearly, until Christ, the true light,
himself came into the world.

130 Thus the popes have also invented a new madness out of the promise
of Christ, which they have not rightly understood, since he says John
16:12, 13: \"I have yet many things to say unto you; but ye cannot bear
them now. But when that one, the Spirit of truth, shall come, he shall
guide you into all truth.\" From this they have invented and said that
Christ and the apostles did not teach all that is necessary for our
salvation, but to the bishops, and much divine report is still reserved
for them, which they are always to hold up to the church more clearly
and distinctly from one time to another. But all this foolishness should
be contrasted with the words of Christ Luc. 16, 29: \"They have Moses
and the prophets\" 2c.; item, Is. 35, 4. Now the Lord Himself has come.
Open wide the gates, that he may come in, Ps. 24:7, 8; for he is not a
servant, as Moses was, or as the ministering spirits are, but he is the
Lord himself.

This shall be taught, and it shall also be inherited by the descendants,
that they may flee and condemn the revelation of new doctrine, and
diligently keep before their eyes this command, when God the Father says
of His Son, \"Him you shall hear,\" Matt. 17:5, that is, the evangelists
and apostles; for these shall be read and heard, and likewise also the
Old Testament, which also faithfully testifies of all these.

Where something is further revealed about it, it must be similar to
faith,

and must be a revelation according to the understanding of the
Scriptures, otherwise it is a devilish revelation. It is true that the
devil has often tempted me, as he did Augustine, who forbids God that no
angel should appear to him, that I should desire a sign from God. But
let this be far from me, that I should give room to such temptation and
follow it. The holy martyrs were strengthened without the appearance of
angels, only by the word that they went to their deaths for the sake of
the name of Christ: why do we not also adhere to the same word and be
satisfied with it? We have clear and beautiful bright appearances
enough, as namely, the baptism, the Lord\'s supper, the keys, the
preaching ministry, which is equal to, yes, far surpasses all
appearances of all angels, whereas Abraham had only small drops and
crumbs.

For this reason, I do not respect angels, and I pray to God daily that
He will not send one to me, no matter what the matter may be. And even
if one should occur to me, I would not hear it, but would turn away from
it, unless it indicated to me something about some necessary matter in
the world regime, as all merry and happy dreams in worldly matters tend
to delight us from time to time: and yet I would not know whether I
would obey and believe it even in such a case.

In spiritual matters, however, we should ask nothing of the angels. For
the divine promise is now abundantly fulfilled and revealed in Christ;
he has left me his word to instruct and strengthen me, and I must not
worry that he is so inconstant or fickle that he sometimes brings this
teaching and sometimes another; as Deut. 23:19 says: \"God is not a man
that he should lie, nor a child of man that he should repent. We have
God\'s word, the Lord\'s Supper, baptism, the Ten Commandments, the
marriage state, the secular authorities with their order and the house
rule; we should be content with these and practice them until the end of
the world.

135\. Gregorius, as can be seen in his Dialo-

**[1528 L.v.rid-221. interpretation of I Genesis 22, 11. 12. w. 1,
2291-2284. 1529]{.underline}**

The people of Apulia, who might have seen it as a miracle, simply
believed all the apparitions; as they, among others, told many lies
about the feast of St. Michael, such as that St. Michael consecrated a
church on Mount Gargarus and stabbed an ox that had been plowing on the
same feast day. I would have said: What have you to do with Mount
Gargarus, whose lord is the king of Apulia? You are not Michael, but the
devil.

The papists\' books are full of such lies. And this is our own fault,
because we did not want to hear the Lord, but desired to hear the
angels, wanted to have special revelations and appearances; therefore we
also found with all our heaps what we were looking for, to our great
harm. For thus St. Paul judges 2 Thess. 2, 10. 11.: \"For not having
received the love of the truth, that they might be saved; therefore God
will send them strong errors, that they may believe the lie\" 2c. We
have despised the doctor and teacher of whom it is said Matth. 17, 5:
\"You shall hear him\"; item: \"The spirit of the Lord is upon me\" 2c.,
Is. 61, 1. and Luc. 4, 18. Our ears have been pricked, have turned away
from the truth, and have turned to fables and lies; therefore we have
also found such teachers who have pricked our ears.

If I were a king and had sent my only son to someone, offering him the
kingdom and all the goods therein, and he despised such a great good
deed, I would have sent all the plagues and tortures upon him: then,
since we have not accepted the gospel confirmed with signs from heaven,
do we not also deserve to have a whole legion of devils appear to us for
a good angel, whom Abraham saw?

V. 12. **He said, \"Do not lay your hand on the boy, and do not harm
him.**

Now another question comes to mind: How could Abraham have obeyed the
voice of the angel and abstained from slaughtering his son?

How if he had doubted and thought that it was not an angel, but a devil,
because he had an explicit commandment of God, namely, since God had
said to him: Slaughter your son and offer him as a burnt offering?
Against the commandment he is now commanded by the angel to spare his
son and not to harm him.

The first challenge was against the promise of the seed; but this was
overcome, since he had now turned to obedience in his heart, and Isaac
had also taken this comfort, even if he would become ashes, the promise
would nevertheless remain, and God would again raise him from death. So
the angel cries out against all this and says: \"Do nothing to the boy.
Such a command is immediately a challenge to him, because it is contrary
to the previous commandment: just as he was challenged above (v. 2) with
the commandment that was contrary to the promise.

But to this question I answer thus: The holy scripture clearly says that
this was not a deceitful or lying, but a real true angel, who truly
brought God\'s word. Abraham believed it, so that it must not have been
spoken in vain; and since he certainly decided in himself that he wanted
to slay his son, the Holy Spirit admonished him inwardly through the
word of the angel as through an outward means and instrument, and
compelled the faith and spirit in him. But if he had not had an outward
word, he would not have believed the contradiction, and he would not
have refrained from his presumption.

141\] After this it is also plausible that Abraham, out of a strange and
secret movement, kept his hand silent against the commandment he had
received before; as in the Old Testament the prophets also did much
against the word: as when Elijah built an altar on Mount Carmel and slew
the priests of Baal 1 Kings 18:30 ff, contrary to what Moses had
commanded, saying Deut. 12:5: \"In the place which the LORD your God
shall choose, there shall ye come and sacrifice\" 2c. Elijah and Elisha
did not do this. Item, there are among the people of Israel

**[1530 D. V, 221-223. interpretation of 1 Dlose 22, 12. W. I,
2294-2296. 1531]{.underline}**

There have been many prophets who did not come to Jerusalem to teach or
preach there.

All of these had a peculiar impulse with a peculiar freedom that they
did this. Thus Samson had a peculiar spirit when he tore the lion to
pieces and slew and strangled a thousand Philistines with the donkey\'s
jaws. Such peculiar movements and a peculiar zealous spirit of the great
valiant heroes are above the common rule and manner; just as we also see
a difference between the rulers and princes in the temporal government.
For some of them keep their regiment according to the common rights,
order and laws, but some do not; as Alexander did not want to be bound
by any law, but broke freely through it as with his peculiar courage and
spirit, which could not happen to others in such a way.

And this we see in the examples of the Gentiles; but how much more has
God reserved such heroes among His people! Gideon with three hundred
soldiers defeated the whole army of the Midianites, Judges. 7, 7. ff.
Abraham overcame four mighty kings with a small group, Genesis 14:15.
These are not bad and mean examples, but miraculous works that God
reserves for Himself. So it could well have happened that God secretly
and specially instructed Abraham that he should not slaughter his son.
So, methinks, one could answer this question simple-mindedly.

But the text also adds an external sign. For it clearly says that the
angel came from heaven. But he did not come as Satan is wont to come.
For God has made a strange distinction there, namely, that the good
angels come with a fright, that is, with a peculiar majesty; as the
104th Psalm v. 4 calls the angels or servants flames of fire, so that
the people to whom they come are frightened by them; as the Virgin Mary
is frightened Luc. 1. v. 29. when she sees the angel and is terrified by
him; item, Daniel on the

8\. cap. V. 17. Therefore they appear with a special prestige and
majesty.

So this one also came from heaven, and no doubt the heavens opened, a
new brightness shone, lightning and fire were seen, and at the same time
there must have been a multitude of the other angels: before which
majesty Abraham was terrified, and both dropped the knife and the
thought of slaughtering his son. This is what happened at Mount Sinai,
where flames of fire were seen and thunder was heard, and the people
were struck to the ground, Ex 19:16, Cap 20:18. 20, 18. But finally the
good angels depart and go away again with joy, leaving the hearts
peaceful and joyful. God keeps this way when He sends good angels: and
by this sign Abraham was also reminded that a right angel was with them.

146\. But an evil angel creeps and creeps along quietly and silently
like a serpent, until he lures and tempts men, so that they become
secure and fall into sin: then he departs again with horrible terror.

147 Secondly, Abraham has the right rule of faith to guide him. For the
angel brings him no word contrary to the promise, but agreeing with that
which was spoken to him, \"In Isaac shall thy seed be called.\" For the
spirits must be tested and discerned by the rule of faith, whether they
also keep even with it. As when the devil commands through the pope that
I should worship the Meissen idol Benno, I hold the same command to the
rule and guideline of faith and see whether it also agrees with it.

But the right rule of faith is that which is written in the Acts of the
Apostles in chapter 4, v. 12: \"There is no other name given to men in
which we may be saved. V. 12: \"There is no other name given unto men,
whereby we must be saved. Therefore, there is no similarity at all
between Christ and St. James of Compostela; therefore, I reject the same
James as an idol, even if an angel would preach another gospel, Gal.
1:8, or if this idol could raise the dead. For

**[1532. 2. v. 223. 224. interpretation of Genesis 22:12. \". I.
WSS-WSS. 153Z]{.underline}**

The divine promises are such that they cannot be changed or reversed,
but stand firm. That is why Abraham also kept what he had been commanded
to do before, but he did it in such a way that he kept it against the
promise of the future seed. Finally, one must also see why God primarily
dealt with Abraham in this way, as follows in the text:

**For now I know that you fear God, and have not spared your only Son
for my sake.**

This is what the angel wants, that one should fear God, which the devil
does not prescribe to men; nor does the fear of God apply unless one
first has God\'s word. And so those who have the right judgment of the
spirit and faith can make an outward distinction between the
appearances. For the evil spirit cannot refrain from it, it must seek
its own honor, as the ungodly false teachers are always wont to do new
and unheard-of things, so that the world may marvel at their great
wisdom and think great of it, but not so that God may be feared and
honored.

The other and most certain sign of the good angel is that he comes from
heaven. Third, his preaching is also according to faith. By all these
things Abraham was persuaded to obey the voice of the angel, so that the
commandment that he should sacrifice his son was abolished. No doubt the
Holy Spirit, who is always at the word, also came to this.

Such contentious sayings in Scripture, which seem to be contrary to one
another, give rise to much strange disputing among ambitious minds; for
the devil seeks such vile speech in Scripture with all diligence, and if
he accomplishes nothing with it, he devises other falsifications to
deceive and seduce men with it. Should God, he says, be against himself
and lie? Before, he allowed Abraham to sacrifice his son hot, now he
forbids him again. But we Christians

We should think and speak of such things with reverence and in the fear
of God, and learn to recognize God as the one who sets one against the
other. Although this government of the saints, in that it leads God so
wonderfully, reminds us of many lovely things and is full of beautiful,
rich consolation. And pious, God-fearing people, if it could be done
without violating the divine majesty and truth, might well use such a
way of speaking that they would say: God lies and thus pretends to us,
pretends to be different from what He means, and thus plays with us; as
one is wont to say in the German proverb: If it is to be true, then it
is a great lie. For when it comes to dying, they can say to God: This is
not death, but life; you play or joke with me, as a father jokes with
his child; you say differently than you think. Such is a good and
wholesome lie to us.

And how blessed we would be if we could learn this art from God. He
tempts and sets before us a strange work, that he may thus do his own
work; through our affliction he seeks his game and our blessedness. God
said to Abraham: You shall kill your son 2c. But how does this happen?
Answer: With games, laughter, and that he pretends otherwise than he
really means. This is truly a blessed and funny game.

153\. So he poses to the lines, as if he wanted to step far away from us
and kill us; but who can believe that he only poses like that and that
he should not be serious? Now it is truly a joke with God, and if one
wants to speak of it, it is a lie with him. It is indeed a real death
that we will all have to take upon ourselves; but God is not serious
about what he lets us see and find outwardly. It is only a temptation to
lose the present goods of this world and life itself for the sake of
God. Thus Genesis Deut. 13, 1. ff. says: \"If a prophet or a dreamer of
dreams shall arise among you, and give you a sign or a wonder\" 2c.;
\"then you shall not obey the words of such a prophet or dreamer of
dreams; for the LORD your GOD tempts you, so that

**[1534 L.V. 224-22S. Interpretation of Genesis 22:12, W. I, S299-2S02.
1535]{.underline}**

He will know if you love him with all your heart and with all your soul.

These are not the words of an angry judge, but fatherly words. As if he
wanted to say: I have given you my word, so that you accept it with a
good, peaceful heart and adhere to it; 2c. But I will send false
apostles, and will try whether you will also mean and love me and my
word seriously.

So the father takes an apple from the child and yet does not mean it,
does not intend to take it from him, but only tries the child to see if
he loves him and believes that the father will return the apple to him.
If the son gladly gives the apple away, the father is pleased by his
obedience and by the love the child bears him. Thus the temptation,
where God tempts us, is also fatherly; for thus St. James says in his
epistle in chapter 1, v. 13: \"God is not a tempter to evil,\" which is
so much to say: He does not tempt us so that we should shrink from Him
and be hostile to Him as a tyrant, but only of the opinion that He may
exercise us and awaken faith and love in us.

Satan tempts people to evil, that he may draw you away from God and make
you distrust God and blaspheme Him; but God plays with the children whom
He loves, showing Himself angry and terrifying against them, as it seems
to the flesh. Hence the lamentations in the Psalms: \"I am cast out from
thy presence,\" Psalm 31:23; item in Psalm 27:9: \"Hide not thy face
from me,\" 2c. But it is all a joke, and God will not deceive you; only
hold fast to His promise, which cannot fail nor be changed. And even if
you have to lose honor and goods, life and limb, you should not think
that God is angry with you and has therefore rejected you, but you
should expect other gifts from Him, which are much more glorious and
better than eternal honor and a better life than this; as Job says in 13
Cap. V. 15. 16.: \"Behold,

Though he slay me, yet will I hope in him; I will reprove my ways before
him, and he shall be my salvation.\"

157\. Incidentally, the word: \"Now I know\" was interpreted by the
Fathers in this place: Noscere te feci I have made thee know, that is,
that thou mayest understand that thou fearest God; as St. Peter exhorts
2 Epist. 1, 10, that we should make our profession and election firm by
good works. So when one has overcome a challenge, he is made more
certain of God\'s help, and can now say, \"This is a certain sign that
God has helped me; for with my strength I could not have done such a
thing. Thus, the fruits of the Spirit are called testimonies of faith,
which make us certain of our calling and election.

158 Here one must also note the rule of the twofold knowledge of God, or
of a twofold seeing of God. When it says in the Scriptures: \"God saw,\"
the teachers make two kinds of knowledge: one that is eternal and
invisible, in that God saw all things before they were; the other, in
that He sees the things that are present. God did not see the Virgin
Mary before she was born, through this vision, so that He might behold
the things that are already present, and yet He has seen them from
eternity. Thus God saw all creatures before they were created; and since
they are now created, it is also said of Him that He sees or recognizes
them. In the same way God also speaks here: \"Now I know\", that is, now
I experience it and see it in action, \"that you fear God\". Hence the
difference that St. Augustine makes between the evening knowledge of the
creatures in their nature and the morning knowledge from God\'s word and
revelation.

For God\'s knowledge is in some respects similar to human knowledge and
understanding: therefore I think that this way of speaking, \"Now I have
seen,\" is simple to understand, as in itself it is illogical; although
I do not reject the interpretation of the Fathers, namely, that God
speaks in a human way, as if He had only then seen and understood all
such obedience.

**[1536 L. V.WS-2W. Interpretation of I Genesis 22, 12. W. 1. 2S02-230S.
1537]{.underline}**

recognized Abraham\'s piety and right fear.

\- 160 For such descriptions, where the Scripture speaks of God as of a
man, and assigns to him all that is human, are very sweet and
comforting, namely, that he speaks kindly to us and of such things as
men are wont to speak to one another, that he rejoices, deceives, and
suffers as a man, for the sake of the mystery of the future humanity of
Christ. For this cause we read and seek in the Old Testament, that we
may see therein, as it was spoken of before, not only in word, but also
with divers figures and works, that Christ should become man.

This is why we love this way of speaking, since in the Scriptures God is
described in human form and gestures, as in the Psalms: \"Lord, why are
you sleeping? Ps. 44:24; item, Ps. 34:16: \"The eyes of the Lord look
upon the righteous\"; item, Ps. 145:16: \"You open Your hand,\" and what
are more such pieces, which are transferred from men to God because of
the weakness of our understanding. And we should gladly be satisfied
with this image, by which God is, as it were, painted before us in
Scripture, and let ourselves be satisfied with it, and beware of the
forwardness of human reason and wisdom, which wants to search out the
Majesty; for this is why it was proclaimed before that God should become
man, so that we might have a certain way of recognizing and grasping
God.

162 After this, one also tends to ask here: Whether Abraham became
righteous through his works? as Jacobus discusses in his epistle Cap. 2,
21. 2, 21. Because the text says: \"Now I know that you are righteous
and fear God,\" St. Jacobus wants to conclude from this that he had not
been righteous before. But it is easy to answer this, as the words
themselves give and indicate the answer. For \"to be righteous\" is
also, according to the grammar, something different than \"to recognize
one as righteous\" or \"to see that he is righteous.

163\. Abraham was righteous by faith before he was declared righteous by
God.

is. Therefore Jacob does not rightly conclude that he is now justified
only after this obedience; for by works faith and righteousness are
known as by the right fruits. But it does not follow, as Jacob foolishly
concludes, that therefore the fruits make righteous; just as it does not
follow: I know the tree by the fruits, therefore the tree is made good
by the fruits.

For this reason, let the adversaries with their Jacobus, whom they so
often reproach us with, leave us alone, and talk much useless rubbish
about the righteousness of works; but they do not understand anything
about it. Yes, the Sophists themselves also make a distinction between
being in knowledge and being in reality. The righteous is not justified
by being recognized for it, but when he has been justified by faith, as
was said of Abraham in chapter 15, v. 6. V. 6, he is recognized as
righteous by his fruits and works.

But in this place it must also be noted that this, which is praised of
Abraham, that he feared, loved and honored God, is not said of faith
alone, but of the whole service of God, of the tree with the fruit; for
to fear God is called by the Hebrews as much as to honor God, or to
serve God, to love and value God. Thus in the 14th Psalm, v. 5: \"They
fear, because there is no fear,\" since it does not speak of fear or
terror, which the wicked do not feel, but of the worship of the wicked,
and wants to say of their worship that they serve God, since one should
not serve Him. \"They have brand in their conscience,\" as St. Paul
calls it 1 Tim. 4, v. 2. That is, they have a fictitious and false
conscience, which is forced by force and is not natural nor righteous.
As the pope does when he forbids marital status and meat eating. So the
wicked always want to fear God, that is, to honor and serve Him, since
there is no right worship.

166 Thus, when it is said Matth. 15, 9. from the prophet Isaiah Cap. 29,
v. 13: \"They serve me in vain, because they teach such doctrines, which
are nothing but the commandment of men,\" is said as much as that they
fear

**[1538 V, 223-230. interpretation of I Genesis 22, 12. 13. \". 1,
2SSV-AM. 1539]{.underline}**

me in vain. For the fear of God is the highest service of God in the
holy scriptures. Therefore Jacob calls God the Lord fear and honor in
Genesis 31, 42, and understands by it nothing else but the Godhead
itself.

Thus the wicked want to be reverent and humble, walking quietly, hanging
their heads and trembling with them like a reed; they want to be seen as
being godly and pious above all others, but nevertheless fear and serve
God in vain.

168\. and this is a common plague and error throughout the whole world,
that we fear God, serve Him and honor Him even to the devotion of
angels, but all with a dense and burned conscience. As the priests of
Baal suffered much that was hard and severe, for they stabbed themselves
with knives and awls, so that the blood ran afterwards, 1 Kings 18:28;
but they were self-chosen marks that they made for themselves, and not
those of which St. Paul says Gal. 6:17: \"I bear the marks of the Lord
JEsu on my body\" 2c. Again, the wicked fear nothing, since one should
fear God most of all; yes, they are quite insolent and bold to despise
the right worship and to trample God\'s word under their feet.

Nowhere shall you fear God but in His word, as it is written in Exodus
20:3, 4: \"Thou shalt not worship strange gods; thou shalt not make unto
thee any graven image or likeness. Where God reveals himself in his
word, there serve him, there show him honor; then you will fear rightly,
as one should fear.

For this reason, we trample underfoot the pope, cults and sects, and do
not fear them, nor do they honor those who perform strange services
outside of and against the Word of God, but on the other hand condemn
the true religion and right doctrine, calling it heresy: therefore they
fear when there is no fear, and when one should fear, they do not fear
at all.

So Abraham performed the sacrifice with his son until now, although it
was not completed, but was only a preparation for the sacrifice.

**II.**

**V.13 Then Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw a ram hanging behind him
in the hedge with its horns; and he went and took the ram, and offered
it for a burnt offering in his son\'s stead.**

172\. it is said above that we may think without sin, but with the fear
of God, that the angel came with great majesty, with a wind and a flame
of fire, and that Abraham was frightened and fell down on his face, or
at least bowed his knees and inclined his ears, when the angel said,
\"Now I know that you fear God. But after he had forbidden him not to
slay his son, the angel disappeared, leaving Abraham alone with his son.
As they lift up their eyes and look around, they become aware of the ram
behind them (it is the emphasis in the word \"behind them\"), which
hangs with its horns on the tangled and jumbled hedge.

For the Hebrew word sebach actually means branches that weave in and out
of one another and grow in disorder; the ram\'s horns were caught on
such branches. Thus it is written in Ps. 74:5: \"The axes are seen
flashing above, as one hewing in a forest,\" 2c. to indicate that the
enemies raged and raged against the sanctuary in no other way than as a
forest or bush is hewn down with axes, as if the temple and the
sanctuary were a tangled and thick forest. Others have pretended that
the hedge was a name of a special place, but it is not. The ram stood at
the bottom of the mountain and was stopped in the hedge and bush.

But here one is used to ask: Where did this ram come from? The Jews say,
he was created on the sixth day with other animals and was preserved by
divine order up to the same time. We Christians know that with God
creation and preservation is one thing. Who now knows l the power and
authority of the Creator, will

**[1540 L. v. 28V-M. Interpretation of Genesis 22:13. 14. W. i.
ssm-ssro. 1541]{.underline}**

Do not arrogantly argue about where the ram came from. Scotus disputes
about where God will take the fire from at the last day, so that the
world should be burned. But how can one pretend more foolish questions
and thoughts? So those who want to be wise commit no small folly, but
when they err, they err very grossly.

In order for us to say something about this question, we should know
that the holy scriptures indicate that God, through the voice of an
angel or servant, brings forth that which was not there before, or even
increases that which is already there. Thus, at the word of Moses, who
is a man, water flows out of the hard rock, Ex 17:6. Item, in the camp
of the people of Israel quails are scattered from time to time, Ex
16:13. If God has one quail, He has a hundred thousand of them and
countless. So he takes five loaves and feeds five thousand men with
them, Joh. 6, 11.

If we believe that by God\'s power and authority all things are created
from nothing, why should we not also believe that He can increase what
is already there? Where does the snow and rain often come from so soon
that now the sky is fine and clear, but soon in an instant, when it
pleases God, He makes a rain or snow come down? In the 1st book of the
kings at the 17th chapter V. 14. 22. Elia says to the widow of Sarepta:
\"The flour in the cad shall not be revered, and the oil jar shall not
lack anything\" 2c. By this word the widow and her family are nourished
during the whole time of the theurge; yes, also her son, who had died,
is raised again.

177 Thus Elisha commanded his servant, saying to him, 2 Kings 4:43,
\"Give the people bread, that they may eat, and they shall be filled;
and it shall be left according to the word of the LORD\"; a hundred men
were fed, and they were filled with twenty barley loaves; but how much
more can angels do this? It is not impossible for God to bring forth a
ram out of the hedge when an angel speaks, but by a proper power and
authority; rather, how could he have done it if he had given his
authority to the angels?

would have wanted to use without means? As when he does not let the fire
in the furnace burn nor consume, but cools and refreshes.

178 Therefore I do not punish that one wanted to say that the angel
brought the ram there, or else it was created by command of the angel at
that time, which I rather want to believe. Nevertheless, it can be seen
that the fathers must not have said this in vain, that the ram was
prepared for this purpose from the beginning of the world; for they had
the knowledge of the seed of the woman, namely of Christ, and understood
that this ram was a figure of the same seed.

For the same was before creation, as St. Paul says to Titus Cap. 1, 2:
\"Which he that lieth not, God, promised before the times of the world.
Christ was therefore ordained and appointed from eternity by divine
providence to crush the head of the serpent, to become the sacrifice for
the human race, to kill sin and make us alive again. But he waited until
the appointed time of his revelation. This allegory and secret
interpretation is good enough and I do not punish it.

180: When they saw the ram, however God had brought it, Abraham took it
and offered it as a burnt offering in his son\'s place: Isaac was the
servant and helped the father to perform the sacrifice, but the ram was
a sign to assure Abraham that he should not offer his son Isaac, but
this ram. So an outward sign is always given for the word. For he soon
understood that the ram had been placed by God to be sacrificed, so that
he would not have prepared and ordered the altar and other things he had
prepared for sacrifice in vain.

V. 14: **And Abraham called the place, The LORD seeth. Therefore it is
still said today, \"On the mountain where the Lord sees.**

181 All those who have interpreted this text conclude that it should be
read passively.

**[1542 V. 232-234. interpretation of I Genesis 22, l 4. W. I.
2310-2313. 1543]{.underline}**

shall: In monte Dominus videbitur: On the mountain the Lord is seen. And
I do not doubt that Jerome would have given it in Latin at the
beginning, but that it was changed out of the error and lack of
understanding of a clever person or a scribe, who thought that the
following words had to agree with the previous one. But above it was
said of the mountain or rather of the land of Moriah, which was a
special place, appointed for the glory and service of God, where the
fathers sacrificed.

182 However, I will now rather follow the opinion of Burgensis, who is
experienced in the Hebrew language and skilled in interpreting the
Scriptures. For he considers that one should read here: In monte Dominus
videbit: On the mountain, where the Lord will look; and gives this
reason for the fact that Abraham, when he asked his son where the sheep
for the burnt offering was, answered: \"God will provide it for him, my
son,\" that is, he will provide it. As if to say, \"We may not know, but
he knows where we are to get the sheep for the burnt offering; let him
see to it.

183\) I cannot punish this understanding, because the Lord has seen,
that is, he has provided that this word, which Abraham had said to his
son, \"The Lord will provide,\" would be fulfilled; therefore this name
was given to the mountain, \"The Lord will see,\" as if to say, \"The
Lord sees and has respect for this place. This interpretation refers to
the mountain Moriah, on which the service was held. And at the same time
the name \"The LORD sees\" points to those who are on the mountain and
serve God there. For God also looks at them and hears them.

Therefore, this mountain, which was honored from ancient times by the
fathers, who worshiped on it, as stated above, is now also sanctified by
God Himself, who looked upon and respected this place and sanctified
those who came there to worship and serve God.

185 So that this name of the mountain is full of

It contains and describes the relationship of those who fear God, call
upon Him and give thanks to Him, to God, who accepts such and answers
the prayers: the relationship of the worshippers to the worshipped. And
even though this place had been ordained for worship before, Abraham is
now fully assured that God is present there, directing His eyes and ears
toward all those who serve and worship Him in this place.

Although it is better to read it this way, as the Hebrews would have it,
\"The Lord is seen,\" the word has been changed by usage from a passive
to an active one, so that it would be indicated that God was present
there and that He was watching over those who served Him there. Thus, in
chapter 28, when Jacob went to Mesopotamia, he saw a ladder in a dream
at night, and the angels of God ascending and descending on it, he said,
v. 16 ff: \"This must be a holy place, for surely God dwells here, and
is the gate of heaven.

So this mountain, \"the Lord will see,\" has been kept holy by all
descendants, and the fathers, out of special devotion and reverence,
made it a service, so that whoever wanted to see God should come there;
for there God not only wanted to appear and be seen, but also wanted to
see there Himself. As if they wanted to say: This mountain should now be
called the Appearance of the Lord; for God sees there, appears, lets
himself be seen and heard, shows himself in his word, so that he hears
the prayer and otherwise shows himself there with all other rich
benefits. And this is called drawing and directing the words to a
foreign interpretation, but it is not done to harm, but rather to
comfort.

188\. but because he does not see alone, and look upon this place, of
which we have not enough, but also lets himself be seen, and appears to
us, it follows that the Lord is seen, since before alone it was said,
\"The

**[1544 D. V, 234-236. interpretation of Genesis 22, 14-16. W. 1,
231S-M6. 1545]{.underline}**

The Lord will see. And I hold that this mountain was the place where God
reported through His servants; and did Rebekah afterwards ask counsel of
this Lord, of whom it is said here that He sees, that is, she asked
counsel of the patriarch Shem, who was a priest of the Lord, and who
undoubtedly taught and preached in the same place.

B. 15. 16. **And the angel of the Lord called Abraham again from heaven,
saying.**

This is now the last conversation that the Lord had with Abraham, and
with it the history of Abraham will come to an end. But here I want to
admonish again, as I have often done, that in the holy Scriptures and
the histories described therein, one should pay attention primarily to
the Word and God\'s sermons, which one does not hear in the silent
legends of the saints, but the holy Scriptures alone have such
appearances of the Lord.

190\. But how great and glorious an honor is this to Abraham, that he
converses so often with God! For we find that God spoke with him eight
times. In our legends, as they are written of our churches, there is
nothing of the kind: and this is a perverse way of all men, that they
wonder more at works than at the word of God, which accomplishes all
wonderful and difficult works. And yet we gape at the works alone, but
we consider the word of God to be the word of men, since no difference
is seen between the word of a man and the word of God spoken by men, and
it is one voice, one sound and pronunciation, whether you speak divine
or human words. Therefore we fall away from the majesty of the word, and
pay no attention to what is written here: \"The Lord is seen,\" and ask
nothing about the appearance of God, but despise that God speaks to us,
and meanwhile think much of the Carthusian and other strict orders\'
abominable works.

191\. . Therefore, first and foremost, one should look at God\'s word
and consider it: and although One performs all kinds of miracles, He
does not do them.

If a false prophet or dreamer could do works, even raise the dead, he
should be dismissed immediately if he comes without God\'s word; all the
apostles and prophets have diligently admonished us to do this, and
Genesis Deut. 13:9, 10 says that a false prophet or dreamer should be
strangled, \"for he has sought to deceive you,\" he says, \"from the
Lord your God.

We should also let ourselves be moved by our own danger and become wise
through our own harm; for with such miraculous works, since there was no
word of God, the pope has confirmed his tyranny, which he exercised in
the church. As they have invented a lie about Pope Sixtus, that when he
once came into danger on the sea, he commanded the sea and said: If I am
the governor of Christ, let the stormy sea cease and be still; and
immediately it became still.

193 With such a miraculous work they wanted to prove that the pope was a
governor of Christ. As they have done with many other miracles, which
either really happened or were false and fictitious: item, with special
spirituality and devotion, with fasting, vigils and arduous work of the
monks, they have made a pretense to the poor, ignorant people and have
shamefully deceived them.

We should know and remember this, and should also diligently impress it
upon our youth, so that they may learn to beware of such abominable
works and to be enemies of them, and on the other hand to love and
esteem God\'s Word; for it is above all things, and creates all things,
as the dear beautiful sun, our body and soul, and all that the world
has.

What is it, then, that we praise the works so highly, however exquisite
they may seem? We should rather wonder about the creator and founder of
the works, and first of all be sure whether the miraculous works that
are praised in this way were done by God\'s word or not.

196\. But then the papists say: How do you do that?

**[1546 V. 2M-2A. Interpretation of Genesis 22:15, 16, W. 1:2, I6-231S.
1547]{.underline}**

could these works be done if it were not God\'s will? It is true that
God wills it and thus decrees that such works must be done as a
punishment, so that people despise God\'s word and become weary of it;
as St. Paul says in 2 Thess. 2:10, 11: \"For not having received the
love of the truth, that they might be saved; therefore God will send
them strong errors, so that they will believe the lie.\"

197 Therefore, the pope should first of all prove from God\'s word that
Pope Sixtus is a governor of Christ. Yes, they say, it is written in
Matth. 16, 18: \"You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church.
It is rightly said, but with the same words Christ wants Peter to
confess and preach the word, and not to be a tyrant who weighs down the
poor consciences with the statutes of men, not to extinguish the
knowledge of Christ; for this is not to be a governor of Christ, but a
true antichrist. If Sixtus, or whoever else it might be, raised the
dead, I would spit in his face and say that he was not driven by the
Holy One, but by the unclean spirit, so that he would not represent the
word of God in his works.

Therefore we set the word against the works, as they, the papists, in
turn set the works against the word. And they have the advantage that
people are always more moved by the outward appearance and splendor of
works than by God\'s word; but we act and speak of these histories so
diligently, so that one may consider what is most noble in them. But
they do not see this, but say that Abraham was a common layman, that he
had his household, that he wandered about the country like a poor
beggar, but they do not see that he was full of patience, humility and
love; much less do they pay attention to the words that God speaks to
him. But if it were said of him that he wore strange, unusual and
peculiar clothes, that he fasted, and that he made special devotional
gestures, then they would burst and praise him. But because he had a
wife, children, and grandchildren, they would

and had cattle, they say that he is a carnal man. But we will always let
them go with their tremendous works, and on the other hand we will
certainly believe that God\'s word is all in all. And if you believe
this, you will not lack great and wonderful works; but they will still
be such works as have no standing before the wicked and will not be
recognized or respected by the world.

We have accomplished many great things through the word and prayer, and
with prayer we still maintain peace, and with it we prevent and ward off
all evil intentions and cunning plots of our adversaries. Only
Christians who have the Holy Spirit, and who highly and grea6tly esteem
the proper spiritual and miraculous works, such as Holy Baptism, the
Lord\'s Supper, absolution, and that each one be diligent in his
profession, obedient to parents and authorities, all of which works the
papists despise, because they are common, unsightly and daily works.

**Fourth Part.**

**About the oath that God made to Abraham.**

[V. 16 **I have sworn by myself, says the Lord.**]{.underline}

God, the high majesty, does not promise everything, but also swears by
himself, as the words show. If there were a greater and higher one than
he is, he would gladly swear by him; but since he does not have him, he
swears by himself. Our people have this way, that they swear by their
loyalty and faith, yes, by their soul, which is not an easy oath;
although, if you want to look at people, it seems to be a small thing,
because they are loose and lying: but in truth it is nothing less than
swearing by God himself.

201\. as Christ interprets it Matth. 5, 34. 35. 36: \"But I say to you
that you should not swear to anything, neither by heaven nor by earth.

**[1548 L. V, 238-240. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16, W. I. 2319-2322.
1549]{.underline}**

mel, for it is God\'s chair; nor by the earth\" 2c. \"Nor shall you
swear by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black\"; much
less shall you swear by your soul. Cause that the oath, which one makes
by the hair, by heaven or earth 2c., happens by the creature of God,
that is, by that which is not ours or also not in our power. Therefore,
such swearing involves God Himself, although the name of God is not
expressed. So also, as often as it is said in the Holy Scriptures: \"As
my soul lives,\" it is an oath that has been taken by God, which
creature is the soul.

Now there is a great and wonderful thing, which the master of the
epistle to the Hebrews also saw and diligently considered in this place,
namely, that God swears by Himself, Heb. 6:13; for it is a sign of such
a lifting up, which burns altogether with great, inexpressible love and
desire for our blessedness. As if God wanted to say: I desire so much
and have such a great desire that one should believe my words, that I
not only promise, but also put myself as a pledge: I have nothing
greater that I want to put as a pledge, because there is nothing greater
than I am myself. As truly as I am God, where I do not keep my promise,
I will no longer be who I am.

This is truly a great thing, one would like to be astonished by it, and
it is well worth paying attention to it diligently. For divine truth
wants to indicate and say with it: You, man, are unstable,
strange-minded and fickle, therefore I will take a constant and certain
oath to my promise, and thus testify that I would rather not be God than
to be lacking in you.

If only he had sworn with these words, saying, \"I will destroy heaven
and earth, the sun, the moon, and the beautiful, glorious buildings of
the whole world, before I let my promise be in vain,\" then it would
truly be a great thing, which would not be less astonishing. But he adds
something even more important and sacred, and says thus:

I, who am God, who have power to break down or create heaven and earth,
swear and pledge not a creature, not heaven and earth, but myself, who
am the Creator of all things.

This oath, which is so holy, will condemn all unbelievers, just as it
miraculously awakened and increased the faith of the holy fathers. For
they thought: God promised us life, salvation from death and the devil,
and swore by Himself that this is our light and right, Ex 28:32. If we
do not believe Him because of this, we must be condemned.

Therefore let us also learn that God makes His promise so rich and
abundant that it is also above all our thoughts and faith; for He
increases and confirms them by His majesty, so that we have no cause for
doubt or unbelief. That is to say, to let ourselves be brought down
rightly, and to be wholly conformed to our weakness. We should have
enough of him, if he would only lift a finger to show his fatherly
kindness toward us: but now he holds out his word to us, and not only
promises us, but also swears and curses himself, as it were, if we
should speak so, that he may bring us his blessing.

Here, however, the disputation of the disposition and other such things,
which are full of danger and ruin, should do to my eyes. For they
inquire after God\'s will and His secret counsel outside the Word, and
refrain from inquiring and pondering too forwardly why God has revealed
Himself in this or that way; why, then, He carefully stops and pursues
us, so that we may believe Him. For we know how Adam was so presumptuous
as to seek God outside the Word in Paradise, just as Satan did in
Heaven; and both found Him, but not without great ruinous harm.

Therefore let us learn that God is not to be grasped according to our
reason, but as He has revealed Himself and humbled Himself to speak to
us and to act with us in a human way. Yes,

**[1550 L.v, 2M-242. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16. W. I, 2322-2W5.
1551]{.underline}**

We are to accept the divine majesty with joy, which so humbly lets
itself down and shows itself towards us that it not only lures and
brings us to itself with promise, but also compels us with the oath,
which it does, to accept what God lets us offer in his word.

209 And this same doctrine is very finely interpreted in the epistle to
the Hebrews in chapter 6, vv. 16, 17, 18. V. 16, 17, 18: \"Men swear by
a greater than they are, and the oath puts an end to all strife, so that
it remains firm among them. But God, wishing to prove abundantly to the
heirs of the promise that His counsel did not waver, made an oath to
that effect, that by two pieces which do not waver (for it is impossible
for God to lie) we might have strong consolation, who have refuge, and
hold fast to the hope offered\" 2c. Now what could be said or thought
more certain or more constant to increase and strengthen our faith? And
what else do we do with our unbelief or doubt, except to prove God false
in His promise and oath, which He has made to this end?

But how many are there who consider this atrocious blasphemy, which,
alas, is far too common, and by nature is in the hearts of all men? For
people either despise God\'s word and promise with great certainty, are
enemies of it, or when they hear about it, they say that they still
doubt it and cannot know whether God is merciful, whether he takes care
of and hears those who call upon him, especially the unworthy and poor
sinners.

Where a heart is thus in doubt, it can be moved and provoked to
blasphemy and despair in an instant. This is why St. Paul so often
exhorts us to learn to know God\'s gracious will toward us with
certainty and firmness, so that our consciences may be assured and
strengthened against all doubt and disbelief.

212 And for this reason the teaching of the pope is all the more
abominable and cursed, because he not only despises all this, but also

blasphemous for it and teaches that one should doubt, that is, he
publicly says that God is a liar, although he promises us his grace,
swears, puts his majesty as a pledge and curses himself.

But how much evil there is in unchristian and blasphemous doctrine, is
proven by the outward sins, such as avarice, fornication, and all kinds
of other sins and disgraces, which come like evil fruit from an evil
tree, and spring from a blasphemous heart, which does not consider God
to be truthful in promising the same, or commanding, or threatening
those who transgress His commandments.

Therefore, the epistle to the Hebrews reminds us diligently that God\'s
counsel does not waver and His promise is certain, lest we think or
think of God as unstable or lying. So also St. Paul says to Titus in 1
Cap. V. 2: \"God who does not lie.\" Yes, you say, to what purpose is it
that one so diligently exhorts about this thing? for who could say that
God should lie?

Do not the pope, Turks and Jews also believe that God is true, just,
wise and good? But since they say this most of all, they most of all
consider God to be lying, unjust and unwise; for they have no other
knowledge of God than only a philosophical or natural knowledge, namely,
that God is such a being, separated from the creatures, as Aristotle
says, which is true and inwardly observes the creatures within itself.
But what does that matter to us? So the devil also recognizes God, and
knows that he is true; but when theology and holy scripture teach about
the knowledge of God, then God must be recognized and grasped not as he
remains inwardly with himself, but as he comes to us from without,
namely, that we take it for granted that he is our God.

The first Aristotelian or philosophical God is the God of the Jews,
Turks and Papists; but he does not concern us, but the God whom the holy
Scriptures show us is our God, because he gives us his appearance, light
and right and speaks with us.

**[1552 6 V, 242-244. interpretation of I Moses 22, 16. w. I, 2325-2328.
1553]{.underline}**

For this reason, it is to be pitied that we do not believe in this God,
who has revealed Himself to us with word and sign. For this blasphemy is
in our flesh and blood, so that we think and say: I do not know, I still
doubt whether God will take such great care of me as he has taken in his
word. But what is this other thing held or said, but that God is a liar?

If fornication, covetousness and other such sins were more prevalent in
us alone, God would not be angry with us; but this root and origin of
all unhappiness, unbelief, he is hostile to and punishes horribly. In
the holy scriptures, many kings are praised because of all kinds of high
gifts and virtues that they had in themselves, such as that they were
able to abstain from being temperate, sedate, kind, benevolent, 2c., in
which, if need be, a well-bred man can prove himself; but yet the
Scripture complains of them, that they have done evil in the sight of
the Lord, that is, have despised that God who speaks and gives promise,
and have worshipped calves and idols, as Jeroboam and others have done.

For the human heart is so wicked and perverse that it accepts foreign
gods much more easily and with greater desire than it should consider
this God, who has revealed Himself to us through promise and signs, to
be true. For is this not an exuberant, abundant blessing of God, that he
has redeemed us through his Son? But how difficult it is for us to
believe this can be seen when there is danger with pestilence, drought,
misery and other punishments, when we come into such fear and terror,
completely without all confidence, as if we had no hope and promise at
all.

But what is the cause? It is precisely this, that because of original
sin we are naturally afflicted with this great affliction; because of
this our heart always rebels against the divine promises and thus
grumbles against them: God lies, and what he swears about is not true.
But if we could firmly believe that God would keep His promise, and His
oath, so that He would make His divinity known to us, would be true,
then we would not be able to believe it.

If it were certain and certain that the God who pledged his life and
gave his Son as a sign, we would consider death, poverty, shame and hell
to be the same as life, riches, honor and heaven, as there is no
difference between them in the sight of God. But since this does not
happen, it is a certain sign of our unbelief and mistrust.

For this reason the papists, Turks and Jews believe nothing at all, nor
do they understand what sin, mercy, justice, truth and grace are, but
these things are all mysteries to them, and yet they want to be thought
wise. And they are wise men too, but in their own way, namely in
philosophy, but not in the kingdom of heaven; for they understand
nothing at all of these spiritual things, but despise them. And how
could they ask much about such things or have much desire to do so, if
we, who want to be Christians, find this terrible misery in ourselves,
that we do not rejoice in our spirit every moment of the unspeakable
grace and mercy of God towards us, do not mock and despise death, the
world and devils?

This is to praise and extol the wonderful patience and grace of God, who
not only forgives our former sins, but also the sins we commit daily,
and who can tolerate and endure this common contempt of His grace with
such great, heartfelt longsuffering.

223\. we have the commandment of Christ, with attached promise and
threat at the same time, Matth. 10, 32: \"Whoever confesses me before
men, him will I confess before my heavenly Father\", item v. 38:
\"Whoever does not take up his cross and follow me is not worthy of
me\"; and Joh. 12, 25. 26: \"Whoever hates his life in this world for my
sake will receive eternal life. He that will serve me, let him follow
me; and where I am, there shall my servant be also\" 2c. Those who are
not moved by such words of Christ, but prefer the welfare of their
bodies and the goods of this world to the confession of Christ, truly
believe nothing else, except that God is not truthful with His promises
and threats.

[**1554 L. V, 244-246. interpretation of** I Moses 22, 16. **W. I,
2328-2331. 1555**]{.underline}

224 How often is it repeated in the Psalms: \"Harp on the Lord, be
confident and undaunted, and wait on the Lord,\" Psalm 27:14. Item in
Psalm 31:24-25: \"Love the Lord, all his saints. The Lord guards the
faithful, and gives ample recompense to the proud. Be of good courage,
all ye that wait for the Lord. We know all this and it is held up to us
daily, and yet we do not believe it and do not follow God, who calls us
to confess His word and promises us help and salvation. Now we must not
think that God is pleased with such doubt and mistrust that is found in
us. Yes, among all sins this is the most serious, which will condemn the
world and unbelievers. For one can understand the greatness of such sin
from the greatness of the promise, the divine oath, and that God Himself
pledges and obligates Himself against us, yes, even curses Himself.

For this reason, whoever has even a small drop or spark of such
spiritual confidence should know that it is a blessing from God and a
special gift. For if we could sincerely and undoubtedly believe such
promises, we would find much more courage and joyful spirit within us
than to be afraid of the world, the devil, or even all the gates of
hell.

For this reason, this teaching is so often used, that we should awaken
our hearts and one day begin to learn, at least with the ABC children in
school; for we will never become doctors and masters in this wisdom.
Would to God that we were only disciples of Christ! After that, we also
mean that the Holy Scriptures teach other and much higher things than
the arts and books of the philosophers, who know nothing at all of the
great grace and truth of God, nor do they understand how great the sin
is, by which God is accused by all men of being deceitful; for they know
nothing of the promises that we have of God\'s grace.

Therefore, when God swears an oath, these words should be considered
with diligence. God admonishes us as a gracious father,

tempts and drives us as he only can, promises, swears, puts himself as a
pledge, that he also curses himself, if one wants to say so, only for
the reason that we should only believe him.

But all the saints have had much trouble and challenge over such doubt
and unbelief, and St. Paul does not say in vain Titus 1:2: \"God who
does not lie. Perhaps he himself was also challenged with this, and was
in a struggle with the doubt of divine grace and truth. As if he wanted
to say: God has promised it, but the world does not want to believe it:
yes, it is also difficult for me to overcome unbelief and mistrust. For
he will undoubtedly have added this part, that he says: \"God who does
not lie,\" with great displeasure to himself.

229 So we should also recognize our sorrow and weakness. For since we
are content with the first fruits we have received to some extent, and
do not desire to accept and continue, we are quite lazy and sluggish in
prayer, confession and thanksgiving, and do not believe that the oath
God has sworn is true, but still doubt it in many parts, and also in
many parts believe God to be lying to us and not wanting to keep what He
has promised.

Therefore, we should not justify ourselves if God would enter into
judgment with us, but should humble ourselves in faith and recognize our
sin, be sorry that such old hags and other such terrible sins still
cling to us, that we make God a liar in what we encounter, and cry out
to Him: \"God, be merciful to me according to Your great goodness\" 2c,
Ps. 51, 3. and as we say in the Our Father: \"Forgive us our debts\"
2c., Matth. 6, 12.

But if we are proud and hopeful because of our righteousness, and
despise our brethren who are still weak, it is certain that we
understand nothing of this doctrine; as the Pharisee, Luc. 7:39,
despises and condemns the poor woman who was a sinner; but Christ again
reproaches him: Dear companion, recognize

**[1556 v V, 246-248. interpretation of Genesis 22:16. w. I, 2331-2333.
1557]{.underline}**

yourself: you do not believe me, since I take an oath and pledge my
majesty to you; this is the supreme sin, you do not consider me your
God, but make an idol for yourself out of your own righteousness.

Then our faith will be perfect, when death and life, honor and dishonor,
fortune and misfortune will be equal to us; which we will not attain by
speculation and certain thought, but will have to learn in challenge and
invocation. For one does not dispute here about the words, \"God is the
truth,\" but about things, as it is said, \"God does not lie,\" since he
swears and promises us the highest goods, namely, life, salvation, from
sins and hell: says this to each one of us so firmly and surely, and
says, \"You man shall surely live, or I myself will not live; hell is
conquered and destroyed for you, or I myself would rather go out, and
cease to be a God. Yea, that thou mayest not doubt, thou hast also my
Son, whom I have given thee.

Believing such great and rich promises and expecting these goods from
God with firm trust is the right faith, and God wants our hearts to be
awakened to such trust not only by the examples of Abraham and other
holy fathers, nor by promise alone, but also by the fact that He gave
His only Son for us, that He should be the gift and pledge of such
heavenly goods.

234 If we now hold the doctrine of the Jews and the papists, we find in
both of them abominable darkness and error, for they teach nothing at
all about these things. What is faith for? say the papists; one must do
good works. But the poor foolish people know nothing at all of the power
and nature of faith, but as much as the paper understands of these five
letters, \"faith,\" so much do they understand of it. The paper holds
these five letters before the eyes of those who read it; so they know
nothing more about faith. They think it is a vain thought or only a
realization, as the devils also think.

But they do not know that this is faith, where one believes God\'s
promise, which He confirms with the oath, and considers it to be true.
They understand that there is a God, as do the devils; but we do not
have enough of that, indeed, it does not concern us in the first place,
for it is outside of us.

But true faith concludes thus: God is a God to me, for He speaks to me,
forgives my sin and is not angry with me; as He promises: \"I am the
Lord your God,\" Ex 20:2. Now search and ask your heart: Do you also
believe that God is your God, your Father, Redeemer and Savior, who
wants to save you from your sins and from death? And if you feel that
you still waver or doubt, seek how you may be rid of such doubt through
daily and diligent practice of the Word of God. Thus we should
strengthen and equip ourselves against the doubts of the papists, and
learn that this is the only and most pleasant service of God, if we
believe and trust in our God, who swears so highly.

But nowhere else in the Scriptures does it say that God swore, except in
this one place. From this then all this flowed, as is said in the 110th
Psalm v. 4. and in the 132nd Psalm v. 11. about the oath that happened
to David. For just as the promise of the seed of Abraham came from the
seed of David, so the holy scripture transfers the oath given to Abraham
to the person of David.

237 And David did not accept this oath other than as if it had been
given to him himself, as he gloriously and highly praises in the 110th
Psalm, where he speaks of his Lord. For he studied the Scriptures
diligently, and when he found the promise of the seed and fruit of his
body, he drew from this text many things masterly and godly, and
appropriated them to himself. For he thus thought: God swore to Abraham
in the promise of the seed; the same oath undoubtedly also concerns me.
And that is why he repeated it so often and knows how to comfort himself
with it so powerfully: as in the 89th Psalm v. 36 and the 132nd Psalm v.
11.

**[1558 \".V, 248-250. interpretation of Genesis 22:16-18. W. I,
233S-233S. 1559]{.underline}**

But why this? Because I am certain, through the promise made to me, that
the seed of Abraham, which came through so many fathers, has also come
into my tribe and lineage, into my person and body; what therefore was
said or promised to Abraham must by all rights also come to me. This was
truly a great honor and dignity, which undoubtedly inflated his heart a
little. This is why humiliation follows, since he fell into the
abominable and shameful sin, so that he would not exalt himself too much
and become too proud.

239 And since the blessing is then placed on Abraham\'s seed, he further
concluded that this blessing must be placed on him and his seed. The
seed of Abraham, he said, is now my seed; the Messiah will be my son and
my Lord, and I am the man to whom the promise adheres, as it adhered to
the person of Abraham. And Matthew has seen this when he says Cap. 1, 1:
\"He is the son of David, the son of Abraham\" 2c. But the blessing
belongs to the priests and not to the kings, as in Cap. 14, v. 19. V. 19
Melchizedek blesses Abraham. But my seed, says David, is a son of the
king, and yet he is the one who gives the blessing; therefore he will be
both king and priest.

\(240\) In this way David considered this oath, unfolded it and acted
upon it by the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, so that he did not
doubt, even gloriously boasted, that the Messiah, his son, would be a
king, as if he were also born of a king, and yet would also bless and
therefore also be a priest.

241\. but because David was not born of the priestly or Levitical tribe,
he thought why God would not have taken the blessing from the seed of
Levi, namely, for such counsel and concern that he thereby indicated
that the Levitical priesthood should be abolished, but that this
priest\'s, the Messiah\'s, priesthood should be an eternal and
unchangeable priesthood; because

The blessing promised to Abraham is also eternal. From this he concluded
that he was a priest after the order of Melchizedek, whose end and
beginning no one knew.

242 Thus not only the master of the epistle, the Hebrews, but also the
fathers and prophets saw and marveled at the great abundant grace and
mercy of God, who poured Himself out completely through His promise, and
the oath He took to that end. For this reason they considered this text
with the greatest diligence, and therefore the beautiful psalms came to
David, and this oath is also praised with great joy by the saints in the
New Testament. For thus Zacharias sings Luc. 1, 72. 73.: \"That he may
remember the oath which he swore to our father Abraham to give us.\" So
the Virgin Mary says Luc. 1, 55.: \"As He spoke to our fathers, to
Abraham and to his seed forever.\"

**Fifth part.**

**The promise given above in the 12th and 15th chapters is repeated and
explained here.**

V. 16-18. **Because thou hast done these things, and hast not spared thy
only begotten Son, that I would bless thy seed, and multiply it as the
stars of heaven, and as the sand upon the seashore; and thy seed shall
possess the gates of his enemies; and by thy seed shall all nations of
the earth be blessed: because thou hast hearkened unto my voice.**

From this text, as from a full well, sprang many prophecies and sermons
of Isaiah, David and St. Paul. They agree with the previous promises,
which are written in the 12th chapter above. V. 3: \"In you shall all
the families of the earth be blessed\"; item Cap. 15, 5: \"Look up to
heaven and count the stars, can you count them? So shall thy seed be.\"
But this promise here is somewhat clearer and more explicit.

244\. above God said: \"in you\", Abraham, \"shall all the families of
the earth

**[1560 k. v. Lw-W2. interpretation of I Moses 22, 16-18. W. i,
2333-2341. 1561]{.underline}**

be blessed.\" There the seed is also understood, but is not clearly
expressed; but in this place it is clearly said: \"in your seed. The
same seed is explained by St. Paul in Gal. 3, 16, and interpreted by the
Lord Christ against the insane dreams of the Jews.

245\] After this, \"all nations\" are also mentioned here; therefore
this promise also concerns us Gentiles and all those who will hear and
accept it at all times, and not the Jews alone. The promise may not have
been made to us, since the Jews have precedence over us, but we are
nevertheless the persons of whom God speaks. The first person is God,
who speaks; the second is Abraham; the third is we Gentiles: therefore
we should hold this text in honor and love it dearly. For where the
words would thus read: -In thy seed shall thy people be blessed, then we
would be excluded there; but because the promise speaks of \"all
nations\" and of us, we have truly to rejoice in this blessing most
highly.

246 And truly these words are worthy to be painted and written with
great letters of gold, and to be always before our eyes and in our
hearts. For this is our glory from the blessing through the seed of
Abraham, whom we praise and extol no less than the Jews.

God has not spoken to us, nor sworn to us, but he has spoken to us, and
there is only a difference of persons, for the Jews are the other
person, and we are the third. But the first person, who is God, who
speaks, speaks to both persons, and wants that first the Jews and then
also the Greeks (as St. Paul used to speak, Ap. Hist. 13, 46, and lets
the Jews keep their preference and advantage) believe and make use of
all the goods, which the Son of Abraham brings with him, namely Christ
Jesus, who is the salvation and blessing of all nations.

248 Finally, it is certain that we will dwell in one place on earth and
possess it, just as the Jews possessed their land.

because in the text it is added: \"all nations on earth\". For this
reason, we must also partake of this blessing for the sake of such a
cause.

The word \"bless\" is to be remembered diligently. For in Hebrew it is a
different word than that which stands above in the 12th chapter. But the
peculiar meaning of this word must be gathered from the conjugations of
the Hebrews, which give different meanings to the time words. In the
first conjugation we find the so-called verba neutralia or absoluta: as,
I run; or when I say, I teach, I bless, without adding another word that
is governed by this one, so that here the action does not pass to
another object; for here I do not say, Deum benedicere hominem, God
bless man, or the like. But these same verba are constructed in the
other conjugation with the accusative, as: He teaches rhetoric; he has
blessed man. Here the act of blessing passes to another. The third
conjugation is the transitive one, which occurs very often in sacred
scripture, as when I say in Latin: doctifico, amatifico, that is, I make
you teach, I make you love. So also benedictifico, that is, I make thee
blessed. And this meaning is peculiar to God alone; for He alone makes
wise, that is, gives the same goods, although the same can also be
attributed to men, as: Moses doctificat populum, that is, Moses makes
Aaron teach the people, that the people may learn. The fourth order and
conjugation is in verbs describing an action that does not pass to
another, but refers back to the one who does something; as, benedico me
ipsum, I bless myself; although the pronoun reciprocum is not added, but
the property of the word already includes in itself this meaning, that
the action comes to myself. The Germans and the Latins add the pronoun,
the pronoun, because they do not have such words. The verba called
inchoativa are somewhat similar to them, but not throughout, as,
calesco, to become warm. So here belong the verba transitiva re-

**[1562 L.v, 252-254. interpretation of Genesis 22:16-18. M. I,
2341-2344. 1563]{.underline}**

ciproca, or reflexiva actionis, as the grammarians call it, as, in
Domino Domino laudabit seipsam anima mea, that is, I rejoice and exalt
myself, or my soul boasts, that is, it exalts itself very high, it
esteems itself more worthy and higher than heaven and earth, but in the
Lord. For it actually means when someone does by someone else\'s
strength what he cannot do by his own strength. We give it passively: In
Domino laudabitur anima mea: In the Lord my soul will be praised. Item:
\"The nations shall be blessed.\" It is God who blesses, but Christ is
the seed through whom He blesses, through whom they are blessed or bless
themselves, that is, the blessing of God will come upon the nations
through Christ, who gives the blessing when they will appropriate it in
faith, saying, I am blessed, not in myself, but in your seed. As when I
say, I praise and glorify myself, but in the sour: I boast of a strange
honor and power, as St. Paul says Gal. 2:20: \"But I live; yet now not
I, but Christ liveth in me\"; I am proud and hopeful from my blessedness
and forgiveness of sin, but by what? by a strange honor and hope, that
is, of the Lord Christ.

And Moses also uses this word in Deut. 29, when he encounters the
certainty and hypocrisy of the wicked after he has recounted the
benefits and confirmation of the divine covenant, and v. 19 thus says:
\"Even though he hears the words of this curse, yet he blesses himself
in his heart and says: It will not be so evil, I will walk as my heart
thinks fit\" 2c. This much is said: The wicked will not be moved by
promise or threat, but will say: It may be God or Moses cursing, what is
it to me? I bless and comfort myself. So also Jeremiah 9:23, 24: \"Let
not a wise man boast of his wisdom, let not a strong man boast of his
strength, let not a rich man boast of his riches; but let him that will
boast, boast that he knoweth and knoweth me\" 2c. Here is a reciprocal
meaning in all the pieces. He who praises himself that he is wise,
strong, rich, let him praise himself that he knows me.

He does not praise himself in wisdom, strength and riches, but praises
himself in the Lord. In German we add the pronoun: he feeds, bites, eats
himself, which the Hebrew word includes in its kind. So one could say
after the Hebrew language kind for this: \"In you will be blessed\" 2c.,
also well: In your seed all nations will bless themselves.

For this reason I wanted to indicate that those who want to study the
Holy Scriptures should learn the Hebrew language, so that they can also
refute the lies of the rabbis from the grammar. For there is a great
danger that they might suppress and falsify the holy Bible with their
glosses. But I have said in another place that there is a double
blessing: one with words, that one praises and glorifies; of this
blessing the Jews understand this place, because they only look at such
a blessing, which happens with words. The other blessing is done with
deed, which is a right divine blessing. For where God speaks the
blessing, the deed follows, or that which is spoken in the blessing; as
Ps. 148, 5. says: \"He gives, and it is created\"; and above in 1. cap.
V. 3.: \"God said, let there be light, and there was light.\" He is such
a God who blesses with deed, and His word is the true deed itself, and
His blessing is nothing else, but that He does good abundantly and
abundantly, both bodily and spiritual.

252 But actually blessing means a multiplication; as the angel says to
Hagar Gen. 16, 10: \"I will multiply your seed\"; and of Ishmael Cap.
17, 20: \"I have blessed him, I will make him fruitful and multiply him
almost greatly\" 2c. And this is not a blessing in words alone, but is
also the true deed; although it is bodily, namely, that Ishmael shall
beget twelve princes. Hence it comes that often in the holy scripture it
is read: \"These are the children, so that God has blessed me\", Gen.
48, 9.

253\. the Jews understand this text only of the blessing with words,
namely, that all the

**[1564 \".V, 254-256. Deposition of I Genesis 22, 16-18. W. I.
2S44-L347. 1565]{.underline}**

The people will praise the Jewish people, marvel at them and praise
their blessings. Which I therefore declare, that none of the rabbis\'
glosses may be disputed. For they interpret these words thus: The seed
of Abraham shall be blessed, that is, it shall be abundantly multiplied
with all things, so that all nations shall marvel at it, and bless it,
and rejoice in it, that they also may be partakers of this blessing and
fellows.

Thus they exalt themselves above the Gentiles and want to be above them
only for the sake of bodily blessing. But if you look at the histories,
you will find that the Gentiles, as the Assyrians and Persians, were
much higher and mightier than the Jews, for they had the rule over the
whole world.

Therefore, by this blessing the Gentiles are not subjected to the Jews
as servants, and it would be more fitting to call this a curse than a
blessing, if the Gentiles had no other glory or honor than that the Jews
should rule over them with such pride. Yes, the Gentiles have been lords
over the Jews, have burdened them with heavy servitude and have had
power over them; therefore, through this blessing, other goods must be
given, namely, heavenly and eternal goods, of which the Gentiles enjoy
at the same time as the Jews, and thus the Gentiles are promised the
right and divine blessing, not that they are subject to others and
burdened with servitude, as the Jews dream.

\(256\) Burgensis also speaks of this well and Christianly, namely, that
here it is not spoken of human blessings, or, as we said above, of
blessings with words, but of divine blessings, that is, of divine
benefits and of the riches of heavenly goods; for which goods the
Gentiles will praise and glory in themselves, but in the seed that is
forbidden to give. Such understanding is right and actually belongs to
this, since St. Paul also interprets this in such a way that the
Gentiles will praise themselves highly and declare themselves blessed,
as they are lords over heaven and earth; as he says in Eph. 1:3:
\"Praised be the Lord of all things.

God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual goods through Christ\" 2c.

257 And such a mind will undoubtedly be accepted by the more reasonable
Jews, who at least believe in a resurrection of the dead. For since
their fathers did not receive the promise of bodily goods, they will
have to admit to us of necessity that this promise is to be understood
of some other blessing than this poor and miserable life, in which
otherwise the wicked are richer and have more happiness than the pious.

258 Now that we have explained the power and quality of the word
\"bless,\" let this also be considered, that it is written, \"in thy
seed. All nations will bless themselves and hopefully boast that they
are blessed, blessed and showered with all spiritual gifts. But how will
they boast? Will they boast in themselves? No, but they will boast of
the victory and conquest of death, that sin has been blotted out and
done away with, and that eternal life has been given to them, not
because of their merit and righteousness, but in your seed. And the poor
sinners will not boast of it, or dwell on it, that they are praiseworthy
and righteous in themselves, but will boast that they have been
sanctified, redeemed, and washed in the blood of Christ, and transferred
from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light.

The Jews, on the other hand, want to be proud and hopeful because of
their wisdom, strength, power and great riches. This, however, does not
entail the promise of this blessing, but teaches that one should boast
in the Lord, as Jeremiah does in the 9th chapter. V. 24, against the
inherent hope of the Jews, which has been felt in them for and for, also
urges this very sharply.

We also reject and repudiate the false confidence of our saints of
works, which they have in their monastic vows, Carthusian and Franciscan
monks in their caps. For even the greatest saints, be it Paul or Peter,
do not have to boast of their works when they

**[1566 8. V,W6-WS. Interpretation of I Genesis 22:16\--18. W. I,
W47-2SS0. 1567]{.underline}**

had already raised the dead: as St. Paul Phil. 3, 4. ff. does not exalt
himself at all because of his Pharisaic righteousness and other gifts,
so that he also counts it all as damage against the exuberant knowledge
of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Therefore, all glory is excluded by these words, which were given as a
promise: \"in your seed\"; for the seed takes away all other blessings
and glory of its own righteousness, that is, that which comes through
faith in Christ, and is imputed by God to faith, Phil 3:9. Therefore,
says God, all nations will bless themselves in none other than your
seed, for in it are all the treasures of wisdom, righteousness and
holiness, and whatever will be praiseworthy and glorious among them,
they will have entirely through this seed. As St. Paul says 1 Cor. 1,
30. 31.: \"Who is made unto us of God unto wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption; so that, as it is written, He that
boasteth, let him boast of the Lord\"; who is our life, salvation and
peace, Joh. 11, 25.: \"I am the resurrection and the life. He that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.\"

Abraham was adorned with many beautiful and glorious virtues and gifts,
which he should have recognized and praised. But he has no glory before
God, for all his virtues have been stripped of their glory. How much
more should we judge other saints in this way, no matter how much merit
they have, be it the meritum congrui ober condigni (be it that God
should reward them according to their due or according to equity). For
God blesses Abraham in this seed alone, and wants us to be blessed and
also to bless ourselves in this seed, that is, we should boast of it and
consider it certain that this seed is ours and belongs to us with all
its goods and heavenly treasures.

Burgensis, who was converted from Judaism to the Christian faith, also
saw this, when he says: The word \"bless\" understands in itself the
author of blessing,

that is, not the Gentiles, but the seed of Abraham, that he is the main
cause of the blessing. Yes, he not only gives such blessing, but is the
blessing itself; for from him and in him we are the blessed and the
anointed, and each one can boast of it in particular and say: Christ is
my true blessing, my anointing, life and salvation, because I cling to
him through faith. And I am called blessed by such a Lord of blessing,
and I also call myself so.

So let the Hebrew form of this word \"bless\" be diligently noted and
considered: all nations shall bless themselves; for it is a certain and
strong confidence and right kind of faith, that I may believe assuredly
and undoubtedly that I am blessed, and I may say of myself that I am
alive, righteous, blessed, and blessed; for otherwise I do violence and
wrong to the seed of Abraham, to the Lord Christ, from whom I have life
and salvation. For the promise does not depend on my merit or works, but
on the seed of Abraham. I am blessed by it when I take hold of it with
faith and accept it, and the blessing also clings to me and extends
through the whole body and soul, so that the body also becomes alive and
blessed through the same seed.

And this is begun in this life by faith, when the soul, lying in the
anguish of death and sins, is raised up, and receives the consolation of
life and blessedness. Soon after, in the resurrection of the dead, the
body of the soul will also follow without all hindrance, and our vile
body will be transfigured to be like the glorious and transfigured body
of Christ, Phil. 3:21.

266 But this confidence and holy glory is prevented in us in many ways.
For with us is born the terrible evil that arises from the guilt of
original sin: hopefulness and presumption, by which men presume and
exaggerate their own powers, wisdom, authority and wealth.

Therefore, nothing is easier for flesh and blood than to bless oneself
and stand before God.

**[1568 2- V, 2SS-261. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16-\^18. w. r,
2M0-2W2. 1569]{.underline}**

overruling his own righteousness and holiness. But such blessings of the
flesh must be curbed and killed as a very harmful poison, and we must
also, sooner than we take hold of these blessings, consider and realize
the curse by which we are immersed in sins and horrible corruption of
unbelief, blasphemy, security, and other innumerable pestilences and
evil lusts.

For since God promises that the nations will be blessed, He indicates
that they were previously cursed and maligned. For God does not say this
in vain, but indicates that they lack the blessing and glory that they
should have in God, Rom. 3, 23. And this must follow from it and no one
can avoid it; as St. Paul also submits himself to this judgment, since
he says 1 Cor. 4, 4: \"I am aware of nothing, but in this I am not
justified.\"

But the saints of works and hypocrites do not see and do not think of it
at all, nor do they think that they are wicked; as the Pharisee Luc.
18:11 boasts with great pride, saying, \"I am not like other people.
Therefore the blessing does not concern them, although they always have
it in their mouths and bless themselves, but in themselves and not in
the seed. But this is a devilish and cursed blessing, and the prophets
everywhere argue completely and harshly against such blessings, calling
them lies, vanity, idolatry, sorcery, fortune-telling 2c. Therefore St.
Paul says Gal. 3, 10: \"Those who deal with the works of the law are
under the curse.\" From this it follows that all nations, because they
lack blessing, are under the curse and under sin, so that all the world
may be guilty of God. For \"the Scripture has decreed all things under
sin, that the promise might come through faith in Jesus Christ, given to
those who believe,\" Gal. 3:22. All these things, and many more like
them, sprang from this promise as from a very full well.

270 But these words of divine judgment are not at all pleasing to the
flesh and to reason, for all men flee from the confession of sin, even
those who are openly ungodly and wicked. But especially

The hypocrites can suffer great evil, that when they hear the teaching
of the gospel, their sins and ungodly conduct will be punished. They can
all suffer the blessing and boast of it, but that they are said to be
cursed and damned for sin, they can never suffer, and what is more, they
hate and persecute in a hostile way all those who teach and punish sin.

Therefore we should know that this text does not concern those who are
full, stiff-necked, puffed up and proud because of their own
righteousness, but those who are humbled and afflicted, who are troubled
by sin and afraid of it, who feel the curse and wrath of God that passes
over the cursed and poor sinners. Although they have righteousness,
wisdom and other gifts, they have to confess that such gifts are nothing
but outward larvae and shadows, and therefore complain that they are the
poorest and most miserable of all the people who live on earth, and
therefore call upon God to be gracious and merciful to them. So David
was very powerful and rich; but because he knew that he would be subject
to the wrath of God, to sin, to death and to the power of the devil, he
thought: \"What good is all the money and goods of the whole world to
me, since they do not give me blessings, nor do they bring me life or
eternal bliss?

272 Thus it is with all peoples who realize that they are damned, and
have a troubled and broken heart, and have also killed their confidence
in their gifts and their own powers. Even though they walk along in
great splendor and glory of the beautiful gifts of the Holy Spirit, as
David and others did, they still consider themselves poor, miserable and
cursed people, because they feel the great power of sin, and feel the
terror of hell and the wrath of God. For this reason, this promise
should be held up to their sorrowful hearts, just as the prophets took
all their comforting sermons from it.

In the New Testament, we have this promise explained very gloriously and
clearly. For the holy apostle Paul Gal. 3, 16.

**[1570 \" V. 2K1-SW. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16-18. W.I. 2WS-2W.
1571]{.underline}**

explains quite nicely who this seed is, and says it is Christ; no doubt
through the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, who taught him this. For
the Jews, and in general, all the wisdom of the flesh, do not understand
this at all, nor do they want to admit that this one seed is the Lord
Christ.

274\. According to this, the New Testament clearly states that this seed
of Abraham is truly man and also truly God. He is man, for he became
flesh and a son of the virgin. The Jews do not deny this, because he is
Abraham\'s son. But that he is also God is proved by this blessing; for
all nations are under the curse, as are all creatures. Therefore he is
not a creature, nor did he come from the Gentiles, otherwise he would
also be cursed. But he not only blesses others, but he is also blessed
in himself, so that through this seed the whole world is blessed. This
cannot be said of any pagan. For no man has ever rightly presumed that
he could bless himself and others and deliver them from death.

For this reason, Burgensis insists that the blessing rests solely with
the Creator and not with any creature; therefore, he who gives the
blessing must be the true God. For to redeem all nations from the curse
is a divine and not a human or angelic work. And so this seed is true
God and man in one person. He is man, because he is from the acid of
Abraham; but he is God because he gives the blessing.

Thirdly, he must also be such a man, born without sin. Now our faith is
all the more miraculous. We believe that he is a true man and yet not
born of human blood. For he was not conceived in original sin, and
cannot have blessing and curse at the same time, which would have to
happen if he were conceived in sin. Therefore, the Virgin Mary did not
naturally conceive this seed, nor is she such a mother as all nations\'
mothers are. She had to be a mother and give birth to a new human being,
but she was a pure mother and a virgin, who

received not from a man, nor from a good or evil angel, but from the
Holy Spirit, Luc. 1:35.

In this way, St. Paul, Isaiah, and the other prophets diligently
considered this text, and did not go over it so diligently as we do, but
read the promise with diligence. For when God speaks, he speaks such
great and lofty words that heaven and earth cannot comprehend. For he
speaks of the greatest things, which surpass all understanding of the
whole world, namely, that all nations are under sin, death and eternal
damnation. And everyone can learn this for himself from daily
experience. For we all feel and sense great danger, innumerable miseries
and misery, harder and more severe than death itself; but we do not know
the cause, much less can we see where salvation must come from.

278\. The same is shown to us here in this promise, which testifies that
all nations are under the curse and power of the devil, and yet offers
them salvation if they recognize their misery and do not despair, but
believe in the seed and bless themselves for its sake, boasting of life,
and each one accept salvation for himself with right faith, saying: I am
not now a sinner, but righteous; I am not cursed, but blessed through
the seed of Abraham, who is true man, born of the seed of Abraham, and
also true God.

This blessing is so powerful and strong that it can destroy and abolish
both death and all the curse we received from original sin.

280\. and this is a great immeasurable glory of the poor human race,
that God nowhere takes the angels to Himself, as is said in the epistle
to the Hebrews Cap. 2, 16, but takes to Himself the seed of Abraham. For
it would not have been difficult or impossible for God to bring His Son
into the world without a mother, but He wanted to use the female gender
for this purpose.

281 He could also have suddenly created a body from the virgin, as he
made Adam, the first man, out of the earthen lump and built Eve out of
his ribbe.

**[1572 D. V, 2SS-S6S. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16-18. W. 1.
23SS-23L8. 1573]{.underline}**

But this pleased him not; but he kept the order which he himself had
made: for a maid was so made, that she should conceive, and go in to be
with child nine months, and bring forth children. Therefore he also
wanted his son to be conceived, carried and born in the womb of a maid,
and not to be made from an earthen womb or to be born from man\'s seed.

This is truly a great consolation, that it did not please God that His
Son should become man in other matter than the human race, so that He
might become our brother and adorn us with such great glory that we have
a God born in our flesh and blood.

And these are such great and high things that they cannot be grasped and
understood in any other way than by faith alone, which awakens in us
such spiritual comfort and confidence that we can firmly believe that we
have eternal peace in heaven and on earth, not on our part, but in the
seed of Abraham.

But here we must put away and forsake all delusion and presumption of
our own righteousness, and diligently separate this seed from all works.
For the seed of Abraham, received by the Holy Spirit, is not my work,
but our righteousness and the seed are distinct things. The works are
also called a blessing, and they are; as it is written in John 14:12,
\"He that believeth on me shall do greater works than these\"; but then
they are not good until this blessing is first.

The blessing of this seed is not ours, but a foreign work. Therefore,
neither the righteousness of the law nor the papal statutes are to be
credited with justification, but in Christ Jesus our Savior I will bless
myself, that whoever boasts may boast in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1:31, and as
it says in the 105th Psalm, v. 3, \"Boast in His holy name.\" So let us
boast with everlasting comfort and joy.

So far we have dealt with the meaning of this text, as reported therein
straightforwardly

is from faith in Christ, the seed of Abraham, so that there all
worthiness and merit of works is excluded and rejected altogether,
because the text clearly says that all nations, even though they are
cursed in themselves and without all worthiness and righteousness,
should nevertheless bless themselves with blessings from others.

Therefore all blessings outside of this blessing are condemned, as well
as all wisdom, righteousness, power and everything that man has after
his first origin and birth from Adam. For though we may be happy and
well with all the world\'s good and honor, yet all such bodily blessings
are condemned as long as the curse remains, and there is no man\'s
honor, power or glory that he should be exempted here for this reason,
for all nations mean all men.

288 All these things rhyme well with our doctrine of justification and
faith, which the Papists condemn and persecute as erroneous and
heretical, mocking us and calling us solarios, because we ascribe
righteousness to faith alone.

Now this doctrine did not come from us at the beginning, but we drew it
from this and other such promises by the illumination of the Spirit of
Christ; for here all delusion and confidence in the righteousness of
works is evidently rejected, and righteousness, life, and salvation are
comprehended and included in this one blessing which comes through the
seed of Abraham.

Because they so brazenly contradict the public truth, we must also tell
them something about their doctrine, in which they deny what this
promise brings with it, and introduce such a doctrine as is utterly
contrary to ours, along with a new gloss, which they recently invented
to cover up their error.

291 For they do not ascribe righteousness to works alone, but to works
and faith together, seeing that they are seized with a manifest and
shameful error, namely, that it depends on works alone, and this

**[1574 L. V. 26S-W7. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16-1-8. W. 1,
23S8-2M. 1575]{.underline}**

They have taught human statutes without faith, that one can be justified
by them. Therefore they now give in a little and demand the works and
righteousness of the law instead of their human statutes for
justification. But since this is not enough to avert the disgrace that
lies upon them, they are now led to attach faith to works, saying that
neither works alone, nor faith alone, but faith with works, makes one
righteous; for faith without works is a dead thing.

292 Let us now consider a little this, that they say that faith alone
does not make one righteous. We have said above that we are considered
and recognized as righteous by faith alone, which is proven and
confirmed in this text, where it is said that the nations will not be
blessed in their wisdom and righteousness, nor in the law, but in the
blessing of the seed, that is, in Christ Jesus, \"who was made for us by
God for wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption,\"
1 Cor. 1:30.

293 But they say that faith alone does not make one righteous, but faith
with works. To this sentence they add a cunning explanation or
restriction, and thus say: Although we demand good works as necessary
for salvation, we do not teach that one should rely on these works. The
devil is cunning enough, but does not accomplish anything with it,
although he can make a pretense of it to the foolish and inexperienced
and to reason and seduce them.

For where trust in works is rejected and condemned, the righteousness of
works is of no value at all, since it is impossible for there to be true
righteousness in men unless faith and trust are also added, even
according to God\'s commandment, in which we are forbidden to lie, or to
think that this is not righteousness, although in truth it is
righteousness, for I should not say that it is sin. But if there is any
righteousness of works, as they say that faith without works is nothing,
then I am to believe from God\'s word and commandment.

Saying the commandment and believing it to be righteousness, and
believing, if I will be saved, that this righteousness is enough to
obtain salvation and eternal life.

For this reason it is a deception and a lie that they teach that one
should not rely on works. And the contradiction must be held, namely,
that the righteousness of works is necessarily followed by confidence.
For all righteousness and truth bring with them trust, which is the
inward power and essence, the beginning and end of righteousness.

Just as justice in worldly and domestic government cannot be without
confidence and trust. How could it be denied to this righteousness,
which is to be righteousness before God? In the domestic regime, I must
be certain that this woman is my wife and this is my child. In the
secular regime, I must also be certain of my authority, whether it is to
whom I am subject, to whom my fellow citizens are subject, and to whom I
am subject to the city law: there I must not doubt or waver. Yes, that
is even more, it requires such a constancy and certainty that I may not
doubt or refuse to give life and limb and all my goods to protect and
save my house, wife, children, authorities and fellow citizens with it.
But if I still doubt whether this is my wife, my father, my child, my
prince or fellow citizen, then it is not my wife, nor my father or son,
or prince 2c., and so both domestic and worldly justice is annulled and
taken away altogether. That therefore with all justice and truth at the
same time in the worldly and domestic rule also a confidence and trust
is and hangs on it, as the substance and right being.

297 When the papists say that they teach the righteousness of works, and
yet say that works are not to be relied upon, they speak against
themselves, and confess that the righteousness of works is nothing. As
it is in the house government. If you still doubt the woman there,
whether she is also your wife, she is not a wife, but a whore.

**[1576 L.V.SS7-2SS. Interpretation of Genesis 22:16-18. w. 1.
2361-2364. 1577]{.underline}**

For there must be a certainty and assurance in every righteousness, not
only of Christians, but also of Gentiles and Turks. A Turk is certain of
his wife, house, servants and emperor. 2c. So also a Christian must
conclude and take it for granted that his works are pleasing and good to
God, whether they are done in the church, in the household or in the
world. And it is a real deception when the adversaries teach that one
should do good works and yet not rely on them. For from where else do
the sermons of the prophets come, in which they say of the saints of
works, \"They worship in the work of their hands,\" Jer. 1:16, and the
like, except from the fact that all who want to be justified by their
works are in truth idolatrous people? for they cannot guard themselves
against not relying on works. Why did I do such great work in the
monastery? Why did I so afflict and torture my body there with fasting,
vigil and frost? Because I wanted to be sure and assured that I would
have forgiveness of sins through such works.

Therefore you should answer a papist thus: You speak against yourself,
and what you pretend in your doctrine is strictly against each other.
You teach the righteousness of works, and yet you do not want anyone to
rely on it, since every righteousness necessarily has a reliance on it,
but distrust is a sign from which one can conclude that there is no
righteousness. Now if you put your trust in works, you are an idolater.

299 Does this not mean that they teach such things, which are straight
against each other and fight? For who would not see from this that they
are hitting themselves in the cheek with a vengeance? They admit
justification by faith once, and soon deny it again, not in word, but in
deed, because they say that faith justifies by works, and yet they want
to exclude trust in works.

\(300\) And whatever they have uselessly invented and pretended of the
statutes of men and the works of the law, is also rejected by their own
judgment and confession, and is of no account. After they

But when they have taken hold of the word \"faith\" and accepted it, so
that they deny it and say that faith alone is not enough for salvation,
and add the merit of works, they now also lose faith along with works.

\(301\) But they draw on the text of Luc. 17:10, where Christ says,
\"When ye have done all that is commanded you, then say, We are
unprofitable servants. In this way they defend their doctrine that one
should not rely on works, but in doing so they are once again acting
shamefully. For this very thing, which they think serves to confirm
their doctrine, weakens and completely overthrows it. For Christ there
rejects and condemns not only confidence, but also all righteousness and
merit of works. For if it is to be said that works are of no use, it
necessarily follows that they are not righteousness, nor can they help
to eternal life, but that they are utterly ineffectual and nothing.

302Therefore all confidence, righteousness, wisdom, and all things that
pertain to works, are utterly rejected, and are false and untruthful,
that we are justified by faith and works together; but the Blessed Seed
alone redeems from death, and gives righteousness and eternal life, if
it be grasped and accepted with faith.

\(303\) We do not say that one should not do good works, but this we
punish, that the adversaries mix together the faith that justifies and
the works of those who are justified by faith. Faith and good works
belong together and are so interrelated that one cannot be distinguished
from the other, but it is faith alone that brings blessing. Therefore we
teach that faith alone justifies, for it alone is blessed: but works
have no such glory as to bless, but are only the fruits of the person
who is blessed.

304\) And this is our righteousness, which cometh by faith, which is not
to be doubted, neither is it to be said that it is vain, lest we hear
that Isa. 5:20 saith, Woe is me!

**[1578 L. V, 2SS-27I. Interpretation of Genesis 22, 16-18. W. 1.
2364-236\". 1579]{.underline}**

To them that call good evil.\" Therefore I shall not say, I have the
blessing, therefore I am unrighteous; but I shall say, I am truly holy,
righteous, and blessed, not for my righteousness, but for the
righteousness of others, and can hold the same against the wrath and
judgment of God, and am sure that God cannot deny Himself or punish
lies, nor reject His Son, the seed of Abraham. Therefore, I consider
myself righteous and an heir of eternal life with complete confidence
and without doubt.

305 And in this promise is comprehended almost the whole Christian
doctrine, and the incarnation of Christ, and justification, except the
sacraments, which were afterwards explained, when Christ came. In
addition, one finds in it a refutation of the papist doctrine not only
of human statutes and works, but also of faith and works together, so
that they may come down hard against us, who thus teach of faith that it
alone is righteousness. And this sentence remains firm, that faith alone
makes righteous. For here all trust of all men is utterly rejected and
condemned, and only trust in the seed is spoken of.

306 Therefore let us conclude against the adversaries, saying, Your
justification, wherein ye teach that works and faith must come together,
is a lie; for ye speak against yourselves. You set up a righteousness of
works, and yet deny trust. Where this is abolished and taken away,
righteousness itself must necessarily be abolished also. For assurance
and confidence is the life and whole essence of righteousness.

307 But this is the right true justification, when I am sure by faith
that the blessed seed dwells in me, by which I am blessed. And let no
one doubt or think that this blessing is nothing and in vain. For the
seed of Abraham does not cause me to be unfit, but makes me full of good
fruit; as John 14:12 says, \"He that believeth on me, the works that I
do shall he do also\" 2c.

308 But the adversaries also reproach us with the fact that in this
place in the text it says: \"Because you have done these things\"; item:
\"Because you have obeyed me\" 2c., which can be seen as if it follows
that Abraham deserved the blessing with his works. Therefore, they say,
our works also deserve something. For it follows from these words that
God says, \"I will bless you because you have obeyed my voice.\" As if
he wanted to say: I would not bless you and the others, where you would
not have obeyed me. With this they defend themselves and hold it up like
a steel wall against what we have said so far, and with it they can
easily put a color and shine before the eyes of simple-minded and
inexperienced people. Where now, say they, doth it remain, that thou
sayest, All nations shall bless themselves in the seed of Abraham; item,
That the righteousness of works should be condemned? Moses here says the
contradiction, namely, \"Because thou hast done these things\";
\"Because thou hast obeyed.\" From this it obviously follows that
Abraham, because he obeyed and did what he was commanded, was given the
blessing. Now \"to obey\" and \"to do\" are works, therefore we obtain
the blessing through the works.

I answer that there are two questions in this disputation. The first is:
Whether we are justified by works? The other is: Whether God performs
great deeds and miracles for the sake of the elect, since they are
already holy and righteous through faith. We are dealing with the first
question here, namely, whether we earn justification by works, or
receive it without merit by grace and mercy of God as a gift. But after
this it is not asked, \"Whether he who is justified earns it by grace
and faith, or receives it from God, so that God performs miracles and
great works of merit for his sake,\" just as he leads his saints in
miracles and adorns them in various and strange ways.

These two questions are mixed and thrown together by diabolical malice,
when they do not belong together, but must be far separated from each
other. And if one is cheaply hostile to such teachers and rejects them

**[1580 L V, 271-273. interpretation of I Moses 22, 16-18. w. I,
2388-2369. 1581]{.underline}**

For they deceive the poor people with pure deceit, and make no
distinction between the arguments and the affairs of which one disputes.
For it behooves a righteous teacher and dialectician first of all to
indicate rightly and clearly what he wants to say, and to know how to
distinguish and divide it finely; and then to lead his arguments and
conclude from them. The opponents do not do the first two things, but
set up their propositions and draw conclusions from them, without any
closer definition and distinction. With such confusion they teach
nothing certain and reasonable, but confuse and deceive poor simple
hearts.

But our question is this: Whether a poor sinner can earn righteousness
by good works alone, or by good works and faith at the same time; or
whether faith alone, without works, makes one righteous? From this
question we must separate the other, namely, whether God performs
miracles for the sake of those who are already justified, holy and made
heirs of eternal life. Whereof the 17th Psalm v. 7. says: \"Prove thy
wondrous goodness, thou Savior of them that trust in thee\" 2c. For they
themselves understand this saying of the miraculous deeds of God, which
are done in those who already have righteousness and the Holy Spirit,
who are children and heirs of God; and thus they mix together the works
of those who are yet to be justified and those who are already
justified.

\(312\) But why do they not rather answer, Whether Abraham was justified
and obtained the inheritance of eternal life by sacrificing his son? For
to this we say no, and this is our cause: he is already justified, Cap.
15, 6. And does the text here say: \"God tempted Abraham\", does not
say: God justified Abraham; for he had received forgiveness of sins and
righteousness through faith beforehand, since Moses says: \"Abraham
believed the Lord, and this he counted to him for righteousness\", since
it does not say: \"Because you have done this\", \"because you have
obeyed me\" 2c.

313 Therefore, the opponent\'s opinion and argument count for nothing;
but this is the

right understanding of these words: You have done a wonderful work,
because you are righteous; so will I also now again do a wonderful work
with you: I will give blessing to all nations through your seed. Abraham
is not justified by this, for what is the blessing of all nations to
him, whom this concerns and concerns completely, that here it is said,
\"I have sworn by myself\"?

314 So this promise was not made to Abraham to make him righteous, but
is like a reward and a beautiful ornament that God adds to it, to show
that he wants to give great rich gifts and benefits to the faithful and
to those who call on him. For this is a great thing, that Abraham is a
father of faith, of blessing, and also of the Lord Christ. These are
great and unbelievable gifts, but they do not make him righteous, for he
has already been blessed before the blessing of all nations is promised.

It is much different when God gives great miracles and gifts to His
saints than when He justifies them and accepts them in grace. Christ
promised His believers Joh. 16, 23: All things whatsoever they shall ask
of the Father, that shall they receive. Item: \"He who abides in me,\"
says John 15:5, \"will bear much fruit. But by such works as they obtain
of the Father they shall not be justified; as it is not by fruit that
the vine first becomes a vine, but is before.

For this reason we admit that God does good to those who have become
righteous, gives them rewards and adorns them with great miraculous
works. But these same gifts and works would not obtain for them
forgiveness of sins and God\'s grace if it were not in the saints
beforehand. And because the saints are also in God\'s grace and have the
Holy Spirit, they are skilled in all good works. If Abraham had not been
righteous and endowed with the noble gift of God\'s grace and mercy, and
had not been full of righteousness and faith, he would never have
sacrificed his son, nor would he have obtained the glory of which this
text speaks.

317\. So I pray daily that GOD will

[**1582 L. V, 273-275.** interpretation of **Genesis** 22:16-18. **W. I,
2369-2372. 1583**]{.underline}

I want to overthrow the pope and the Turks and trample them underfoot,
but this prayer does not make me righteous; indeed, if I were not
righteous, I would not pray. But I feel and experience that this prayer
of mine and of the whole church drives back the Turk, the pope and his
followers and stops them, and it is a great blessing of God that thereby
the fierce anger of the adversary is driven away and prevented, so that
day and night they exercise all their power and art and try how they
only want to shed innocent blood.

However, this prayer does not make a church, but the church causes the
prayer, by which it achieves this wonderful victory against the devil\'s
cunning plots and drives away the cruel tyranny of the evil angels and
achieves the protection of the good angels. These are the works and
merits of the saints, of which Christ says John 14:12: \"He that
believeth on me shall do greater works than these.\"

In this way God also speaks to Abraham here. He will say that you have
done this great work, that you have been obedient to me; therefore,
behold, I will adorn you again with a great miracle and make you famous;
not that you will be justified by it, but that you will know that God
loves his saints, that he does not only want to make them famous and
just, but also great and glorious.

So those who are righteous do great miracles, but they do not become
righteous through such miracles. And so St. Paul has this honor and
glory, that he is a doctor and teacher of the Gentiles, Rom. 11, 13.
Thus we boast of the victory against the devil and his members, that
they are not able to do anything against us; but through this glory we
are not justified. For God loves His saints so much that He is pleased
with everything they do, and rewards and honors them, not because of
works in themselves, but because of faith in the seed of Abraham, which
is active and strong to prove itself in all kinds of virtues.

321 If then the works of the righteous and faith could be divided and
separated from each other, this would not be possible.

If the sins of the saints can happen, then they would be unfit in truth,
and one would have to say: \"We are useless servants\", Luc. 17, 10,
which the papists say about their righteousness. For the other sins that
still cling to us make the works unclean. But faith must be wrapped up
at the same time, as it clings to works and cannot be separated from
them; and though deficiency and infirmity still remain, it is swallowed
up and taken away entirely by the blessing of the seed.

322 Therefore I command this text to all pious Christians, as it is full
of rich and manifold spiritual teaching and wisdom. And since not
everything in the interpretation has been done by me according to its
dignity, a Christian reader should attribute this to my poor
understanding. But I think that these are the most important parts of
all the things that are dealt with here.

323 First, that this text abundantly and fully confirms the doctrine of
the righteousness of faith, that we are justified by faith alone; for no
blessing can be hoped for without the seed of Abram alone. For it
clearly says, \"all nations.\" However righteous, however wise, and
however adorned with excellent gifts they may be, they will not be
blessed, dear Abraham, except through your seed alone, so that they
bless themselves not in themselves but in your seed.

324 And at the same time the kind and nature of faith is described here,
which is that we must certainly believe that we are blessed not through
ourselves, but through Christ, who is our blessing. Therefore we bless
ourselves and consider ourselves to be those to whom this blessing
belongs, for it is faith that takes hold of the blessing.

325\] To this assurance and confirmation of the doctrine of the
righteousness of faith comes also the refutation of the opponents of the
righteousness of works. For since works are not this blessing through
the seed of Abraham, it is evident that all things must be idolatry and
a curse, that one misses and presumes righteousness or blessing through
works.

**[1584 L.v, 278-277. interpretation of Genesis 22:16-18. W. I,
2372-2378. 1585]{.underline}**

326 These, I say, are the main points of our doctrine, namely, that we
say that righteousness comes by faith alone, and that, besides this, we
punish the pope\'s idolatry and refute it to him. From this it follows
that the papists themselves do not understand what they say about faith
and works, and that they are to be punished primarily because they doubt
what they teach and deprive righteousness of its true substance and
essence, which is trust.

327 But we preach and teach so much of faith, that we may receive
confidence and certain assurance, from which we should consider it
certain that we are blessed through the seed of Abraham.

328 And let it be known, that the scripture hath wrapped up in this
promise, not only the Godhead of Christ, but also the distinction of the
persons. For the Father is he that maketh the promise; but the seed is
the Son which is promised, and so is distinguished from him that maketh
the promise. Therefore these are two distinct persons, namely, the
eternal Father who promises, and the eternal Son who is promised. The
prophets have finely worked this out from these words. For they did not
read the Scriptures as coldly and diligently as we do, and especially
the Jews, whose thoughts are directed to blessing with words. Thus says
the prophet Isaiah in 65 Cap. V. 16: \"He who will bless himself on
earth will bless himself in the right God, amen,\" that is, where a
blessing will be on earth, it will be in God, amen, that is, in the
right true God. Therefore, by this he indicates that the seed of Abraham
is true GOD, through whom the blessing should come, so that the Jews may
not say, we worship a crucified man. For the prophet Isaiah clearly
says: \"It will be GOD and the GOD Amen\", that is, the real true GOD,
who will not fail with his promise. Many such sayings have flowed and
sprung from this text, as from a living well from which living waters
flow.

329 Now, however, let us again consider

see the words of the promise and compare them with the previous
promises. The previous words are repeated here with an addition that is
common in the Scriptures, namely, that the promises or previous sayings
are repeated as often as something new is to be added; which also
happens here. But the difference is not only in words, but also in the
things themselves. The difference of words is that he says, \"Your seed
shall possess the gates of your enemies.\" For he also said above in 12
Cap. V. 3: \"I will curse those who curse you,\" which is just as much.
But the difference in the matter itself is that here he adds an oath,
and in the word \"bless,\" namely, that all nations will bless
themselves and the same in the seed of Abraham. This makes the promise
not only clearer and more explicit, but also much richer and more
glorious.

The other parts of the promise can easily be balanced with each other.
For what God says here: \"I will bless you and multiply your seed\", is
written in the 12th chapter v. 3. with the same words: \"I will make you
a great nation, and I will bless those who bless you\" 2c. So also in
the 13th chapter v. 16. it says: \"I will make thy seed like the dust of
the earth.\" Here such words are changed a little, thus: \"I will bless
and multiply your seed like the sand on the shore of the sea.\" I have
just indicated that this refers to two kinds of Abraham\'s seed, one
which is compared to the stars of heaven, which are the saints, and the
other which is compared to the sand of the seashore and the dust of the
earth, which are the wicked.

Whoever desires further interpretation would do well to compare all this
with the sermons of the prophets, but especially with the Psalms of
David, who diligently meditated on this text; as can be seen in the
110th Psalm, which he spun out of this promise as a very beautiful
fabric. For first of all, he calls the seed of Abraham his Lord, yes, he
sets him at the right hand of God, that is, he attributes to him equal
authority with God Himself. For the-

**[1586 L- V, 277-279. interpretation of I Genesis 22, 16-18. W. I,
2375-2378. 1587]{.underline}**

Because all nations are to be blessed in him, he must be distinguished
from the nations that were all born of Adam and are therefore also under
the curse. For to take away sin and death, to bless men and to give them
spiritual and eternal goods are divine works and benefits. Therefore
David concludes that this seed, born without male seed, sits at the
right hand of God, that is, is equal to God, because he does such works
as are equal to divine works.

But because he is a seed of Abraham, he also had to take on human
nature; otherwise God cannot be called Abraham\'s seed in his own nature
and divine being. This is what David concludes from this. This seed is
the Son of God, like God, and such a king who sits at the right hand of
the Father.

The promise says that he will not only rule and reign, but also bless.
Therefore he will also be a priest at the same time. For it is not only
the kingdom that is spoken of here, but also the priesthood, and the
priestly name and office comprehend in themselves the most distinguished
benefits of Christ. And David, enlightened by the Holy Spirit, takes an
oath not to the kingdom but to the priesthood, when he says in v. 4:
\"The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, that you are a priest
forever. That is so much said: My Lord will sit at the right hand of
God, but so that he shall not only rule, but also bless.

This was David\'s glorious knowledge of Christ, the future Seed, who was
to come from his tribe of Lind flesh; and he will no doubt have known
and rejoiced that he would be pardoned before other kings with such
great honor and glory, since Nathan brought him the promise: \"I will
set on your throne the fruit of your womb,\" Psalm 132:11. 132, 11. For
from this he concluded that this blessing would come upon his body and
seed and that the Son of God would be born from his seed.

335\. he accepted such a message with joy, since he heard that
Abraham\'s

He had never thought of this honor and glory before, just as the virgin
Mary could never have hoped for such an honor, that she would become the
mother of Christ. He had never thought of this honor and glory before;
just as the virgin Mary could never have hoped for such honor, that she
should become the mother of the Lord Christ, but had thought that the
seed of Abraham would be scattered now and then, and could not know with
certainty to which person the promise would be directed. Therefore the
prophet directed her to a certain tribe and person: \"I will set thee,\"
saith he, \"upon thy throne the fruit of thy womb.\"

And this was certainly a great thing that he knew that the Son of God
should be born of him as a man and that one should expect the blessing
of all nations from his flesh. For this reason he rejoiced not only for
his own sake, but also for the sake of the whole world, that the promise
was now repeated and pointed to his body, so that henceforth the hearts
of men would no longer waver from time to time or doubt from where they
should await the redemption of Israel.

337 Therefore let us diligently and carefully consider this honor of
David, that we may learn to distinguish between calling, justification,
and glorification. Many are called who are not justified, and are
justified again who are not glorified as Abraham or David were glorified
and given great honor. And yet such honor and glory of David does not
belong to his justification; for the Scripture itself has distinguished
it, and teaches that God promises and gives to those who are justified
great and glorious works, which are told in the 149th Psalm, where v. 8.
9. thus says: \"To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with
fetters of iron, to do them the judgment of which it is written. All his
saints will have this honor,\" as we read that some saints raised the
dead. These are all works of special pardon, by which they have not
become righteous, although they were certainly assured that they were
righteous and in God\'s grace.

**[1588 \"\'V. 27S-2A.\' Interpretation of I Genesis 22:16-18.\" W. I,
2376-2380. 1589]{.underline}**

For if they had not been justified beforehand, they would not have done
such works.

338 I have reminded you of this in passing, for the sake of the clumsy
pretence of which I have just said that the papists would thus introduce
and conclude: Because it is said to Abraham, \"Because you have obeyed
my voice,\" 2c. we are justified by works. For the works of
justification and the works of glorification must not be mixed together.

339 But that in the promise it is further said, Thy seed shall possess
the gates of his enemies, David hath declared in these words, Till I
make thine enemies thy footstool. From this it is to be understood that
this seed shall have enemies and adversaries, and that many, mighty and
fierce: but still the victory shall be with the sand of the sea shore,
and with the stars of heaven, but most of all with the only begotten
Son. For thus we see that it has been conquered and fallen, and that
this people has had great and pernicious enemies, yet against such
enemies also in temporal and bodily things many great victories. As it
is shown in the books of Judges and Kings that even godless kings in
Israel, such as Ahab and Joash, won great glorious victories against the
Philistines, Syrians and Ammonites for the sake of this seed, for whom
God makes the enemies the footstool of His feet.

340 And these have been the victories of the wicked, which are likened
unto the sand of the sea shore, and to the dust of the earth: but the
stars of heaven, that is, the pious and godly, have obtained the right
blessing in spiritual victories. For they have possessed the spiritual
gates, that is, they have converted to faith the bodies and souls of
those who were subject to the power of the devil, and have destroyed the
gates of hell, the kingdom of the devil, death and sin, as well as all
kinds of afflictions of soul and body, and have obtained peace in heaven
and on earth, so that they no longer fear hell and do not despair when
sin and the law accuse and threaten the conscience.

These are much more glorious victories and battles than the Ammonites,
Philistines and the like have been, and this rhymes very finely with the
first promise made in Paradise: \"The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent\'s head\" 2c., Gen. 3, 15; as the others all are, only that one
is clearer than the other.

342 And we, believing that this seed is our blessing, have also great
cause to boast and to defy all the gates of hell, and the devil himself
with all his scales and fellows. We must indeed suffer that the enemies
hate us and practice cruel tyranny against us: but \"in all this we
overcome far because of Him who loved us\", Rom. 8, 37.

If we are Christians and believe in the seed that is given, what is it
to us if the devil and the world are angry? Let them take by force what
we have and kill the body; will they therefore keep us in death? Oh no!
For we are blessed, and are assured of life against death, and of the
grace and gracious will of God against the hatred and enmity of the
world.

344 So David was comforted by this promise and did not rejoice
unreasonably that this seed was turned to his house, calls him adonai,
his Lord, and concludes that he will be a king and priest. For he is a
king, because he sits at the right hand of God, who has all things in
his hand and power; as he says Matth. 11, 27: \"All things are delivered
unto me of my Father\" 2c. He is also a priest, for he gives the
blessing.

345\. All this follows very finely and conveniently from the foregoing:
The blessing of the seed promised to Abraham belongs to my house; for I
have heard from Nathan the prophet, \"I will set upon thy throne the
fruit of thy womb\" 2c.: therefore Christ, promised to Abraham, shall be
born of my seed. And so the cord is passed from Abraham to David\'s
womb.

346 Lastly, he also understood that the priesthood of Levi was not
instituted for this reason,

**[1590 L.v, 281-283. Interpretation of I Genesis 22:16-18. W. I.
238V-2SS3. 1591]{.underline}**

that it should always last. For another man is promised here who is to
give the blessing, and the office of giving the blessing, which
previously belonged to the tribe of Levi, is now turned to the tribe of
Judah. So the face of Moses has been uncovered, so that he could see
that the priesthood of Levi alone was a shadow and a figure. This also
shows that the promise that the blessing would come from his seed was
made to Abraham before the time of Moses.

Therefore he saw that much higher and more excellent priesthood would
follow the Levitical priesthood, which should bless both Abraham and the
Levites, who themselves are under the curse and therefore need the
blessing of this seed as well as the others. Therefore, he also applied
the example of Melchizedek to this and concluded that it would be an
eternal priesthood for the sake of the seed, which is eternal.

348 David was able to calculate and conclude this clearly and easily.
For the prefixes are certain, as that he saith, I am of the tribe of
Judah, which are not the Levites: and there is promised me such a king
and priest, which shall be a blessing unto all nations. Therefore all
that was ordained of Moses concerning the tribe of Levi is but a shadow
of things to come; for the man that shall give the right blessing was
promised long before such ordinance.

349\. item, he has from that, that God speaks to Moses, 3 Mos. 25, 40.:
\"See to it that you make it in their image, which you have seen on your
mountain,\" he recognized that God must not have reminded Moses of the
parable or model in vain, and concluded from this that Moses actually
had before his eyes and in his vision the future blessing that was to
take place through Christ; For Moses is the shadow, figure, or model
that preceded Christ who was to come, for which reason the right and
true priesthood has been from the beginning of the world, and was at
first somewhat obscure, but afterwards was clearly promised to Abraham.

350 So David and the others

The prophets diligently pondered this text. Therefore they were able to
interpret Moses correctly and well, namely, that the righteousness of
the law and works cannot redeem anyone from the curse, but only that one
believes and accepts the priest with right perfect trust, as was
promised to Abraham.

The Levitical priests were also ordained by God, but they were mortal,
therefore they could only give temporary blessings; for as the priest
is, so is the blessing: they could not abolish sin and death, nor
cleanse the heart.

For this reason David says that another will come who will give the
right blessing, namely, one who is eternal and has a kingdom without
end. Yes, that is still more, Moses indicates secretly with all its
arrangements that everything, so this promise has in itself, is to be
turned on David\'s house.

This is why all the prophets and all the saints cry out so often and so
fervently before Christ\'s coming: Oh Lord, come! as they have desired
to behold and see the great glory and light of the seed of Abraham and
David, which all the godly in the New Testament enjoy by the great grace
of God.

354 But these words, \"All nations shall be blessed,\" are to be well
heeded; for such a manner of speaking is common in Scripture, namely,
that none of the nations is blessed except through this Seed alone. As
on such opinion St. John says at the 1. cap. V. 9: \"This was the true
light which lighteth all men\" 2c., and Paul 1 Tim. 3, 4: \"God wills
that all men should be saved\": not that they should all be enlightened,
but that all the blessings scattered among all nations should come from
this seed. And St. John means by this saying: \"This was the true light
that enlightens all men\", nothing else than that there is no light,
life, salvation or blessedness anywhere except in this seed.

355 Therefore, our doctrine is clearly proven and the doctrine of the
adversaries is proven against it.

**[1592 k. V, 283-28S. Interpretation of I Genesis 22:16-19. W. I.
2383-2887. 1593]{.underline}**

is also sufficiently refuted. We are blessed in Christ and not in
ourselves, that is, we should certainly believe that through this Christ
alone comes the blessing. Those who argue against this, as the papists
do, show sufficiently that they do not understand anything about
Christian doctrine.

**Sixth part.**

**How Abraham returns from Mount Moriah, and receives news of the
lineage of his brother Nahor.**

**I.**

**V. 19 So Abraham returned to his sons, and they arose, and went
together to Babylon, and dwelt there.**

It is astonishing that the holy patriarch again departs from such a holy
place. If such a glorious revelation were to happen to one of us, that
he should sacrifice his son, and such a beautiful and glorious promise
were to be added to it: \"Through your seed all nations shall be
blessed\"; item, the conversation and the presence not of one angel, but
of the whole heavenly host: then truly human devotion would advise that
one should not only honor such a place, but also dwell there. Why does
not Abraham do the same?

357 In the books of the kings and in the prophets it is seen how foolish
and furious the Jewish people are according to human religion; for they
have chosen for themselves mountains, hills, groves and trees, having
only a little evidence and proof of the things done by the fathers.
Therefore they made special services and sacrifices at Gilgal, Bethel,
Dan, and Tabor, because there the good things were done.

So Abraham had a very good reason to stay in that place and to honor the
place, he did the highest sacrifice there in honor of God and his
religion: but still he has no memorial there, of which the same place
has a reputation after him.

As we shall hear hereafter from the patriarch Jacob, his son\'s son, who
set up a stone in the place where he saw the ladder.

359\. and if Abraham\'s descendants have visited and honored such a
place, where the fathers practiced their devotion and holiness,
therefore they are also so often reproved by Moses and the prophets: and
Moses takes great care that he directs and directs all histories,
miracles and the whole service of God only to the place, which God has
chosen: \"Beware,\" he says 5 Mos. 12, 13, 14, \"that you do not offer
your burnt offerings in all the places you see, but in the place where
the LORD makes his name dwell.\"

\(360\) Therefore he appointed a certain place for them and called it
the \"tabernacle of Moses,\" that is, a certain place. God gave this
same tabernacle to Moses as a certain sign of the place he would have
chosen, and he also made the promise that he would dwell there, be found
there, and hear the prayer of those who call upon him.

361 But the same people, who most of all had a certain and definite
place of worship, nevertheless most of all ran and went astray now and
then to uncertain places, which they chose for themselves out of their
own and uncertain devotion.

For such deplorable perversity is in our nature that we do not keep, nor
do we greatly respect, what God commands; but what the devil establishes
and ordains, we accept with great diligence and devotion and keep much
of it: we build altars, chapels, churches, run to Rome and to St. James;
but we do not respect baptism, the Lord\'s Supper, absolution and our
vocation at all.

363 And has the pope alone dealt with it, that he would abolish and
abolish the appointed place or tabernacle, that is, the ministry of
preaching. He does not ask for the Word, does not preach, nor does he
administer the holy sacraments properly; but abolishes all this and
plagues the poor people horribly, fills the whole world with his
indulgences: where one chooses a place and a special corner, there

**[1594 V. 285-287. interpretation of I Moses 22:19. w. I, 2387-2390.
1595]{.underline}**

He gives out indulgences so that he may confirm all kinds of error and
idolatry.

But God draws us back to the place where He makes His name dwell, that
is, to our tabernacle, which is the preaching office, where the Word is
taught and the holy sacraments are administered according to the
institution of Christ, which is the right tabernacle of God.

If the pope had such a great testimony on his side that God had spoken
to him in Rome as he spoke to Abraham on Mount Moriah, no one could
resist him: but now he is so bold of himself and confirms such great
idolatry without God\'s word, under the name of Peter, and fills the
whole wide world with his insolent lies, so that he may bring goods to
the whole world.

Therefore, this example of Abraham, who had a very good reason to do
something new in this place, is well to remember. He was called by
divine command from Beer-saba to Mount Moriah, and there he made a very
great and wonderful sacrifice, being willing to sacrifice his own son,
and had heard God\'s word from heaven in right fear and faith: yet he
did not take upon himself anything, nor did he call the people together
to praise and honor the place.

367\. And Moses wrote this especially for an example and lesson to us,
that we should not begin or boldly undertake anything in divine matters.
For in other matters, which concern the temporal or domestic government,
there is enough for you to do, in which you may practice and carry out
your office boldly according to God\'s word. So it is permissible for
you to be bold, strong and defiant against the Turk; but in matters of
religion, all boldness and iniquity, all works that man can strive for
and choose for himself, are completely forbidden; as such things are
punished from time to time by all the prophets.

For Abraham did nothing more for religion above the profession, although
this place was very holy and the most holy persons stayed there, as the
angels, Abraham and Isaac; which he does not even consider, but turns
away from all this and goes away. For so he thought:

I have done what I should have done, I have sacrificed my son as I was
commanded: but now God does not command me to perform a service here, so
I will not subject myself to anything. He thus abstains from all
boldness and outrage, remains in the fear of God and awaits the calling
of God, ready to obey and follow wherever God may call him.

This is the lesson of this text, that in matters of religion one should
ask first of all who has said and commanded this or that. Seneca says:
Do not look at who is the one who says something, but pay attention to
what is said. Such teaching and warning has its place and use in the
domestic and worldly regime; but in the church and matters of religion
one must turn it around, and ask not what is said, but who is the one
who says it. There is indeed understanding and wisdom in man, which
comes from the light of reason implanted in us by God: but because it is
the nature of man to err and fall short, and also to be afflicted, one
must pay attention to what is said, and not who is the one who says
something, and not trust the person. But in the church one should
consider who and how great he is who says or commands something. If this
is not done, the devil can very easily and quickly make people see not
who and how great he is who commands, but what and how great he is who
commands. King Ahaz thinks how he can do a great service to God, and
sacrifices his son like Abraham, but hardly sins in doing so. For God
did not command him to do so, but commanded him to sacrifice a calf. He
despised such a commandment and took up another that was not from God.

This should be said often in the church and practiced diligently, so
that we may be satisfied with the teaching that was once given to us.
For if we had followed it before this time, we would never have accepted
monasteries, pilgrimages, indulgences, the pope\'s sacrificial mass for
the dead, 2c. but every pastor would have taught God\'s word in his
church, and the church would have been satisfied with the word, baptism,
and the Lord\'s Supper of the Lord.

**[1596 2 V. 287-289. interpretation of I Moses 22:19. w. I, 2390-2393.
1597]{.underline}**

Lord, with absolution and consolation in death and life. . After that,
everyone would have done in the worldly and domestic government what was
due to him in his office, whether servants or masters, authorities or
subjects. So that the abominable abominations of the papacy would never
have entered the church.

For so Abraham keeps the devotion, the angels and God\'s appearance on
Mount Moriah, when there was no holier place in the whole world than
this mountain, because there the voice of God and the divine promise
were heard. To all this he turns his back and turns away. That is how
great and high he esteems the profession and the ministry of preaching.
And since God did not command him to do anything there, he did not start
anything new for himself, but returned to his household, governed his
household, his wife and servants, in whom nothing spiritual or
devotional was to be seen, because he left such things on Mount Moriah.
He also does not endure the appearance of the angels, but returns to the
boys and his donkey.

If a devout hermit or monk heard this, he would curse Abraham. For if he
should think that this is a holy patriarch, who leaves such a holy
place, where God dwells with his angels, and meanwhile goes to his
donkey, doing housework, vile, filthy and stinking works; what kind of
holiness is that? For no one can sufficiently say how the monks despise
such common works so much, and consider this alone as devotion and
holiness, that one leaves the world, that is, father and mother and
worldly offices, and hides in a desolate corner.

In one place Jerome praises this holiness so highly that he says that if
mother or father came running to a monk who wanted to enter the
monastery and wanted to hold him back, they should be let go and
rejected and trampled underfoot. Such is a godless, cursed speech. For
this, dear Jerome, we will despise you and trample you underfoot with
your Bethlehem, with your cap and desert; for I am called by the
preaching ministry of the divine word.

not to Bethlehem, but to my parish and to the church, there to hear
God\'s word: there God dwells, there the holy angels are our guardians;
there I hear that I should honor my parents and wait for my profession
in a Christian and diligent manner. If God wants me to go to another
place, he will call me there, but without a profession the devil may
follow you and others. Therefore, I will honor my parents for the sake
of God\'s word and commandment, and will not despise them or trample
them underfoot. For what kind of holiness or worship can that be, if I
fall away from baptism, from the faith and obedience of God, which all
monks have done?

Christ says Marc. 10, 29: \"For my sake and for my Father\'s sake you
shall leave your brothers, sisters, father, mother, wife, child and
field\"; but you shall not, according to your own will and choice,
forsake your parents when they are most in need of your help and
assistance, Marc. 7, 10. 7, 10. Such an ungodly nature was also
ingrained in the Jews, which Christ punishes them for in Matth. 15, 5.
since they taught that sacrifice was much more holy than obedience to
parents. For they said, Corban, that is, the gift and sacrifice which
thou shalt offer in the temple shall be more profitable unto thee than
the honor which thou shouldest have paid to thy parents. And so, under
the appearance of sanctity and devotion, they raised the status and
honor of the parents to fill their avarice with it.

375\. Therefore, just as this doctrine has been treated at length and
has been diligently interpreted, so it should always be repeated for the
sake of the dear young people, so that the church may grow and be
increased, so that it may learn to stand and remain where God speaks,
and become accustomed to the works commanded by God; unless they are
called to other places or driven out, as when tyrants drive pious
God-fearing people out of the country and deprive them of their offices
by force and drive them out.

376 Self-selected devotion in religion is pleasing to the flesh, and
reason thinks much of it; but if you follow it,

[**1598 L.v, 289-291. interpretation of Genesis** 22:19-24**.** **W. I,
2393-2395. 1599**]{.underline}

You do just as those did who left the Lord\'s tabernacle and ran to the
trees and groves, which is devilish and not divine. St. Paul also
rejects and condemns self-chosen devotion and worship, where there is no
word that calls one to such devotion, but only a man\'s own will that
chooses and establishes such.

Therefore Moses recorded this very diligently, that Abraham did not want
to remain in this holy place after he had performed his sacrifice, but
returned to his common housework, so that common laymen and craftsmen
also go about, and to his services, which at that time were still free
and not bound to a certain place. For he was still wandering about in
the wilderness and had no particular place of worship, but did his
sacrifice at times when God commanded him. Therefore he comes back to
the boys or servants and to his donkey, and will undoubtedly have
prepared a meal there and eaten with his son and servants. For a
sacrifice belongs first of all to a splendid and cheerful meal.

378 As it was kept in the law, that when an animal was sacrificed, the
fat was burned, but the shoulder and the breast were given to the
priest; the rest of the flesh belonged to those who had made the
sacrifice, if it was not a burnt offering. Therefore they sat before the
Lord, rejoiced, ate and drank, and gave thanks to God.

It was also the custom of the heathen, when they sacrificed, to eat with
one another: and we have our custom from this heathen manner, that we
eat and drink better on feast days, and dress more cleanly than on other
days. So Abraham also sat down by the mountain with his ass, and made
merry with his son and his servants.

It is a wonderful thing that after such a great and difficult temptation
to sacrifice his son, he was able to come back to himself so soon and be
content and happy in his heart.

And it seems that this was customary with him, although it was not yet
commanded in the law at that time, as it was subsequently decreed by
Moses, that they also ate with each other after the sacrifice. Since the
son remained alive and the ram was slaughtered in his place, both father
and son rejoiced with joy and no doubt told the servants about the whole
thing with great joy and praised God with a grateful heart. Then they
returned to Bersaba to Sarah, from which place they had departed,
leaving behind them the holy place, the sacrifice, the angels and the
revelation of God on Mount Moriah.

**II.**

(v.20-24) And it **came to pass after these things, that it was told
Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah also bare children unto thy brother
Nahor; to wit, Uz the firstborn, and Bus his brother, and Kemuel, from
whom the Syrians come, and Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildah, and Jedlaph,
and Bethuel. But Bethuel begat Rebekah. These eight Milcah bare to
Nahor, Abraham\'s brother. And his concubine, whose name was Rehumah,
bare also Theba, and Gaham, and Thahaz, and Maachah.**

These countries, Syria and Canaan, lie close to each other. Abraham did
not know anything about his brother Nahor, who stayed in Haran with his
wife; therefore Moses wrote that Abraham was told to kill his brother\'s
children and family, that he had eight sons with Milcah and four sons
with Kebsweibe, that is twelve persons, except Rebekah. And the holy
scripture remembereth this generation first of all, that it maketh Nahor
almost equal unto the patriarch Jacob in the right and perfect number
both of the male and female generations. For he begat twelve sons and
one daughter, as Jacob also did. Then for Rebekah\'s sake and for the
marriage that was soon after between Isaac and her.

But this text explains the previous question in the eleventh chapter
above and indicates,

**[1600 2. v. ssi-Ms. Interpretation of Genesis 22:20-24. w. i,
2395-2393. 1601]{.underline}**

that Nahor was older than his brother Abraham, because he had so many
children, which are listed here: item, Bethuel has his daughter Rebekka,
Nahor\'s son\'s child, since Abraham is eighty years old. Therefore it
can be assumed that Abraham is not the firstborn.

383 Among the Hebrews he is considered the firstborn, Haran the second,
and Nahor the third; but if this is so, how could Milcah and Sarah,
Haran\'s daughters, have married two brothers, Nahor and Abraham? For it
would follow that Haran in the eighth year of his age had taken a wife
and begotten Sarah, which is in bad taste. Lyra alone challenges this
calculation and opinion of the Jews, and concludes that Abraham was born
last and is sixty years younger than his brother, and proves it with
good, proven causes and evidence, which we have told above.

But St. Stephen\'s words in the stories of the apostles move me a little
more, since he says in the 7th chapter, v. 4, that Abraham went from
Haran because his father died. V. 4, Abraham went out of Haran because
his father had died. For it follows that one must put sixty years to
Abraham\'s age, in which he went out, if one wants to look at the
history and count the years of Tharah, his father. But if one wants to
start counting from the seventieth year of Abraham, as Ulan does in all
yearly calculations, then the sixty years are lost, as I have also
indicated above; as there is also a lack of twenty years in the books of
the kings, so that we almost lose a hundred years. And it can be seen as
if the holy scriptures, out of special counsel, have hidden these years
for the sake of the last day, because God wanted that the hour or year
of it should be unknown to us. For it may well happen that he would come
a hundred and sixty or more years before the thoughts or desires of the
pious.

The other question of Sarah or Jizca and Milcah has been dealt with
above. There were three brothers, Haran, the firstborn, who died at Ur
in Chaldea, and left two daughters after him,

Milcah and Ishca, whom Tarah took to herself; the middle brother is
Nahor, and the third Abraham. These two brothers took two sisters in
marriage, the daughters of their brother Haran; for at that time such
marriages were still free.

Now Moses says that among these twelve fathers, Kemuel was a father from
whom the Syrians came; but this name has become obsolete and has passed
away, and it is no longer mentioned in the Scriptures.

387 Uz has the name of the wood or the tree; but they make this also the
father of the Syrians, and is called with this name the country Uz, in
which Job was born, as St. Jerome says. Many want to say that Job was of
the family and descendants of Esau; and I was also of this opinion, but
now understand it differently, and rather believe that he was born from
Mesopotamia in Syria. For therefore it is also told in his history, Job
1, 17, that the Chaldeans as neighbors devastated the country, plundered
Job\'s house and drove away his cattle. Therefore, I think that Job was
a powerful and rich lord who had a part of the land of Mesopotamia close
to the Chaldeans and Babylonians.

388 Bus was also a noble, mighty man and had a part in Mesopotamia.
Therefore Elihu, the son of Baracheel, is called a Busite, Job 32, 2.
who disputes so hostilely against the afflicted Job and showers him with
many abusive words. Therefore it can be seen that Nahor had a large and
famous church, in which there were many great men, the like of which
Abraham did not have in his church.

Jerome writes that those who are well versed in the Scriptures say that
this Elihu is Balaam, of whom it is written in the 23rd chapter of the
4th book of Moses, who was an excellent prophet and teacher in
Mesopotamia, and to whom God\'s word was revealed, as he himself boasts,
and to whom many beautiful and glorious prophecies were given by God.
Therefore he says in Num. 23, 7: \"From Syria, Balak the Moa-

**[1602 V, 2S3-2S5. Interpretation of Genesis 22, 20-24. cap. 23, 1. 2.
W. 1, 23S8-2E 1603]{.underline}**

By this he indicates that he was called and fetched from a place in the
country where these fathers, who are listed here, lived, and it can
truly be seen that they were excellent men, and that they had a
beautiful rule and well-ordered regiment.

390 Moses writes that Balaam was a son of Beor, whom St. Peter calls
Bosor, 2 Peter 2:15, and lived above the waters of the children of
Ammon, that is, above the waters of Tigris or Phrath. He was a great
man, but fell horribly, like

his history indicates. He had the greatest prophecies, which were equal
to the prophecies of Daniel, of the great Alexander and of the Roman
empire, which was to devastate the kingdom of Israel and Judah. This
Balaam, they say, was born of Bus, the son of Nahor, and lived until the
time of Moses, both of whom were the highest prophets at that time.
Balaam was called from Mesopotamia against Moses, who came from Egypt:
and Balaam had in truth the word of God, and blessed the people of
Israel.

**The twenty-third chapter.**

**First part.**

**About Sarah and her death.**

**Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old, and she died in
Hebron, the capital of the land of Canaan. Then came Abraham to lament
and weep over her.**

\(1\) Lest any man think us ignorant, or that we have not read the
thoughts of the Jews which they had concerning this text, we will first
of all relate them. For in this text they invent some mysteries
concerning the number of years Sarah lived, because Moses does not
simply say a hundred years, and seven years, and twenty years, as we are
accustomed to speak, but puts by each number particular years, as, a
hundred years, twenty years, seven years: and they say that this was
done to show that Sarah was as beautiful in the hundredth year of her
age as in the twentieth, and as chaste and modest in the twentieth year
as in the seventh.

Now let us give them such a poem as they have thought up out of a good
heart, so that through it the excellent discipline and beautiful figure
of the most holy old mother, who was well worthy of such praise, might

to be praised. For so we also use to do, that after the death of our
friends we praise their praise and virtue, but cover up the infirmities,
and what is worthy of praise, say freely from them, so that we may
soothe our sorrow and desire for them with time. But if someone wanted
to make a general rule out of this and apply it to all the years, it
would be ridiculous; just as it would be a very clumsy thing to make
such a comparison of the years as this, since the years of the
patriarchs are counted.

\(3\) And I am surprised that they did not rather consider why Moses
speaks in the plural: vitae Sarae (the lives of Sarah), and wanted to
say, as it were, that Sarah had many lives: such would have been a more
useful consideration, namely, of the years of the lives. For this shows
how many great, innumerable and various changes, dangers and
misfortunes, as well as various conditions Sarah experienced and endured
in this life. First, she was born and married in Babylon; soon after,
she left there with her husband and lived in Haran, and then in the land
of Canaan, where Abraham had been a stranger and had moved from one
place to another.

**[1604 D- v. 2S5-S97. Interpretation of Genesis 23:1, 2. W. i,
1605]{.underline}**

to the other, and finally came to Egypt and Gerar.

4 The pious holy mother was able to endure such changes and the
vexatious heavy pilgrimage with great strong courage and was very
patient, as it also ended with all kinds of misfortune that she
encountered. And it has this character with all people\'s lives, so that
one would like to call it quite a lot of life for the sake of the
miraculous change of all things. For as often as a new challenge comes,
so often do we die, and come to life again when we are raised up and
receive comfort.

Dear one, see how there is such a great change and difference in every
man\'s life. The first age of a man is when a child is seven years old.
After that, other seven years soon follow; just as philosophers and
physicians speak of this when they speak of the years of stages, in
which great changes take place. And St. Paul says of himself in 1 Cor.
13:11: \"When I was a child, I spoke as a child, and had childish
thoughts; but when I became a man, I put away those things which were
childish.\" Such changes always follow each other in human life. That is
why the same times or ages are called vitae (life) in every human being.
For every seven years we are somewhat changed into another form, become
differently minded, get another mind 2c. In sum, we die and come to life
again.

In the third seven years come the thoughts of marriage. When you have
become a husband, then comes the care of the house or worldly
government. If you are elected to the council and used for the counsel
of lords and princes, you must begin to live in a new way and, as it
were, crawl into a new skin; for there you must bear all kinds of
unpleasantness, burdens and burdens, in addition to hatred and enmity
from neighbors and fellow helpers, and often also suffer that your honor
and good reputation are diminished. Such a variety of changes and
changes also make a variety of life.

7 And Moses wanted to indicate this, when he says vitae Sarae, as if he
wanted to say: Sarah often, after she had been in many places and seen
many people, had to change her mind and spirit, life and way of life;
when she came to a place, where she thought she wanted to live there in
peace and tranquility, she soon had to move on again and look for
another place, and at the same time she had to change her attitudes and
behavior: so that this holy matron had many lives. The Jews should have
taken note of this, and it would have been worth thinking about;
although I will easily believe that she was just as beautiful in the
hundredth year of her age as she was in the twentieth.

8 After this, one should consider even more in this text how Abraham
preached such a beautiful funeral sermon and praised Sarah in it. For in
the Holy Scriptures, no matron is praised as highly as Sarah: her years,
life and life, as well as her burial, are described; therefore, in
God\'s eyes, she was the only noble pearl that He especially loved, and
St. Peter rightly cites her as a model and example of all holy women.
For thus he says 1 Ep. 3, 6: \"As Sarah was obedient to Abraham, and
called him Lord, whose daughters ye became,\" 2c., thus holding her up
as a mother to all Christian matrons.

\(9\) Of the other wives of the patriarchs the Scripture does not
indicate how or when they died, as it does not remember how many years
Eve lived or in what place she died. Of Rachel it is written that she
died in childbirth and in childbirth, but of all the others it passes by
and is silent, so also that we know nothing of the death of the mother
of Christ; but Sarah alone has this honor, that of her the certain
number of years, the time of her death and the place of her burial are
described, which is then a great praise and certain sign that she was
held before God as a dear matron.

\(10\) And all these things do not concern Sarah alone, who has now
died, but us also,

**[1606. v. W7-MS. Interpretation of Genesis 23:1. 2. W. i, sios-rivs.
1607]{.underline}**

who are still alive to me. For this is a great comfort, that we may hear
that the end and death of these most holy patriarchs and dearest
fathers, against whom we are nothing at all, is no different from our
death, but that it is as horrible and ignominious as ours. Their bodies
have been buried and devoured by worms, buried in the earth for the sake
of the stench, no other than as if they had never been the bodies of
such saints, even though they were very holy men and still truly live in
Christ, even though they have died before our eyes.

\(11\) Therefore, I say, these things are written for our sake, that we
may not know that the most holy fathers and mothers suffered the same
things that we must suffer, who are certainly known to be alive in the
sight of God: and I hold that they were raised with Christ, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Adam, and others.

012 And it may be supposed that this was the cause of Abraham\'s
endeavoring so much for burial, that his Sarah deceased might not be
buried in a foreign land; as we shall hereafter hear of Isaac also.
Likewise, Jacob and Joseph did not want to be buried in Egypt, but in
the land of Canaan.

\(13\) Such their will and desire shows that God put this into their
hearts, that they desired and wished to be buried in the land promised
to them, with the certain hope that they would also be raised with
Christ. Therefore they wanted to be buried there, so that they would not
rest far from the future seed; for Hebron is two or three miles from
Jerusalem. Therefore they were undoubtedly raised with Christ, for our
consolation, that we should not be afraid of death when we see the
terrible form and change of our bodies after death.

14 Those who have no hope of the future resurrection, as Paul says of
the Gentiles 1 Thess. 4:13, think and ask nothing about the life to
come;

But this is written to us, that we should remember how from the
beginning of the world all the saints died, and became such stink, dust
and ashes as we are; as St. Paul says 1 Cor. 15, 43: \"It is sown in
dishonor\" 2c.; they suffered the same decay and dishonor, regardless of
the fact that they were holy in body and soul. For thus it pleases God
that from worms, from rottenness, from earth that is all decayed and
full of stink, He will raise up a beautiful body, more beautiful and
lovely than all flowers, balm, even the sun itself and stars.

\(15\) These things I teach you, that we may be moved by the examples of
these saints. For the weak in faith are more moved, and are more easily
comforted, by such lesser examples than by the example of the Lord
Christ. Because Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah die in this way, a
pious, God-fearing heart, even if it is still a little weak, thinks: Why
would I refuse or be afraid of this, which has generally gone over all
the saints?

\(16\) For the weak imagine not only their own weakness, but also the
hideous form of the dead bodies. Therefore they think: If I had such a
body as Christ had, which death could not consume, nor worms devour, I
would wait with greater courage for the last day. So Christ\'s death,
when it is held up as an example, is considered almost no death, because
he rose again on the third day. Therefore, the weak will be more
accepting and strengthened when they see that the bodies of the holy
patriarchs decayed and were devoured by worms just as much as ours.

But those who are better equipped and stronger in faith simply despise
death, mocking it with proud courage and defying it. What is death? they
say. What is hell? Christ, the Son of God, died and put Himself under
the law; with His death He overcame death and brought life back to us.
And if we were so strong and

**[1608 V, SS9-soi. Interpretation of I Genesis 23, I. 2. W. 1,
2408-241\". 1609]{.underline}**

If we could believe without doubt that Christ died for our sins and rose
again for us to righteousness and life, no terror or fear would remain
in us. For the death of Christ is a sacrament which assures us that our
death is nothing. But the weak are moved more by examples than by such a
sacrament. For the greatness of the person of Christ makes it not so
easy to penetrate hearts and persuade us to despise death.

18 Therefore we remain with the examples; as I myself at times have more
desire for the example of Sarah than of the Lord Christ; which cause is
the weakness of our faith. It pleases me and seems to me that the death
of Sarah is more sweet, and I am more comforted by it, because I know
that she was a holy matron, and yet I hear that she dies so shamefully
according to reason, and is buried and forgotten, as if she had been
torn away not only from the sight of men, but also from the sight of God
and His angels. If this has happened to her, I should not be offended if
this also happens to me.

But those who have strong courage and faith keep the sacrament; and
because they believe that the Son of God died for them, they defy death
and mock the devil and the hells; as Paul says 1 Cor. 15:55.Death, where
is thy sting?\" and Col. 2, 15: \"He hath stripped the principalities
and the powers, and hath made a public spectacle of them, and hath made
a triumph of them by himself,\" since St. Paul speaks of death very
mockingly and contemptuously. For Christ is not only an example to him,
but also a sacrament, which is more complete and much higher than an
example. For everything that is lacking in the example, the sacrament
fulfills in a manifold and innumerable way. Sarah did not die for me,
nor can she give me life; but in the sacrament there is this majesty and
emphasis, that it has such power to make alive, which will give me life
in the resurrection of the dead. Sarah\'s example draws, provokes and
persuades us to despise death: but the Sacrament does and works this in
my

Body, which was done to Abraham and many saints who were raised from the
dead.

\(20\) Therefore the examples are not to be rejected, for they provoke,
speak sweetly, and move us: but the example of the Lord Christ, being at
the same time a sacrament, is powerful in us, not only teaching as the
examples of the fathers do, but also working that which it teaches,
giving life, resurrection, and redemption from death.

\(21\) For the examples of the saints teach us that we must die, and
they urge us to endure and suffer death with a patient heart. But the
example of Christ says this: \"Arise and be alive even in the midst of
death; that which was corrupt and decayed in you shall become clearer
and more beautiful than the sun. For the example of Christ is a
sacrament that testifies and makes us certain; it does not only teach us
or convince us, but it necessarily and definitely proves that the death
of Christ gives us life.

\(22\) Those who are therefore weak and have frightened consciences do
well to imagine the examples of the saints, so that they may keep their
faith and awaken and strengthen it more and more. But after that they
should also know this: What is lacking in the example of Christ, as far
as bodily shame or dishonor is concerned (for he did not decompose
dishonestly or was eaten by worms), that this was abundantly repaid and
fulfilled on the cross and in the garden. If anyone had seen the
terrible anguish and torment he felt and suffered there in spirit and
soul, he would have said: O how glorious was Abraham\'s and Sarah\'s
death compared to this cross of Christ! Therefore, what was lacking in
his body in that case was fulfilled in his spirit and soul.

\(23\) Of the name of this place there is much dispute. For in
Abraham\'s time it was not yet called Hebron, but Kiriath Arba; above in
the eighteenth chapter v. 1. it is called the grove Mamre. But why this
happened, the grammarians are not yet one among themselves and the
dispute is not yet decided. In the Latei

**[1610 L V. 301-AS. Interpretation of Genesis 23, 1. 2. W.I, AID-AIS.
1611]{.underline}**

nische Arbea: in civitate Arbeae, in Arbastadt, as if Arbea were a
proper name, as we call several cities in German Halberstadt, Carlstadt
2c.

\(24\) But if one wants to follow the derivation of the word Kiriath
Arba, it is just as much as if one wanted to say four-city. Jerome
follows this derivation, and states that four patriarchs were buried
there with their wives, as Adam, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and of the
last three there is no doubt; but that Adam and Eve were buried there,
no one can easily prove. From the book of Joshua Cap. 20, v. 7, it can
be seen that Hebron was called Kiriath Arba before, and that this name
was given to the city by a prince whose name was Arba, who was great
among the Enakim, that is, among the giants or tyrants who lived at that
time; and he was an outstanding man, and distinguished himself either by
virtue and wisdom, or by shame and vice, or for whatever other reason he
may have been great or famous. Thus the city of Carlstadt is called by
Carolus, who was great and excellent among the kings. Item, Halberstadt
has the name of one who was called Albertus, who was the most excellent
among those of nobility. Arba, however, had the name from the number, as
also the Latins say Quintius, Octavius, Nonius.

25 Therefore I do not accept this opinion of Jerome, that he says Adam
was buried in that place. Because by the Flood such a destruction and
desolation came over the whole world that no signs remained at all, by
which one could have felt where the previous burials had been. Just as
the whole world has become much worse and the following world cannot be
compared with the previous one at all, both of the fruits and plants and
also of the people. Paradise is torn and desolate, and no one knows in
which place Adam or Eve or other fathers are buried. Therefore, neither
their graves nor other marks of them remained after the Flood.

Some have also invented another fable and lie, saying that Adam was
buried on Calvary, when Christ was crucified. With this they want to
indicate that Christ died in Adam\'s grave or where the tree of
knowledge stood. These are good poems, but it seems to me that the truth
is that the place where Paradise was located was around Jerusalem.

27 But it is a strange thing, and to be remembered for this reason, that
Abraham and Sarah wandered about in so many places, of which I have
often said that Moses nevertheless says that Sarah died in Hebron, when
he had just before told that Abraham, Sarah and Isaac dwelt in Gerar,
that they were protected by the favor and protection of King Abimelech.

028 When Isaac was born, Sarah was ninety years old; but at the time
Moses says, he was seven and thirty years old, so that he must have
increased both inwardly and outwardly, in body, in strength and power.
When he was to be sacrificed, he was twenty years old; from that time on
he lived seventeen years until the death of his mother Sarah. In the
meantime Abimelech died and another king came in his place, who, as it
usually happens, was not equal to the previous one. But now that the
king had changed, the people had also changed their minds, and hatred
and envy had arisen again against Abraham, both at court and among the
people, after they had seen that he had increased in number and had
received great goods. Because he was so unjustly hated, insulted and
driven away, he escaped and returned to his old inn in Hebron, otherwise
he would have had no reason to leave there.

29 Now Abraham may not be at home at the time of Sarah\'s death, may
have been busy with his household, selling fields or other property he
had in Gerar, or may have been burdened with other such business; and
God does not reveal this to him, nor does He keep him at home, but sends
him away on a journey.

**[1612 L V, 3V3-30S. Interpretation of Genesis 23, 1. 2. W. I.
AIS-2416. 1613]{.underline}**

But when Sarah lay in bed, she would no doubt have sent a messenger to
call Abraham home, but death overtook her before he returned. When he
returned to Hebron, he found his wife dead at home. These things are
written for our sake, so that if such a case should happen to us one
day, we will not think that something unusual or new has happened to us,
more than to these holy people who were very dear to God. For it is
truly a case full of pain and heartache when one has to lose his most
beloved wife and in addition in his absence.

Genesis 30 says, \"Abraham came to lament and weep over Sarah. He cannot
bring her back to life, nor does he call her his wife, but his dead,
which is very pitiful and miserable. Without a doubt, her virtue, piety,
the friendly companionship of her entire life, her sweet disposition and
manners, which she had, her gentle manner, discipline, honor and
heartfelt love for her husband, were before his eyes and heart. For that
such things were all very excellent in her, I have now often said.

\(31\) What is this that Moses says Abraham came to lament and weep for
Sarah? Did such a great man then weep, lament, wear mourning clothes,
make sorrowful gestures, look sadly, cast down his eyes? 2c. Where then
is the great man of victory, who overcame so many miseries, who wandered
through Syria, Egypt, and the whole land of Canaan so many times; who
slew and smote four kings, and saved Lot, and sacrificed his dearest
son? Such works are not found in any history. For he wanted to slaughter
the son on whom the hope of descendants and promise stood, thus overcame
his fatherly heart and the highest natural inclination with strong
courage and killed him.

Why then does he weep? and why has he not kept himself manly here? He
does not act otherwise than as if he had such great spirit and courage
as the saints.

I do not want to have the care of God, and as if he had never been
exercised and tempted by some danger or adversity. To this I answer: The
holy Scripture wants to prove by this example that God is not displeased
that one mourns or weeps for the deceased parents, wife and child or
good friends, yes, if one does not weep for this, it is a sin and a
disgrace; as the world, which is even leprous and impure, calls such
inhuman unkindness and unmercifulness, which is without all compassion
and love for wife, children or relatives. But it is a raging nonsense
and not a virtue.

The holy fathers were very tender people and purer by nature than other
people, therefore they had more excellent and heartier inclinations than
other insensitive people. For the holier one is and the better he knows
God, the more he has understanding of creatures and the more he lets
them move him. Part of lamenting and mourning is that you grieve and
mourn from the heart, so also that your sad face, your tears, sighs,
howls and cries show your heartache and sorrow. Therefore Moses writes
plainly and commends to Abraham the mourning and weeping. And see how
Jacob wept so bitterly for Joseph\'s sake. That is why the holy fathers
took the misfortune and sorrow of human nature to heart, wept with the
weepers, Rom. 12, 15, were not sticks or rough blocks, but had very
tender movements and inclinations. For they had the knowledge of God;
but he who knows God also knows the creature, understands it and loves
it. For in the creature are footprints and characteristics of the
Godhead.

\(34\) Since God created the heavens and the earth in the beginning, the
first characteristic of the Father was the essence of all things, then
the form was added, and thirdly the goodness or that they were good
creatures. But such a difference in the creatures is noticed only by the
pious; the wicked do not recognize it, for they recognize neither God
nor the creatures, much less their usefulness.

35 For this, that one can see the benefit and

**[1614 . L. V, 30S. 3V6. Interpretation of Genesis 23:1-4. W. I,
2416-242.\" 1615]{.underline}**

The one who sees the use of the things that God has created belongs to
the Holy Spirit, and the one who sees the same use of a creature sees
the Holy Spirit. Whoever sees the form of the beauty of the same, sees
the Son; but whoever sees the essence in itself, the preservation and
duration of the creatures, sees God the Father. And these three parts,
namely, the essence, the form and the goodness of the creatures may not
be separated from each other. A miser, however, sees in money only the
essence, form and weight, but pays no attention to the fact that it is a
characteristic of the Son of God, nor does he consider what it is
actually supposed to be useful for, namely, that it should serve
primarily for God\'s glory and then for the benefit of the neighbor. So
godless people do not see the goodness of things, although they do see
their nature and form to some extent. So a hard-hearted and unkind
person does not see the benefit of the wife and children.

\(36\) Abraham understood for what purpose his Sarah was given to him,
not for fornication, but to rule his household, to beget children with
her, and to bring them up in the fear of God. But because the wicked do
not understand this, they do not take it to heart, but are only stones
and blocks; and truly such inhuman unkindness and hardness of heart is a
sign that nature is leprous and corrupt.

37 Therefore these things are written to Abraham for praise and honor,
and that we should learn from them that it is praiseworthy and good to
mourn and weep for good friends; as he also did in the 19th chapter
above. V. 27. for the Sodomites, although it was in vain. For since we
are human beings, we must feel and sense the inclinations that were
created by God the Creator and sunk into our hearts, so that we are not
like unreasonable animals. And so one should diligently note this
description of the patriarchs, which the Holy Scriptures have thus set
before us, that they are like us, have human affections and
inclinations, are compassionate and speak like men. For man\'s speech,
inclinations, heart and soul are the same.

creatures of God, even though they are weakened and corrupted by
original sin.

\(38\) The Holy Spirit also praises the natural inclinations in the
greatest of men, who have been famous for their virtue, piety and great
deeds. They have not been sticks or blocks or puffed-up spirits, moved
neither by happy nor sad things, but it behooves godly people to let the
pious accident, even their joy and happiness, go to their hearts, and
grieve even when their adversaries come into danger; and such
inclinations are governed in godly men by the Holy Spirit.

\(39\) Just as everyone else mourns when he loses his wife, so the
saints also mourned and wept over the death of their dear friends, and
this is an honest and Christian mourning. Others, however, who do not
mourn or grieve in such a case, boast of their manhood and strong minds,
but are inhuman, unloving and inexperienced people who despise such
things as God created and are His creatures.

40 So Abraham mourns and grieves because he has lost Sarah, his wife, a
godly, honest matron, who governed the servants and managed the whole
household, which was large and extensive. He lost in his house the light
which had shone forth to the household in all manner of virtues. For
Sarah was a queen of all queens and mother of all housemothers. And this
is what Abraham\'s example teaches us about human tendencies and about
mourning and weeping over the dead.

**Second part.**

**From the burial of Sarah.**

**V. 3. 4. After this he arose from his dead body, and spake unto the
children of Heth, saying: I am a stranger and a sojourner with you; give
me an inheritance burying with you, that I may bury my dead which is
before me.**

41\. the dead shall be mourned and lamented, but in such a way that one
also

**[1616 D. V, 3VK-M8. Interpretation of Genesis 23:3, 4. W. I,
2420-2423. 1617]{.underline}**

Keep moderation. \"Over a dead person one is wont to mourn, but one
should not mourn too much,\" says Sirach in 22 Cap. V. 10, 11. That is,
you should moderate your mourning; for \"he is at rest.\" If thou lose
thy brother, father, wife, or kinsman, thou hast good cause to mourn,
and shalt not be a rod or block to laugh at the dead body and burial of
thy dear friends; for there is no time to laugh, and such a stony and
iron heart displeases God. But still the mourning should be measured, so
that you are not consumed by excessive mourning. It is indeed painful to
be torn away from one\'s dear parents, spouse or children; for \"the
dead,\" says Sirach Cap. 22, 10, \"have no more light,\" that is, they
no longer enjoy this light and our company; but the mourning should be
contrasted with that which follows in Sirach v. 11: \"For he is at
rest.\" The cause of mourning is that the light of man is gone out; but
the cause of comfort shall be that he is at rest. Therefore shalt thou
remember, Let him rest in peace: for I know that he is well. He is in no
sorrow or calamity, but in rest he lieth and sleepeth, waiting for a
better life. Therefore this is our comfort, that our wives, our
children, our parents sleep, are not in such a place where they suffer
pain and torture, but lie and rest gently and quietly in peace.

\(42\) When such horrible and terrible cases occur, as when David loses
his son Absalom, 2 Sam. 18:33, who dies in mortal sin and is condemned,
there is the most intense and severe mourning and heartache that one can
have. And what else can you do in such a case, but to entrust the matter
to God? But where there is a peaceful and quiet parting, there those who
die and sleep lie in peace. And this is what Moses wants when he says:
\"Abraham arose\" 2c. He has felt sorrow and sadness over the death of
his dear wife, but has overcome such natural inclination and now thinks
further about the burial.

43\. but it is also strange that he should have

He has never thought about Sarah, his own life and his son\'s life, nor
has he taken care of how he would get something of his own and
inheritance, except now that Sarah has died. And though it seems to be a
vain thing to make provision for a place to sleep in, if it cannot be
possessed, yet Moses tells this with special diligence, and makes more
words of it than he usually does, namely, how Abraham bought a place for
Sarah, not while she was still alive, but while she was dead.

44 Until now he has been a stranger and has not been able to change his
difficult situation. But now that his wife has died, he is thinking of a
place of his own to bury her. Before, when he was in the land of Canaan
for seventy years, no doubt more of his household died, servants or
maidservants, but he did not care for any of them as he did for Sarah.
He buried some of his other dead in Gerar and some in Egypt, but here he
is looking for a special, hereditary burial place.

45\. the word ger means a stranger with the Hebrews; as in the 39th
Psalm v. 13. it says: \"I am both your pilgrim and your citizen, like
all my fathers.\" And St. Paul also speaks thus, Eph. 2, l9. \"Ye are
now no more sojourners or strangers\" 2c. It means one who is a stranger
and has come from another place. So Abraham was also a stranger, because
he was not born in the land of Canaan, but came from Chaldea. The Hebrew
word toshav means a stranger who is not a master but a guest and has
nothing of his own in the country where he lives. Just as Christians are
strangers and sojourners in this world, whose fatherland and inheritance
is in another place. For according to the fleshly birth they come into
the world from nothing; therefore they are strangers, and do not remain
in the Wett, but leave the Wett. So we also are strangers, having been
born again of the Holy Spirit through baptism and the Word, and walk
here on earth as sojourners.

**[1618 V, 308-3IV. Interpretation of Genesis 23:3, 4. W. I, 2423-2426.
1619]{.underline}**

\(46\) Therefore Abraham says, I come from a foreign land, and have
nothing of my own here with you; I am a stranger to you in two ways;
therefore I have no place where I may bury my dead. David diligently
considered these words in the 39th Psalm, and it is also such a thing
that is well worthy of being diligently considered. For such a great man
with such a large household, almost four hundred men, excluding wives
and children, had to wander so long in the wilderness. And if you count
it right, he had about a thousand people. For where there are four
hundred men, there are also so many wives and children.

Thus, this holy patriarch was led in a very strange way, which would be
impossible in our time. For it is a miracle above all miracles that God
fed and sustained him in foreign lands with such a large household, and
that Sarah was able to manage and order it all. Therefore, Abraham\'s
house government was no less miraculous than his church. He is a
stranger and a sojourner with all his household, but he will undoubtedly
have been uplifted and comforted by the promise.

\(48\) Furthermore, this text about the inheritance grave that Abraham
bought raises a whole house of questions and strange thoughts among the
teachers and in Peter Lombardus. For from this, in scholastic theology,
cause is taken to dispute simony, of which they dispute in such a
confused manner and disorderly, that such a trade is not worthy to be
brought to light or to be thought of. And simony was an atrocious vice
two hundred years ago, but the popes have barely kept the shadow of the
same word, as Julius boasts of it in a dialogue of Erasmus.

But this is actually simony, when one buys and sells a spiritual office,
good, gift or authority for money, as Simon Magus did. When he saw that
the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles\' hands,
he offered them money and said, Acts 8:19 ff.

Power, that if I lay hands on someone, he may receive the Holy Spirit,\"
thus desiring that if he had bought the Holy Spirit for money, he would
have it in his power, and the Holy Spirit would do as he pleased.
Therefore St. Peter punishes him severely and says to him: \"That you
should be condemned with your money, because you think that God\'s gift
is obtained by money.

\(50\) From the same Simon this is called simony, which, as I said, is
nothing else than when someone thinks, according to this Simon\'s
example, that the gifts of God can be bought and sold for money. For
Christ does not sell his gifts and grace, but has redeemed us for
nothing and by pure grace.

\(51\) And this is the true and proper concept of simony, which the
Cenonists have subsequently tortured in a strange way. For these words,
\"to buy God\'s gift for money,\" 2c., they apply to all that which men
give to God. Thus they now call the income or interest of the church
spiritual goods, because they are God\'s gifts, not given by Him, but
that men have sacrificed and given them to Him: but is this not great
blindness and foolishness? They drag by the hair the text from 3 Mos.
27, 9: \"Everything that is given to the Lord is holy\" 2c. Such, they
pretend, are the gifts given to the church, as fiefs, gold or silver
jewels and other goods, which were initially given to the churches to
maintain the servants; but if one asks them whether such goods may also
be bought or sold, they answer that one may not do so, because they are
spiritual goods.

Now Peter understands such goods or gifts given by God to be active, not
passive, that is, that one takes them from him and does not give them to
him. The canonists mix and match these things, even though they do not
belong together. And how could they teach these things correctly, since
they do not respect the gift of the Holy Spirit, and in the simony and
gifts given by God,

**[1620 D. V, S10-SIS. Interpretation of Genesis 23:3, 4. W. I. A2S-AW.
1621]{.underline}**

that is, drowned in spiritual goods, as they call them.

\(53\) And I have often complained of the abuse of these words,
\"spiritual goods,\" \"spiritual persons,\" as the papists call their
clergymen: and I would gladly have the same words kept in their right
and proper use; but we have lost them through such abuse, and are now
called by the papists \"spiritual goods,\" annual incomes, interests,
houses, cities, and lands, which are most of all worldly. But this is a
true spiritual man who believes and is baptized, whether he is a common
layman or a person in church office. It does not mean a priest who has
been anointed, anointed and consecrated to say sacrificial masses for
the dead.

I teach you this so that you may know that in spiritual law there is a
wicked abuse and an abominable blindness in the dispensation of simony.
Among the canonists this is called simony, not where one buys the gifts
of the Holy Spirit, but where one buys or sells the gifts and goods that
men have given to God or to the church, as there are prebendaries,
fiefdoms or benefices, cities and such other goods. As if someone wanted
to sell a spiritual fief, as they call it, a parish or any other fief of
an altar or mass: item, if a bishop takes money and ordains one to the
priesthood for it. After this they also dispute whether one who has
practiced simony and is ordained and consecrated by another who has also
practiced simony is ordained and consecrated rightly. There are whole
cargos, yes, whole seas full of books about such questions.

55 If this description of their simony remains true, then all papist
bishops and buffoons are vain Simonists, and are all damned to hell and
the devil. And do they condemn themselves, not according to evangelical
law, but according to their spiritual law. The bishop of Mainz has given
the pope twenty thousand guilders for the pallium; the bishop of
Wuerzburg ten thousand; one of the bishops has given him a hundred
guilders: now are they not

all Simonists? Therefore, the whole papacy is sunk and condemned to
hell, because they all practice simony, not according to our law, but
according to their own. But the canonists remain silent about this and
do not want to suffer that we should punish them. But when our ministers
and priests take wives, they condemn them and kill them. But what is
this but sin above all sin?

\(56\) Four hundred years ago, if a bishop had punished anyone for these
sins, no one would have had fellowship with him; indeed, he would
immediately have been considered evil for such a deed: but now
everything is for money. Furthermore, they command us to keep their
canons and decrees, of which they themselves are quite free. They cry
out against us that now the decrees and statutes of the popes are
despised, yes, that even the church order is despised and destroyed: why
do they themselves not keep such things? No one sins with them except
the Son of God, and no one is righteous with them except the devil.

If only the pope were wise, and would recognize this benefit, that our
teaching makes him free from his books and decrees, and absolves him
from the vice of simony, because he only steals temporal goods, such as
gold and silver, which are not spiritual goods, such as baptism, the
gospel and the preaching ministry, none of which he seeks or steals, and
which are nevertheless the right gifts of the Holy Spirit! They are also
gifts of God, but only worldly, outward and bodily gifts.

58 Therefore we absolve the pope according to the right concept of this
sin, in which he has put himself with his spiritual right. For he does
not sell spiritual goods, which are rightly so called, for he does not
have them, but sells offices, fiefs, and prelatures, and thus snatches
to himself the goods of this world; but he does not sell the ministry of
preaching, nor does he ask for it. Therefore he should not be accused of
simony, but of theft and robbery, as Verres and Dionysius did, calling
him a robber above all robbers, a thief above all thieves, a murderer
above all murderers.

**[1622 2 V, 3I2-ÄI4. interpretation of Genesis 23, 3. 4. W. I. AW-ALU
1623]{.underline}**

For his throat is filled with insatiable desire, so that he snatches
after temporal goods for and for.

59 Simony is a spiritual vice and sin, as described by St. Peter, where
money is taken for the gifts of the Holy Spirit and not for bodily gifts
or goods. These two things are mixed together by the canonists, who are
nothing but rough asses. For simony does not belong among domestic and
worldly goods, but among the gifts of the Holy Spirit.

\(60\) But if they would reproach us that these bodily goods are
attached to the spiritual, we answer that this is rightly said. For the
rule of the house and of the world is bound up with the church, and this
life cannot be maintained without food and drink; but are these all
spiritual goods which Christians use?

61 Simony is when I sell a spiritual thing for money, which should be
given for free. But a church, a tomb, and all other gifts given to the
saints are not spiritual, but simply corporeal goods, and can be stolen,
bought, and sold: but spiritual gifts we cannot steal, sell, or buy; for
they are not ours, but of the Holy Spirit. Simony, however, would be if
a church servant or priest did not want to teach or tell you about the
forgiveness of sins and other benefits of God, which are presented and
offered to us in the gospel, and wanted to deny you absolution, if you
did not want to redeem or buy them from him for a hundred guilders.

In this way, the pope is also a true Simonist, because he offers God\'s
grace and forgiveness of sins to anyone who wants to give him a certain
amount of money. This is called selling a spiritual thing and the grace
of the Holy Spirit, although it cannot be sold even if you want to give
a thousand guilders or more for an absolution. For first of all the pope
does not have it; then it is impossible that spiritual things can be
sold; only that one can make a pretense to inexperienced people and
pretend that such things are sold to them.

The gifts of the Holy Spirit and the blood of Christ are not for sale,
nor can they be sold, except in appearance, according to the choice and
will of men. When the pope says that he who brings five pennies can
redeem a soul from purgatory, this is really simony, but it is not true.
For the redemption of souls from purgatory does not follow, although the
money, buying and selling is there.

\(64\) So he made up that he had the power to forgive sins. He snatched
the keys, sold forgiveness of sins, promised people that he would
deliver them from hell and purgatory, but only took away the money and
left the poor souls under the power of sins, hell and the devil.

This is actually simony, namely, selling the gift of the Holy Spirit,
which no one can receive other than for free. One may well offer it for
sale, but one cannot sell God. For that which has the name and
appearance of being sold does not follow such a simonean purchase or
exchange. Thus simony is an impossible thing in respect of the things,
but in appearance and color it is very mean. For the name of the Lord is
profaned and sold by it; but it is nothing else but a vain pretense and
pretended pretense.

\(66\) Therefore, in spiritual things, the pope is a true Simonist,
selling forgiveness of sins and righteousness. In temporal goods he is a
church robber and thief, who would sell the Lord Christ Himself if he
had Him in his hands and power, as the Jews had Him; for he does not
lack good will at all. Simony of this kind also occurred in the
monasteries, both on the part of the buyer and the seller. For whoever
gave a hundred guilders, four beggings were held for him in the year.
Thus the whole papacy is the devil\'s church, full of theft, theft from
the church, and unspeakable abominations and blasphemies.

But here a question arises: Whether a preacher or church servant may
also take emergency maintenance for his office? There-

**[1624 L.v, 31S-S17. Interpretation of Genesis 23, 3. 4. W. 1,
24SI-2434. 1625]{.underline}**

I answer that it is quite proper for him to do this, as otherwise a poor
man might take a gift. If I had the power or authority that no one could
be absolved of sins, for he had previously listed several florins for
me, I would bring all the goods of the world to myself in one day. But
this is not proper and the pope has done such a feat out of devilish
audacity and sacrilege. We are commanded to teach, comfort and absolve
all who accept and believe, and they all receive such goods from us for
free, according to the saying of Matth. 10:8: \"For free you have
received, for free you give.

68\) As Christians enjoy the ministry of preaching for free, so they
should also feed, maintain and protect the servants for free, give them
food and clothing; as St. Paul says Gal. 6:6: \"He who is taught by the
word gives all good things to him who teaches him\"; item 1 Tim. 5:17:
\"The elders, who are well instructed, are counted worthy of double
honor; especially those who labor in the word and in doctrine. And
Christ himself says Matth. 10, 10: \"A laborer is worthy of his food.\"
Item, the Lord says in the prophet Isaiah Cap. 49, v. 22, 23, that the
princes and kings of the church will give gifts. But these gifts are not
payment, buying or selling. For we need daily sustenance, food and
drink, but this does not pay for absolution, for who could pay for it?
What are a hundred or a thousand florins against this immeasurable great
gift of the forgiveness of sins?

\(69\) If we therefore take our food from the community, this is not a
payment that should be considered equal to this gift, which is so great
and expensive that it could not be paid for even with the whole world\'s
goods. But since such a great and abundant gift cannot be distributed in
any other way than through people, who must have food and sustenance, it
must be nourished and maintained. But this is not payment for the gift,
but for their toil and labor.

70\. there is another question with the canonists, namely: if a church
servant of

If he had saved two hundred guilders from his work, would he not buy a
field or an inheritance for such money? And they say that he may not do
so because it is a spiritual good. But I say freely that he may well do
so, for it is not spiritual goods, although the person administers and
distributes the spiritual gifts.

Therefore the canonists err very shamefully, and do not know what simony
is, but mix spiritual and corporal goods among themselves: and they
themselves, according to their right and their own conscience, are great
and excellent simonists, stealing, robbing and devouring the goods of
the parish priests and the churches, and are worse than Verres and
Dionysius, and divide the right spiritual goods for money like a robbery
or booty. And yet just such people may arrogate to themselves the rule
over the whole world, as well as the judgment over our doctrine and
God\'s word: command us to be obedient to the pope, when they themselves
neither understand their own statutes and bylaws nor ask anything about
them.

Lyra recently remembers this disputation and simply wants to escape by
saying that Abraham did not buy a grave, but only a place for burial.
But such a thing is sophistical and fraudulently spoken, as they
themselves confess. He did not buy a grave, because there was none there
yet, but he could have made it where he wanted.

This example also teaches that the dead should be buried with special
honor and discipline for the sake of faith and the hope of the future
resurrection. Before the time of the martyrs, the Christians had burials
in all fields, gardens and houses: but afterwards there was greater
respect and discipline, since special places and churchyards were
decreed for burials; just as among the pagans, too, fine ceremonies were
held at the burials. Therefore this should be much more so among
Christians for the sake of the article of our faith in the resurrection
of the flesh, so that it should not have the appearance and appearance
that we die and are buried like horses and donkeys.

**[1626 D V. 317-319. interpretation of Genesis 23:3, 4. w. i.
2434-2437. 1627]{.underline}**

74 What now follows, goes almost everything on external discipline and
customs, except this only, that Abraham says: \"Pray me a hereditary
burial with you\" 2c. For that which the text in Latin has, jus
sepulturae, a right to burial, is not in the Hebrew, and wants to say to
Abraham only this much: I did not want to desire a foot wide in this
land and during my life, but only desire a place where I may make a pit
and prepare a grave for my deceased Sarah. The whole land was promised
to Abraham and belonged to him by all rights as his own; yet he did not
have a foot wide in it, but is a stranger and dies with his Sarah in his
own land like a stranger.

The prophets and apostles looked at this with spiritual eyes and a
little more diligently than others have done. For the fact that Abraham,
who is the Lord of this land by God, is a stranger in it with Sarah and
his son Isaac, is indicated in the spirit and means that we are all
guests here on earth and live here as in misery. For this is what St.
Paul says in 2 Cor. 5:6: \"While we dwell in the body, we are pleasing
to the Lord.\" But if we dwell in the body, which is really ours, and
are strangers, and our life in this body is nothing else than a
pilgrimage, how much more are the goods which we have for the sake of
the body, as fields, houses, money, 2c., nothing else but strange things
and pilgrimage! The body is like a dark dungeon, in which the soul lies
locked up, as in a dungeon and in a pit; therefore our one half is like
nothing and a carrion, lying in the grave and stinking.

Therefore, it is clear enough from this that the patriarchs drew out and
looked at the right core of the promises, and did not just touch the
bark externally. Thus Abraham understood that the promise given to him
included the right fatherland and the right true life, namely, the life
to come, which is better than this, which is not a servitude and prison
of souls. So, since David says in the 39th Psalm, v. 13, that he is a
stranger, one might wonder why he is a stranger.

when he was a great and mighty king in Israel and had the promised land
in his possession? But he esteems it very little, and has in his heart
and before his eyes another dwelling place much better, which those do
not esteem, who in this life, as if the eternal one would not come
after, practice robbery and shameful usury.

Oh, what a fleeting and futile honor and hope it is to have the goods
and riches of this world, when no man can be sure of his life for a
moment! How we all, and each one in particular, feel, see and understand
this, namely, that we drag ourselves along with such a body, which is
half a carrion and already a dead thing: and yet there are many of them
who think that this life is the best and will last forever. This can be
seen from the fact that people are so very eager and cannot get enough
of gathering together as much money and property as they can and may,
whether rightly or wrongly. But why do they do this? Because they are in
the devil\'s exile, and go astray, caring and worrying only about
temporal life.

\(78\) The faith and patience of Abraham, who waited for another and
eternal dwelling place over the promised land, are praised here. He
wants Sarah to be buried in the land, so that she may be raised from
death with Christ when he rises. However, he wanders in his own land as
in a foreign land: God does not give him a foot wide in it, nor a burial
place, but he buys a place from those who live in the land for his
money. Therefore he did not strive with shameful lust and addiction, as
if he wanted to collect a lot of money and goods, as if he would remain
eternally in this life; but his whole heart was set on the promised
Christ, on whom he primarily looked in the promise, and he waited with
joy for him to come to this earth. Now follow other pieces of outward
conduct and good manners, but they are very glorious and useful.

**[1628 V, 319-321. Interpretation of Genesis 23, 5. 6. W. 1, 2437-2441.
1629]{.underline}**

**Third part.**

**Of the benevolence of Abraham and the Hebronites, and of Ephesus\'
bounty.**

**V. 5, 6: And the children of Heth answered Abraham, and said unto him,
Hear us, O Lord. Thou art a prince of God among us, bury thy dead in our
most honest graves; let no man among us forbid thee that thou bury not
thy dead in his grave.**

79\. Moses makes a lot of words in the description of this condition and
trade; but the Holy Spirit does this first of all in honor of the famous
matron Sarah, who is a mother of all patriarchs, prophets, as well as of
the most distinguished princes and kings, the like of which is not found
in any histories. Therefore, no funeral is described in the holy
scriptures as glorious as Sarah\'s; indeed, this is how Christ wanted
his old mother to be buried honestly, as she was also worthy of it
because of her virtues. For she governed her household in discipline and
godliness, was an abbess far more glorious and excellent than ours are
now, in external and domestic matters, with which the abbesses of the
nuns in convents are not only not to be compared, but are even
contemptible and unrecognizable. For what are they, if one wants to
compare them with Sarah, who is the mother of the most excellent and
famous princes and kings, and who ruled her house and all that belonged
to it so praiseworthily during her life? But what are the works of the
abbesses, which they do in the monasteries, but an abominable idolatry?

80 Because, as I said, this text here belongs entirely to the outward
life and good manners, one should first notice the example of courtesy
and respect in this people. For there shines out of their words, customs
and gestures a wonderful kindness, which would be hard to find in our
time among the old or the young. For thus they address Abraham: \"Dear
Lord, you are a prince of God among us\" 2c. This is a great, excellent
honor, which the same people show to Abraham.

are lords in the land and hold the same by divine right.

81 After this, consider the special composure and humility of Abraham\'s
request. For I consider that Ephron, of whom it will be said hereafter,
was a prince of Hebron: to him he does not go immediately, but first
addresses those who were under him, and humbly seeks their favor. And
the Holy Spirit did not want to pass by such behavior, so that he would
show that he wants to have such virtues and that he respects them
greatly. For this reason he holds such examples of great people before
us, so that we should learn that reverence, discipline and comportment
of one toward the other is necessary, and that God is pleased that one
should be at the will of the other, and as St. Paul teaches Rom. 12, 10,
one should precede the other with reverence, and Phil. 2, 3: \"Through
humility, one should esteem the other higher than himself.

So this description, for which Moses uses so many words, is not in vain.
For we are not born swine, asses, logs, or sticks, but were created to
lift up our faces and raise them to heaven; and God has given man a
rational soul that can understand the difference between honor and
dishonor, that he may know what is good and praiseworthy in other men
and show them due honor for it. Therefore, a rough, rustic and
animalistic life is not befitting for a Christian, as is seen in the
rough and wild customs of our people nowadays.

83\. and especially our country here has such people, who are quite
ill-mannered, without all discipline and politeness, that one would like
to say that peasants, burghers and the nobility in these countries are
more like sows than people: there is no kindness or gentleness about
them at all. Therefore, I often wonder why God first revealed the light
of the Gospel to such naughty, coarse and wild people.

The poets fable that Ulysses once lost his companions, and that they all

**[1630 V. 321-323. interpretation of Genesis 23:5, 6. w. 1:2441-2444.
1631]{.underline}**

have been transformed into sows. It seems that such a transformation has
also happened to our people. Although there is less danger in the case
of coarse, rustic people, if such vice spreads and gets among the
teachers of the churches, who ascribe everything to themselves for the
sake of special gifts, and through clumsy and rustic hopefulness despise
all others with whom they should deal kindly and love them, then it is a
great pity and ruin of the church.

Therefore learn from this example how you should govern your life, so
that you may become accustomed to be kind, humble and respectful toward
everyone. For this reason Moses so diligently and in so many words sets
before us Abraham\'s example, who with the utmost humility and modesty
asks that a place in the land be sold to him, and does not press for it
unreasonably and impetuously. Although he seems to do this because of
necessity, since he is a stranger there, he has also had cause, after he
has been adorned with such great virtues and gifts, that he might well
have exalted himself somewhat because of this. But he forgets all these
gifts and addresses the people of Hebron respectfully and kindly; and
they greet him again, even though he is a stranger, as a gentleman, and
reveal in their words and gestures a special kindness and benevolence
toward him, forgetting even their right and dominion in the land, which
they might well have used against a stranger and a newcomer.

These are true good works, and even though they are worldly, they should
be held up against all the dreadful self-chosen works of the monks, who
only make a point of captivating young people into their order and
accustoming them to unskillful and abominable humility, which is not at
all like the conduct and life of honest and holy people: on the other
hand, young people should learn humility, courtesy and reverence from
this text and example of Abraham and the people of Hebron.

\(87\) Notwithstanding that the hypocrites despise these works as evil
and wicked, as Witzel the apostate also did, saying that we teach such
works,

which would be too mean and worldly. But if you ask them what else one
should do, they say that one should go to the churches, roar like an ox
in the choir, and pray the Torahs or rather murmur them. But this and
other such examples clearly punish their hypocrisy, because the Holy
Spirit is not shy about telling and praising such external and worldly
works so precisely.

It seems that God graced and adorned Abraham and his church with special
prestige and glory in the eyes of the Gentiles at that time: as with
King Abimelech above, who allowed Abraham to use the land and thought
much of him, even though he had nothing of his own and had to give way
again after the death of the king. So the people of Hebron, who were
pagans, honored him and called him a prince of God. This shows that they
have heard the sermons of Abraham and have believed in the God of
Abraham. For in the place where the holy patriarch was, he produced much
fruit by word and spirit, by teaching, admonishing and punishing, and
through his preaching the Gentiles heard and saw the great deeds of God,
wherefore they also believed and were saved. Therefore they honored him
as a lord, as Sarah calls him her lord, and called him a prince of God.

It is a great blessing and a gift from God when princes have such guests
with them, recognize God and Christ in them and hold them in honor, and
the guest and priest also does in his office what is due him, namely,
that he teaches Christianly and faithfully. This grace and benefit is
very rare, that pious God-fearing priests or teachers have a safe and
quiet place where they can teach and preach quietly, and is a special
grace of God, which the devil, as a great enemy of the word and the
blessedness of men, always hinders and destroys.

Where there is such unity that the princes of the land honor the
ministers of the church for preaching God\'s word and spreading the holy
treasures,

**[1632 L. V. 3W-Z\". Interpretation of Genesis 23:5, 6. W. I, L444-2E.
1633]{.underline}**

protect and nourish them, there one may truly say that there is the real
paradise.

91\. But where the ministers of the church are despised, mocked and
trampled underfoot, as happened to Isaiah and other prophets, as Isa.
57:4 says: \"Over whom will you open your mouths and stick out your
tongues,\" since they taught in the best and most faithful way, then
there is certainly a sign of God\'s wrath and that there is great misery
and misfortune. For this has never gone without punishment, where such
great grace, shown to men by pious, godly servants, is despised.

\(92\) On the other hand, the wicked and the perverse priests are
generally more fortunate, for the princes are obedient to them, willing
and ready to do them all good: as your pope has subjected all kings and
princes to him, showering him with all kinds of benefits, serving him
not only with their possessions and goods, but also with their bodies.
But for such benefits he has shamefully seduced them, won them over to
the devil and brought them to him.

Today, praise God, the ministry of preaching has been cleansed and swept
clean of all kinds of error and idolatry, but how is it received in the
world and how is it dealt with? It is blasphemed, rejected and, as it
were, trampled underfoot, and the church servants are strangled for this
purpose.

94\. By great grace, God has granted us an inn under the Most Serene
Prince of Saxony, as under Duke Hans Friedrich, Elector, and his brother
Duke Ernst: but as gracious, favorable and benevolent as the princes
show themselves to be toward us, there is so much horrid hatred,
disfavor and contempt on the part of those of the nobility, the
officials, burghers and peasants; who, if it were in their power to do
what they would have liked, would have driven us out of this dwelling
and inn long ago.

95 Therefore I say that there was a wonderful fear of God, reverence and
kindness among those in Hebron toward Abraham, whom they recognized as
such a guest that could make all the inhabitants and citizens of the
place rich, not with money.

They do not expect him to be full of good things or goods, gold or
silver, but with heavenly and spiritual gifts, namely, that he could
show them the way to salvation and redeem souls from sin and hell
through the word, and in sum, that he would be full of all kinds of
goods and blessings. For this reason, they gladly receive him, love him
and obey him, just as he found such favor with King Abimelech (Cap. 20,
v. 15).

96 Now it is an honorable and very glorious title, \"a prince of God,\"
which the people of Hebron give to Abraham: not that he was their
sovereign, or that he ever had authority over them, but that he had at
home in his house a large household, that is, over a thousand men.
Therefore they call him a prince of God, as one who rules over very
pious and holy men in his house. As if they wanted to say: We do not
have such a faithful people, such holy, obedient and humble servants as
you. Your principality is a divine principality, which makes the people
holy and pious.

It is truly a special gift of God when princes govern their subjects
wisely and well, and the subjects are obedient in turn. For God provides
both, namely, a seeing eye, that is, a righteous teacher, bishop or
authority, and a hearing ear, Proverbs 20:12, that is, obedient subjects
and listeners. Where there is a lack of these, there is an evil regime
and things go badly. For it is not enough that you are a hearing ear,
but have not a seeing eye; and again, that you are a seeing eye, and
have not a hearing ear. With the people of Hebron Abraham was the seeing
eye, that he taught them and governed his household, and they were the
hearing ear; therefore the word there brought forth abundant fruit.

But if the eye does not see, as the pope is a blinded and cursed eye,
and the ear nevertheless hears, as we have hitherto listened to and
accepted his human statutes \"with great eagerness\", there is the most
certain way to perdition and eternal death.

99\. we have today the seeing

**[1634 L.v, 325-327. interpretation of Genesis 23:5-10. W. l.
244\"-2449. 1635]{.underline}**

Eye, that is, the pure doctrine of the Word, but we find, alas! no
listening ear; for our doctrine is despised, yes, it is horribly
blasphemed. Wherever these two things are together, God Himself has done
it, and it is a divine miracle of which God and the angels in heaven
rejoice.

The other proof of the favor and kindness these people show Abraham is
that they show him the place for burial. Go, they say, where it pleases
thee, into the garden of the prince, or of any princely council. For it
was customary among them that each one should bury his dead in whatever
place he pleased. For this reason, we have allowed you not only the
common burial, but one of the most special and most honorable.

This is truly excellent reverence, which they undoubtedly learned in
Abraham\'s church, who instructed and taught them in the spirit, and
also made them outwardly fit and chaste according to the flesh. They
also add to this, saying, \"No man shall forbid thee among us to bury
thy dead in his grave\"; thou shalt be at liberty to choose which place
thou wilt.

**B. 7-10 Then Abraham stood up and bowed down before the people of the
land, that is, the children of Heth. And he spake unto them, saying, If
it please you that I should bury him that is dead before me, hear me,
and pray for me against Ephron the son of Zoar, that he give me his
twofold cave, which he hath at the end of his field; and he shall give
it me for money, as much as it is worth, among you for an inheritance.
For Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth.**

First of all, Abraham stands up before the Hebronites as the elders and
noblest, for he believes that they should be honored as lords of the
land, and he does so justly and rightly. For our Lord God did not create
us to be proud and hopeful, hard, unreasonable, unreasonable and coarse,
rude people, but that one should show honor to another. So, when I tell
the world

If I show honor to the authorities or to a priest and church servant, I
do not honor him as a brother among the other brothers, but as a person
ordained by God. In the same way, one should honor honest matrons,
virgins, and especially parents and disciplinarians, not for their sake,
but because they are God\'s creatures and God Himself is honored in
them; as Augustine says: You should honor God one by one.

After that Abraham bows down before the people of the land. Here a
distinction must be made between bowing down and worshiping. For, first
of all, it happens when one falls down with the face or with the body on
the earth, and attacks its feet, before which one thus bows down. This
is the highest bending down or worshipping that is due to kings and
princes. And so the Sunamite holds Elisha by the feet, 2 Kings 4:27, and
Peter also fell at Jesus\' feet, Luke 5:8. Secondly, it happens when one
bends the knees or falls down on the knees. Thirdly, when one bows his
head and holds one by both hands.

\(104\) Therefore bowing down or worshipping in this place actually
means the offering of the body, which is done either by bowing the head
or falling on the knees, or by falling on the face, according to the
custom in every country and among men in every place, or according to
the dignity and status of the one before whom one bows down or whom one
worships; for it is not worshipping in the spirit, of which Christ says
John 4:24.

Abraham stood up, not lying on the ground or bending his knees, but he
bowed his head and perhaps took their hands, holding them and kissing
them at the same time, which was customary among the same people. And
these are fine, honest customs of humility, reverence and courtesy,
which should be held up and praised especially to the young, so that
they may also learn to get used to them, and discard the coarse, wild
customs and gestures, which are very common.

\(106\) Abraham will no doubt have had other reasons for showing such
honor to the same people, namely.

**[1636 L. V. SL7-SN. Interpretation of Genesis 23:7-18. W. 1,
2449-2452. 1637]{.underline}**

Not only because they were the people of the land, that is, the lords
and inhabitants of it, but also because of the fear of God and all kinds
of virtue that he inspired in them. How long they remained so pious
cannot be known, but it is known that almost all peoples in all
countries did not remain in their discipline and good manners, virtue
and respectability for more than twenty years; and all histories, both
of the Gentiles and of the Holy Scriptures, testify to this.

For when men are once brought to the knowledge of God and to good
honorable manners, they remain in such piety and good manners for the
longest twenty years; for they are gradually corrupted again, so that
they fall into contempt and overindulgence of present things, until
afterward they fall into abominable sin and disgrace. Read the histories
of David, Solomon and all the kings, and also of St. Augustine. Yes,
look at our time too: does not experience teach us now that the
beginning of the heavenly teaching was sweet and very pleasant to
everyone? Now, however, people are getting more and more tired of it and
disgusted with this loose food, as it is written about the Jews 4 Mos.
21, 5.

\(108\) Thus the Hebronites were good, pious and godly people in
Abraham\'s time, but afterwards they were destroyed in Moses\' and
Joshua\'s time, after they had lost the right divine teaching and had
also abandoned discipline and respectability. Moses also told the same
story about the Sodomites (Cap. 14, 21), who were also pious for a while
after Abraham saved them from the great danger and drove away their
enemies; but after seven years, such great shameful deeds took over
among them that they were burned with fire and brimstone from heaven and
destroyed.

109 And our Germany, according to the great light of the gospel, is
almost possessed by the devil. The youth is impudent and wild and will
not let itself be drawn; the old are afflicted with avarice, usury, and
many other sins that cannot be told. So

we thank God for the word of grace and for His only begotten Son; as
Moses also complains about the Jews, Deut. 32, 6: \"Do you then thank
the Lord your God, you foolish and foolish people? Therefore it is no
wonder that great punishments and all kinds of misfortune follow; but it
is the way of the world that it must be so. While we have time, let us
do good, Gal. 6:10, each in his profession, that we may study the
Scriptures and practice good morals, while the doctrine of the gospel
still goes forth and shines before us, as Christ exhorts Jn. 12:36,
\"Believe in the light while you have it. For the devil does the
opposite, and at all times brings his cunning and darkness upon the
necks of the unwary by force.

V.10-18. **Then Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham, that the children
of Heth should hear him before all that came in and out of the gates of
his city, and said, Nay, my lord, but hear me. I give thee the field,
and the cave that is therein; and I give it thee in the sight of the
children of my people, to bury thy dead. Then Abraham bowed down before
the people of the land, and spake unto Ephron, that the people of the
land might hear, saying, If thou wilt let me have it, I pray thee, take
of me the money for the field, which I give thee, and I will bury my
dead man there. Ephron answered Abraham, and said unto him, My lord,
hear me. The field is worth four hundred shekels of silver, but what is
that between me and you? Just bury your dead. Abraham obeyed Ephron, and
weighed to him the money which he had said that the children of Heth
heard, four hundred shekels of silver, which was common in the purchase.
So Ephron\'s field, wherein is the twofold cave, over against Mamre, was
confirmed unto Abraham for his own possession, with the cave therein,
and with all the trees of the field round about, that the children of
Heth looked on, and all that went in and out of the gate of his city.**

110 Ephron tries to persuade Abraham to take the field without money, as
a gift. What is, he says, between me and you

**[1638 n. V, 329-331. interpretation of I Moses 23, 1020 . w. I,
2453-2458. 1639]{.underline}**

You are a prince of God, so I am rich; what good can it do me if I sell
the field for four hundred shekels of silver? This is a fine and
praiseworthy tribute to the prophet and teacher; but Abraham has refused
to do so, and wants to buy the field for his own money.

\(111\) For he thought or said: I know that you are good, pious and
upright people, but I have experienced other people\'s inconstancy in
other places and have learned to be a little more careful. In Egypt and
in Gerar, I felt the favor and honor of many people, but I was finally
cast out: I did great good to the Sodomites, but they thought little of
it and finally thanked me badly for it. So if I took this field as a
free gift, perhaps your descendants after your death would forget about
your kindness and gifts, and take it from me again by force, and dig up
my Sarah and throw her away. For because we are strangers and in a
strange land, they would say, as the Sodomites said to Lot in 19 Cap. V.
9: \"Thou art the only stranger here, and wilt thou reign?\" Therefore I
will buy him, so that your descendants will have no right to demand him
from me again.

Behold, how wisely spiritual men deal with one another even in outward
worldly things; not as the monks, who compose spiritual works alone,
that they may go about, when all their works are altogether carnal. But
the righteous saints live in the world and deal with worldly affairs
with great, whimsical prudence; they are reverent, kind, prudent,
careful, and prudent in all civic duties.

He bought the field before and in the presence of all the citizens, so
that, as Moses says, all who went out and came in at the gates of his
city were watching; they were all there as witnesses that this field was
Abraham\'s and all his descendants\' for and for. For at that time it
was not yet customary to give handwriting or letter and seal to each
other.

\(114\) Now this is another virtue of Abraham, namely, prudence, that he
may deal with men, whose descendants are apt to be inconstant and
fickle; as is commonly seen in all generations, as in David\'s,
Solomon\'s, and other excellent men, that the children seldom imitate
their parents\' manner and virtue.

115 Abraham\'s request was also quite modest. For he wanted to be
satisfied with a part of the field, for example at the back in a corner,
which would not have been in a convenient place, but which could not
have been used in any other way; Ephron, however, grants him the whole
field and not only a corner, then also the cave, which is in the same
field, and he himself moves to another plot or field, of which he
undoubtedly had several.

But Abraham paid the four hundred shekels of silver, as it is customary
to buy and to sell in the marketplace 2c. And these words are repeated
again in the text, \"that the people of the land listened,\" that is,
that the people heard, witnessed and confirmed the contract or purchase.
From which example we are to learn that one should deal wisely and
cautiously with people for the sake of their descendants, who are fickle
and can easily change their minds; but with those who are present one
should deal kindly, honorably and humbly.

How the twofold cave was formed, one cannot know. I think that two caves
were wide enough, so that Isaac and Jacob and their wives were buried in
the same place.

V. 19**,** 20 **After this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of
the field, which is twofold, over against Mamre, which is Hebron, in the
land of Canaan. So the field and the cave therein were confirmed unto
Abraham for an inheritance burial of the children of Heth.**

So far Moses has described the death and burial of Sarah in many words,
so that they are a beautiful, glorious teaching and excellent examples
of good manners;

**[1640 \" v.ssi. vi, s. 4. interpretation of Genesis 23, 19. 20. cap.
24, 1-4. w. i. m\"-24so. 1641]{.underline}**

For the Holy Spirit, in addition to the great, high, and glorious
virtues of faith, hope, and love, praised in Abraham also the outward
virtues, namely, his reverence, humility, discipline, temperance, and
equity; so that in the one Abraham there is found a great number and
multitude of all virtues, whether they be spiritual or worldly and
domestic virtues, which one would seek in him. About his faith nothing
can be found that is more excellent: but how great is also the love that
he had for the sodomites? Item,

How great was his patience as he wandered in misery? How great
reverence, fairness and weariness can be seen in him toward those who
were masters in this land? For he does not want to take the field for
free or as a gift and be burdensome to the inhabitants of the land.
Therefore, the whole doctrine of good morals and honorable conduct could
be better learned from this than Aristotle, the jurists and the
canonists have taught it; so that it is not in vain or useless words
that Moses has described all this so extensively.

**The twenty-fourth chapter.**

**First part.**

**How Abraham gives the household to Eliezer and seeks to marry his son
Isaac.**

**V. 1-4. Abraham was old and well-born, and the LORD had blessed him in
every way. And he said unto his eldest servant of his house, which was
the head of all his goods, Put thine hand under my thigh, and swear unto
me by the LORD God of heaven and earth, that thou shalt not take a wife
unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell; but
that thou shalt go unto my fatherland, and to my friendship, and take a
wife unto Isaac my son.**

So far Moses has brought the history and the life of Abraham up to the
part, which is used to be the last in this life, namely, up to his
testament, which Abraham will now make. And now the father has this some
care, that he may be anxious how he may promote his son to the marriage
state, and have offspring, which were promised to him. Therefore this
whole chapter belongs to Isaac, whose marriage is described in it.

The first teaching, however, is very clear,

concerns the service of parents to their children, and again, how
children should also show themselves godly and obedient to their
parents, if they want to take up the marriage state. This doctrine, as
it is common nowadays, is also very annoying, because such service and
obedience, which parents and children should practice toward each other
and which is commanded by divine and worldly laws, has almost been
extinguished and abolished by the wickedness of men. And since only now
we want to bring such love and obedience back into pregnancy, and teach
the people that the betrothals, who happen without the knowledge and
will of the parents, are not allowed, are also not valid or can last, we
must invite many people\'s hatred upon us, and let ourselves be
blasphemed and scolded about it.

\(3\) For the papal canonists are hard against us, and in this case our
jurists, whom we have as irreconcilable adversaries, as rejected and
deadly enemies in the whole world, hold it with them quite splendidly.
Although this doctrine is therefore not almost pleasant, one must
nevertheless not cease to confess and defend the truth; for we have here
a clearly beautiful example of our opinion, although no law is made
here. For there is a lack of

**[1642 k. VI, 4-6. interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-1. W. 1, 2tM-2463.
1643]{.underline}**

We are otherwise lacking in testimonies and proofs of good laws, and not
only of divine ones, but also of those which are deduced from the
sources of natural law, as is the case with secular laws and civil
rights. We have on our side the examples of Scripture, the written laws
and rights: why then do the jurists and tongue-thrashers persecute us?

\(4\) Therefore let us arm ourselves with the holy Scriptures against
their obdurate wickedness; for this they are wont to boast of to their
hearers: They could not depart from their canons, and in this matter
pronounce judgment from our writings, which they scornfully and
ignominiously call canons, as if we were devising or setting up
something new and out of our own heads. We have on our side the will of
God, natural reason, the examples of the fathers and civil law.

\(5\) And they know this well, but will not be admonished and punished.
But it is not to be suffered that they seduce and mislead the hearts of
young people with their so shameful and unfounded pretensions; and we
will never suffer that their ungodly, shameful and wicked canons, which
are so radically contrary to God\'s word, should command us in this. I
therefore make this admonition, so that God-fearing young people may
prepare and guard themselves against their falsification and blasphemy.

For what wickedness is this, that one knows the truth, and yet says: I
find differently written in my book, therefore I must also judge
differently; regardless of the laws, the civil right and God\'s word,
which even conclude and judge the contradiction. Are people to be
deceived and led around by the nose in such a way that they must regard
as certain and right everything that the canonists ungodly recognize and
pronounce as right according to their canons? This is a wicked nonsense,
which is also utterly contrary to the reason and common sense of all
men. They confess that they know very well that this opinion of ours is
Christian and honest, and

But against their conscience and against the known truth they speak a
different judgment in this matter, namely because it is written
differently in their books.

\(7\) In the same way, I would like to say that I have become a doctor
in scholastic theology, but I find many things in the Bible that are
contrary to this theology; nevertheless, I would like to follow the
Cardinal of Cammerich, although the Holy Scripture teaches much
differently: who would suffer this and not curse and condemn such
doctors? The Cauonists, however, indicate that they carry great hatred
in their hearts against the Holy Spirit, because they have the spirit of
the pope in their hearts, and such their malice finally gets to the
point that it becomes a public blasphemy. Against such insolence and
wickedness, which is not human, we should arm ourselves and strengthen
ourselves with the Holy Spirit, and should only freely despise them. Let
him who has hitherto erred with them learn that he may understand the
matter better, and follow those who speak better of the matter and teach
rightly. And when thou seest the seducing canons, thou shalt say, Hear
thou, papal law, thou shalt yield to the truth of the Holy Ghost.

\(8\) This is why we are dealing with this text, although it is annoying
that Isaac does not take a wife where he desires, but he is forbidden by
his father to take a concubine, and the father himself takes care that
he procures a wife for his son. But the son obeys his father with the
highest will and obedience.

\(9\) For daily experience bears witness to the fact that the
clandestine engagements that take place in the corners are a cause of
much great misfortune, daily strife and strife; in addition, false
oaths, murders and deaths follow from them, and finally, a terrible
disruption of the churches and the secular regime follows from them. So
the canonists do nothing else but tear the church apart and mislead the
whole world for the sake of their foolish and clumsy canons. But shall
we now suffer that

**[1644 2- VI, 6-8. interpretation of Genesis 24, 1\--4. W. 1,
246S-246S. 1645]{.underline}**

they introduce so much unhappiness into our churches and world regiment?
This should be suffered by the devil and no one else. Yes, I will banish
all these lawyers and doctors before we suffer their ungodly opinions
and pretensions in our churches.

\(10\) For behold, how vain and loose are their reasons, on which they
stand, that they say, I cannot judge otherwise, because it is not
otherwise written in the canons. In the same way, some Turk or
Mahometist might also argue and conclude: I cannot accept the Gospel,
because it is not written in my Alkoran. Thus a Jew will not be
converted to the Christian faith because the same faith is not taught in
the Law of Moses. The Romans and Gentiles could also have excused
themselves for not accepting the gospel, because there was nothing about
it in their books. If all that is true which is written in the books of
the canonists, and that alone, but all that is false and wrong which is
not taught in them, we must throw away the other books.

\(11\) But let the honor and glory of the married state move us to speak
and teach of it thoughtfully, chastely, and Christianly; for it is not a
small thing, but a heavy and great thing in the whole world. For it is
the origin of all things that men have, and of the whole human race, and
this whole life has nothing more excellent nor more glorious; therefore
let it be spoken of with great fear of God, and from important and
constant reasons, proofs, and causes; for otherwise, alas, this estate
is sufficiently obscured with the lust of the flesh and shameful
immorality.

For this reason, one should look at God\'s will above all things. God
wanted it that way, ordered it that way and established it that way. We
should not seek our honor from it, much less revile God\'s order. And
experience itself also shows that it is not a joke or a game to become
married. In the first year everything is delicious, cheerful and merry;
one spends the same time laughing and loving; but after that, when all
the

When you find misery and wretchedness in your life, it is necessary to
take comfort in knowing that it is certainly God\'s will that we should
live in this state, and that God Himself should join man and wife
together in it; so that you may certainly conclude in yourself: This
woman is my wife, whom I have taken in marriage, since God Himself has
willed it, by testifying to His pleasure in it, and the angels have also
granted it. After that, you shall also ask God for help, so that he will
assist you from heaven. And then you will be able to overcome the most
difficult danger and hardship. The canonists make a cold definition or
description of the marriage state, since they say: The marriage state is
where man and woman are joined together according to the law of nature.
This is a poor and weak description, for which reason they are unskilled
in deciding this controversial business of betrothal, for they do not
consider how this is such a great thing.

Theology describes the marriage state differently, saying: \"The
marriage state is where a man and a woman are joined together so that
they cannot be separated again, not only according to the law of nature,
but also according to God\'s will, pleasure and good pleasure, that I
may speak thus. For the will and approval and pleasure of God covers the
wretched shame of fornication, and turns away the wrath that follows
such sin and lust. And in such a way one acts from the marriage state
with due reverence.

\(14\) The pope does not understand anything else about it, because
where two of them run together, and one says to the other: I am yours
and you are mine, that should be the marriage state. But he does not
think that God is pleased with it, wherewith the married couple shall
comfort themselves, and how husband and wife shall be instructed to use
the heat of fornication moderately, and how they shall govern children
and servants. Item, from the divine blessing; and after that, how the
husband is to bear with the weakness of the wife, and how she is to bear
the danger and displeasure that comes about for the sake of the
children, and unrighteousness.

**[1646 u. VI, 8-10. interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-4. W. 1, 24W-246S.
1647]{.underline}**

or the burdening of evil neighbors. He only looks at the shameful
mixture of the flesh, which he calls the bond; but to the promise and
order of God he pays no attention at all.

For this reason, Christians should be admonished and armed against such
poisonous serpents, who praise their canons so highly against divine
truth, and reject and destroy this right papal reason that they claim it
is written differently in their canons and decrees. However, in this way
they definitely judge our doctrine. They confess that they know very
well that our doctrine is the true, pure gospel, and yet they pay no
attention to it. Bishop Albrecht of Mainz used to say that our doctrine
was founded in the Holy Scriptures and was the right truth, but he would
not and could not accept it. This is also what the canonists do. For
they say that this sentence, in which secret betrothals and marriages
are condemned, is right and true; but since the canons are against it,
such an opinion must be rejected.

\(16\) These are abominable words, and I had never imagined that in my
life I would hear such words, or that any man would be allowed to speak
such abominable blasphemy, namely, that he would hear the truth and
understand it well, but nevertheless deny it for the sake of some
people\'s uncertain and unfounded opinion. Is this proper for a pious,
sincere man? Yes, it is not due to a Turk or a pagan.

\(17\) A pious man may well be deceived and fall, if he has been led
astray by other people\'s error; but when he is admonished, he
recognizes his error and corrects himself, rejects and condemns his
erroneous opinion. Therefore, I will never admit or defend the error and
foolishness of the canonists, but rather consider the canons and the
pope himself to be wrong; since even imperial law holds the
contradiction and something more honest of this order of God.

18 Therefore this history is to be remembered well. Abraham, since
Sarah, who had given him his

He then considered how he could arrange and order the household in a
different way; for such a household needs such a Sarah, or it must be
ordered in a different way. For this reason, he orders the entire
household to his oldest servant and makes him master of it. The good,
pious old man had previously placed the entire burden of the household
regiment on his dear wife Sarah; now that she has died and he has had to
bear the burden himself, he places it on the servant until he can again
look for a housemother, namely, his son\'s wife.

019 Therefore, when Sarah died, he laid aside the whole rule, not
wanting such a heavy burden to be upon him in his old age, though he
took a wife afterward. Therefore he thought of a person who would be
able to govern the household; but now he uses his oldest servant, who
has governed the household for three years.

020 For when Isaac was seven and thirty years old, Sarah died, and in
the fortieth year of his age he took Rebekah to wife. Both father and
son spent the same three years, always mourning and grieving, for they
did not have hearts of stone. When Abraham thought of the kind
fellowship and beautiful virtues his dear wife had, his sorrow and
heartache were always renewed. Isaac also could not soon forget his
beloved mother, for they were very pious and heartfelt people.
Therefore, in order that the father might comfort his son Isaac, he
sought him a wife for the companionship of this life.

21 So that the lesson we are to take from this text is that parents
should provide for their sons and daughters, so that they may be
promoted honestly to the state of marriage. Although we must not ignore
the fact that in this life it often happens that parents at times abuse
their power and their right, and want to force their children to take
care of their children.

**[1648 L. VI, 10-12. AuslegUNg V0N Genesis 24, 1 4. W. I, 2468-2471.
1649]{.underline}**

They shall take to marriage those whom they do not love, which often
happens in the great families of the nobility. Such parents are to be
punished, for they have no fatherly heart or inclination at all, but are
lumps and sticks who do not love their children as they should.
Therefore, the priest with his office or the secular authorities with
their power should interfere, for this is not paternal power but
tyranny.

22\. And therefore we press so diligently for the authority of parents,
first of all for the commandment and order of God, and also for the sake
of the examples of Scripture and also for the sake of worldly law; then
for the sake of the great wickedness that has been practiced in the
world at all times by force, and is very hard to suffer for pious,
God-fearing and honest parents, that when they have raised their
children godly and honestly, so that they should be heirs to their
goods, some have been found afterward who, without their knowledge and
will, have taken the liberty of deceiving and seducing honest virgins or
young men with deceit and cunning, so that they have secretly engaged
themselves to those who, at the same time, were not nearly honest and
not worthy of them, and who were neither pleasing nor pleasant to their
parents.

The pope has opened the door to such sins and has given free access to
the procurers and whoremongers, so that they may steal my sons and
daughters from me, from you, and from every one of us. Shall we then
take it for granted that such things are to be suffered and defended?
Yes, they say, one must keep the children and care for them diligently.
But how can this be done, since the wickedness and perverseness of men
is so great? How easy it is for a poor, simple heart to be seduced and
deceived!

\(24\) Therefore, the parents should think that they have been given
power and authority by God to provide for their children honestly, and
that the betrothals made without their knowledge and consent are invalid
and may not exist either in divine or human rights.

\(25\) After this, the children should also know that they are to show
this honor to pious parents.

that they seek advice from them and inquire from them what their will
is. A young man who is old enough to marry should not be afraid to
reveal his heart to his dear parents and declare to them that he loves a
pious, honest virgin, and therefore ask them to give her to him as a
wife. For although it may be seen as a sign of fornication and
impudence, young people should know that divine grace and goodness cover
such fornication in marriage, and thus have wanted to counsel and help
this epidemic.

For this reason, children should humble themselves before their parents
and freely say: \"My dear father, my dear mother, give me this young man
or this maiden whom I love. If she is then worthy of your or your
parents\' or friendship, pious, honest parents will not refuse their
child such, if the gift or the good is not so great that it should be
equal to theirs.

\(27\) Such marriages must certainly be blissful and well-directed, and
God blesses them according to His great goodness, and easily sees and
covers, as it were, with the cover of matrimony, the fornication: yes,
that is even more, such fornication of love confirms the holy
Scriptures, and makes an example of the love and the voice of the
bridegroom and the bride. So God forgives us the shame in which we were
born, and the wretched fornication also; yes, He honors and adorns it
with the honest and proper state of marriage.

\(28\) But let young people beware of disobedience and contempt of their
parents, which, alas, is now very common, so that some of them become
quite foolish, go blind, and make dishonest marriages, bringing disgrace
to themselves, their parents, and their ancestors. For here the holy
scripture holds up an example for us to follow, which is quite repugnant
to such senseless and foolish behavior, namely, when Isaac, according to
his father\'s will, counsel and good pleasure, takes Rebekah as his
wife.

\(29\) So the pope and the canonists do not teach, nor do they mean,
that one should be honest.

**[1650 VI, 12. 13. interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-4. W. 1, 2471-2474.
1651]{.underline}**

but to take wives by force, as if the children had the power in
themselves and were powerful in their own right, or if such a holy union
or joining together should take place and be carried out without the due
order of God. The holy scripture says Proverbs 19:14: \"A sensible wife
comes from the Lord.\" Therefore, the prayer should be preceded by
asking God for help and saying: \"Dear Lord God, you see that I cannot
abstain from marriage without sin; give me good counsel and give me a
pious, God-fearing and honest wife.

030 As this servant, which is sent forth by Abraham, hath asked, and
Abraham shall doubtless have taught him to pray; and Isaac himself hath
prayed also. After this, the parents\' advice and consent must be given,
and you must not do or begin anything without the parents\' knowledge or
against their will. For, my dear, consider how your parents have
showered you with great benefits, how much you owe them, and how
unreasonable it would be to grieve or anger them in their hearts, who
have so kindly nourished and brought you up, and love you so dearly. Let
the bachelors reproach themselves with this and always remember it. For
in this way they will become accustomed to honor their parents; which is
not only honest and godly, but also in accordance with the commandments
of God and examples in Scripture, and is also very useful and good
throughout life. Thus the papal canons are to be condemned and
abandoned, which do not teach such works of obedience, which children
are obliged to show to their parents, but against all this they trick
and confuse the simple hearts into the secret corner alliances, steal
away the parents\' children, and couple and hang them together without
their foreknowledge, counsel and will, as for example, a loose woman or
boy seduces the poor children, and some enemy or loose boy steals their
child from the parents by force and steals it away.

\(31\) Now what can happen to a man that is more grievous and
unreasonable, than when he has brought up his child in a Christian and
chaste manner, and has taught him good manners?

must follow a loose boy and a disgraceful unflattery, who is after his
inheritance and property? Should one take such a boy for his son and
heir to all his goods? Is this not a far more miserable and sorrowful
thing than death itself?

For this reason, I do not often impress this upon the youth in vain, and
warn them how to approach and begin such a great and holy thing, so that
the authority that parents have over their children, and the obedience
and reverence that children owe them, may be preserved. The son or
daughter shall ask and desire counsel from them, as they can well
counsel for the best and out of divine order and blessing.

Again, parents should not be harsh and sharp, should not force their
children to marry those they do not love, nor should they easily and
without good reason withdraw and prevent them from loving those who are
honest and pious, unless the children have chosen those who are unlike
themselves and their parents, and are not honest and pious. They should
think of the natural inclination that is given to them by God, and not
resist so hard the honest love that their children bear to others with
honor. Thus did the parents of Samson, when they heard that their son
loved a woman of the Philistines, and he asked and desired that they
give her to him in marriage, they allowed him to take her, even though
she was a Gentile.

Now I have again admonished that, above all, if one wants to take up the
marriage state, it is necessary to call upon God that He may choose and
give a husband or wife. When this happens, it is followed by God\'s
blessing, and that the marriage state will be blissful everywhere. The
Lord gives your husband the grace to have patience and to be able to
take his wife\'s weakness into account, and that she, in turn, may also
be able to put up with her husband\'s ways. On the other hand, where the
fear of God and prayer do not come into play, it is easy for a woman to
fall from grace.

**[1652 vi, Interpretation of Genesis 24:1\^-4. W. i, p474-L47\".
1653]{.underline}**

such displeasure and indignation, from which hatred, quarrels and
eternal resentment and enmity arise. As I have often seen such badly
turned out marriages, and such happens commonly to those who follow the
pope and his canons.

35\. But those who take to the marriage state in a proper and Christian
way, according to God\'s order and appointment, and are certain of
God\'s will and that of their parents, often overcome the greatest
disagreement and unwillingness and great danger without any effort or
difficulty, with God\'s help and with a good conscience, which is
certain that if any misfortune occurs, it will not happen by chance, but
out of God\'s good gracious will, out of which commandment and command
they have entered this state. The papists do not see any of these
things; they neither see the cause from which the marriage state has its
origin, nor what makes the marriage state or for what it is ordered, but
consider it to be such a pandering as is in the life of a whore.

In the law of Moses the secret betrothals were so seriously forbidden
and condemned that the parents could cancel and break them again, even
if one had already touched the other. And even if we cannot or should
not follow the same law, since such external and judicial laws of Moses
do not bind us or concern us, it is nevertheless a written law that was
given and announced by God at that time, and with which example and
testimony of the same law our opinion is confirmed tremendously.
According to this, the secular and civil law is also on our side, to
which the canonists and all those who are subject to the Roman Empire
should be obedient at the same time.

\(37\) When Moses says in the text that the Lord blessed Abraham in
every way, he means all the goods and welfare of the married state.
These are called blessings, because everything that a householder has in
the way of possessions and goods is called a blessing by the Scriptures.
And if people knew and believed this, there would not be so much robbery
and unseemly

Handling should not be. But the greatest hemp lives without prayer;
therefore there is no blessing with it. And with such certainty they
enter the marriage state, gain and collect money and property without
the blessing, which they do not even think of in their lives. How few
are the peasants and citizens who have the blessing of God and possess
their property without other people\'s harm and wrong? It is all full of
usury, avarice, scratching and scraping.

38\. But if thou wilt enter into matrimony by divine blessing, seek
counsel first of all from the Lord, and pray thus: Dear Lord God, give
me a godly wife and my daily bread. God is pleased with such a prayer
and answers it, saying, \"I have made you a man and a wife, why should I
not feed you? see to it that you refrain from robbing and stealing,
since one tries to get rich by doing wrong and harming his neighbor.

39\. and this is called the marriage state, where a man and woman are
joined together by God and according to the will of God; and the
spouses, knowing this, easily suffer and overcome all harm and
misfortune that may befall them. So this is the first and highest
blessing, when you know that you have entered the marriage state
according to God\'s will, and that you were forced to take a wife out of
necessity, namely, to avoid sin by doing so. What God gives you after
that, call all these goods by their proper names and say: This son or
daughter the Lord has given me; this field, meadow, these cows and goats
God has given me, it is all God\'s blessing.

40 This is truly a very beautiful and blissful marriage, in which both
are written at the table and at the bedside: Here is God\'s favor, will
and gracious pleasure. These are the right and immeasurable goods and
riches, the like of which you will not find in the papist canons. Thus
the patriarch Jacob says afterwards Gen. 33, 5: \"These are my sons,
whom the Lord has given me,\" namely, by special favor and by his
blessing; for such people understand and recognize their Creator and his
creature; they know from whence they came.

**[1654 L. VI, 1S-I7. Interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-1. W. 1 ,
2476-2I7S. 1655]{.underline}**

are, and from where they receive everything they have.

41 But this is not taught, neither in spiritual, nor in temporal, nor in
civil law, nor in medicine, but only in the Holy Scriptures. They all
hear how Abraham had many good things and good fortune and acquired
great wealth; but from where did such good fortune and wealth come to
him? The scripture answers and says: It all came from God\'s blessing
and grace, and he who made him a man also gave him the wealth.

\(42\) If we could think and believe this, we would be very happy even
if we were not very fortunate, and if we had a lot of money and
property, we would not be of a different mind than if we had nothing.
For there is no difference between small and great goods, as far as God
is concerned, who gives the blessing: he who has a cow or a child has
the same Lord who blesses him, whom even the most powerful king has.

\(43\) If in this way we could ascribe to God the enjoyment of all the
good things we have and confess that we have them from Him, then
everyone would be content with his own happiness. He who cannot do this
sets out on a shameful course of action, and picks and pulls to himself,
rightly and wrongly, that he may have it all; and if he has already
obtained it, his heart is never satisfied, but he has to fight for and
against avarice and covetousness for riches and goods, which cannot be
satisfied. But if he were so minded that he could say to God: Dear Lord
God, what you will give me, I will accept with a glad heart in
gratitude; but what you will not give me, I will gladly do without: I
will be content with a few goods as well as with great riches; then he
would be much happier.

\(44\) But no one follows this teaching, but people follow their
understanding and carnal wisdom; therefore let us govern and direct it
all with reason. Otherwise we are ungrateful to God and do not recognize
the divine blessing, which the holy scripture remembers in this place,
when Moses

speaks of Abraham\'s possessions and goods, silver and gold, small and
large livestock, which he had, even though he was a stranger, and calls
all this a blessing from God.

45 Now follows the instruction that he gave to the servant, and it
follows that Abraham appointed this servant to be the head of his
household in his place. If he was a true God-fearing man who knew God
and believed in Him, it is a miracle and a great grace and blessing of
God that he had such a servant, to whom he could entrust his house and
all his servants, and that he made him master of it; just as Joseph was
master of the king in Egypt, Gen 41:41.

\(46\) It is indeed a great blessing in the household where one may have
a faithful servant or maidservant, for it is a common complaint
throughout the world about the wickedness and wickedness of unfaithful
servants; and it is a curse of God, which increases daily and grows
greater and greater, because we are sure to despise God\'s word and do
not pray diligently. Therefore with this calamity the wicked and ungodly
are punished; but the pious are exercised and afflicted with it, as with
other plagues and afflictions.

\(47\) Those who are blessed have all kinds of goods, and they also have
a ruler and an Eliezer, who administers the house rule faithfully and
rightly. Sirach says Cap. 33:3l: \"If thou hast a faithful servant, keep
thee above him, as thyself: for whosoever shall hurt him shall mean thy
life and thy limb. If thou hast a servant, let him keep as thou
wouldest: for thou hast need of him as of thine own life.\" Such a
servant was Eliezer, to whom this great patriarch entrusted and
commanded the administration of his household regiment. He must have
been very holy and pious and full of the Holy Spirit, and may have been
released afterwards: but here he is still called a servant. Therefore,
God has blessed this house with great incredible blessings: First, with
goods and riches; second, with faithful servants. Now follows the third
blessing with bride and bridegroom.

**[1656 n vi, i7-w. Interpretation of Genesis 24, I-4. W. i. 2470-2434.
1657]{.underline}**

**Second part.**

**As Abraham requires an oath from Eliezer, demanding that he not take a
wife for his son from the daughters of the Cananites.**

\(48\) But someone might ask here, Why Abraham, when he commanded his
servant to swear an oath to him, had him put his hand under his thigh,
or in the place of his thigh? For the Scripture says nothing about
whether it was such a way that the fathers kept, and thus came from one
to another from time immemorial; or whether it was first instituted by
Abraham, that the servant had to swear and at the same time put his hand
or fingers on his thigh. If it was an old custom to swear in this way,
Abraham followed the same custom of the fathers, and the servant,
knowing this custom, swore in this way.

49\) It has a wonderful and great, glorious meaning that he does not lay
his hand on the breast, nor on the head or on the hand of Abraham, but
on the place to which the birth or the begetting of children is assigned
in the holy scriptures. Thus it says hereafter, Cap. 46, 26: \"All the
souls that came with Jacob in Egypt, which were of his loins\" 2c. Item:
Levi was in the loins of Abraham; David came from the loins of Abraham,
that is, Abraham was like a fountain and origin of the same children.

\(50\) The Jews say that this was done because of the circumcision that
took place in the same part of the body. But I believe rather that it
came from the mind of the fathers, who soon understood from the
beginning that the Savior would come and be born of the human race.

51 The oath is one of the most holy things, because it contains the name
of God, the service of God, the invocation and all divine works. Because
such a sacred thing and the noblest worship is applied to this place,

so it follows that it was considered a very sacred and, as it were, a
divine place. One would have such thoughts about it, where this would
have been established and accepted by the fathers. But since the
Scriptures are silent about it, it does not behoove us to conclude or
deny anything certain about it. What the holy scripture teaches, denies
or asserts, we can also teach confidently and may follow it freely; just
as it is also silent about Sem, and describes neither his birth, death,
nor even his parents. Therefore we can neither miss nor teach anything
about it. And this has been done with diligence, so that a figure of
Christ may be held up to us in it.

52 But it is believed that Abraham first began this way and told his
servant to put his hand under his thigh as on a very holy thing. For he
could have found Mount Moriah, an altar, the heavens, the earth, the
sun, the moon, or any other creature where he would have stretched out
his fingers, just as people swear by the gospel today. In the papacy
they swear by the sanctuary of the dead saints. For the oath is always
made on something that is more holy and divine than we are. Because he
called the servant to touch his hip, he would undoubtedly have
considered it a holy thing.

53\) And if it is true that Abraham first raised this way of putting his
fingers under his waist, then he did not understand the promise in this
way, when God said to him, \"Through your seed,\" 2c., but according to
Paul\'s interpretation, namely, that from his loins the Savior of the
world should come. As then St. Paul acts this text Gal. 3, 16. \"He
saith not, Through the seed, as through many, but as through One,
through thy seed, which is Christ.\" This opinion of the promise was
well understood by Abraham, especially since Isaac had already been
born, who was his son and was to be an heir of the same land. Therefore
he considered his loins a sacred thing, on which he called the servant
to put his fingers when he was to swear. For this was the beginning and
the origin, of which the

**[1658 L. VI, 19-21. interpretation of I Moses 24, 1-4. W. 1,
2484-2187. 1659]{.underline}**

Seed should come, which should make the whole human race alive and
righteous. This rhymes finely with the Scriptures, which often praise
the loins and hips, as said before. It seems to be an ugly thing for the
sake of fornication and abominable lust, which has its place in the body
of man, in the loins, hips or kidneys: but nevertheless God considers it
to be a very holy thing, which is abominable and disgraceful because of
its kind and nature and is also defiled with sins.

Thus God commands circumcision in a very shameful place, which can
hardly be thought of, let alone spoken of, with shame and breeding. It
means that we poor sinners are not only conceived and born in the plague
of lust, but also that the seed promised to Abraham would come, which
would not only be blessed and without all sin and evil desire, but also
bless all nations.

For this reason, God also has regard for such very shameful things, and
the Holy Scriptures are much more explicit in describing the marriage
state in this regard than they are in speaking of great, high things.
The promise of spiritual blessings in the 22nd chap. V. 16. 18. with few
words: \"I have sworn by myself, through your seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed.\" This whole chapter, however, contains nothing
else, except that it describes Isaac\'s marriage, how the servant is
sent out and how the bride is brought.

56\. But why does this happen? Because God created us, we are his
creature and his work; therefore he also takes care of his works, and
provides for them even in the midst of sins, death, hell, shame and
disgrace; as divine help and salvation, life and all his salvation are
in such means, which are quite absurd. He helps in death, gives peace
and safety in the highest danger and distress. These are divine works,
which carnal men, who are without the Holy Spirit, do not understand:
therefore they turn their eyes only to fornication and shame in the
state of marriage. In lust they do not see the

very sacred blessing of child rearing; for they feel or sense nothing
but the rutting of the shameful lust pestilence. So in death they see
nothing but death; in hell they see no heaven: and as they understand
and feel it, so they judge of it. But since we did not make ourselves
(for God made man, and created him a man and a woman), we should take it
for granted that God cares for us as for His creature.

\(57\) This is the reason why the Scriptures speak of this thing, which
seems so contemptible, in so many words. The marriage state is nothing
new and unusual, or has been considered good and praised even by the
pagans according to the judgment of reason. But who has ever considered
or regarded this state as a divine creature, a blessing in cursing and
chastity in fornication? If you judge by reason and outward appearance,
there is no difference between the cohabitation of man and woman in the
marriage state, and between lewd intermarriage, as whores and boys do
shame with each other: and yet the marriage cohabitation is chaste and
honest under the forgiveness of sin, under the blessing, and is pleasing
to God. But that cohabitation which takes place outside the marriage
state is shameful and condemned under the wrath of God. For in the
marriage state, even in the midst of fornication and disgrace, God keeps
His appointment and order.

\(58\) Therefore Abraham understood this text gloriously and well:
\"Through your seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,\"
which understands Christ in itself. Therefore, for the sake of Christ,
who was born from the loins of Abraham, from whom the whole human race
came, all things are to be esteemed pure, clean and holy. For it is the
same seed and the same flesh, which we also are. But he was conceived
quite holy and miraculously, not like us, but born without heat, evil
desire, fornication and abominable shame of the father, even without
pain of the mother, and yet he is the seed of Abraham.

**[1660 VI, 21-23. interpretation of I Moses 24, I-4. W. I. 2487-2490.
1661]{.underline}**

\(59\) This is what is meant by Abraham\'s putting his hand under his
thigh. For Christ is in the thigh, and therefore also the marriage state
for Christ\'s sake must be holy and pure, and the marriage camp, which
is in itself very shameful, must also be chaste and honest. And Abraham
held it that his thigh was holy, not for his own sake, but because of
the divine promise. For the promise, which in itself is holy,
comprehends his loins: therefore it sanctifieth them also, that they
also which come by fornication and carnal mixture of them should not be
reckoned unclean, but chaste and pure; and that the marriage bed should
be undefiled, and that marriage should be kept honest, for the sake of
the seed that is to come.

\(60\) Now if Paul had not thus acted and interpreted this text, I would
not have understood it. David, Isaiah and Jeremiah also saw the same
thing; but the common hand of the prophets and the Jews only looked at
it above; just as we also do and seek only the shameful lust in women,
and nothing else than that which we feel and which pleases and lusts us
after the flesh. But this is to be learned and diligently remembered,
that in the midst of death is life, and in dishonor is honor.

\(61\) The ancient theologians make three kinds of chastity, namely, of
virgins, of widows, and of husbands. But if this is chastity, when a
husband begets children, then it is truly hidden and covered with a
wonderful shapelessness, so that no one can see that it is chastity;
since it is not much different from fornication in the gross sense and
outward appearance. As no virgin is so chaste and pure that she does not
feel heat toward her husband, and even bachelors experience this, and
this is even more, shameful dreams and defilements also follow; which is
truly not true chastity, but only outward chastity; for inwardly in the
blood and in the marrow burns the evil desire. Nature is so completely
depraved. Therefore the papists boast in vain of their chastity and
virginity.

\(62\) But they do not like to admit that there is or should be called
conjugal chastity, unless they are forced to do so by the reputation of
the ancient theologians. For otherwise they say it is an impurity; just
as they interpret the saying of the prophet Isaiah Cap. 52, 11, where he
says: \"Purify yourselves, you who wear the Lord\'s apparel,\" that is,
they say, abstain from the marriage state if you want to serve God and
share the sanctuary of God.

Chastity is a beautiful gift, and it is very honest for a man to live
with his lawful spouse and avoid fornication: although the chastity of
widows and virgins is somewhat better and higher, it is nowhere pure;
and you will not find a virgin or a widow in whom all feeling and desire
for fornication has died out and died away. When one therefore comes
before God\'s judgment, God passes such a sentence and says: \"You have
been a very pure virgin, a chaste, pious youth, you may not have been
carnally defiled, but you have not been without heat and evil desire,
therefore the law condemns you, saying: \"Do not let yourself be
lustful.

64 So chastity will remain in Christ alone, who was born from the womb
of Abraham without evil desire, fornication and sin, and through his
chastity we will also become chaste and blessed.

And Abraham did not understand this for himself alone and put it into
his heart, but also taught it in many sermons, which he always did with
diligence from this one saying: \"through your seed\". For while he
wished to establish this new way in his church, he diligently impressed
the promise upon the people, that he might persuade them that the seed
which was promised would surely come; even as we diligently pursue daily
the doctrine of the redemption and resurrection of our bodies at the
last judgment. \"It is sown,\" says St. Paul 1 Cor. 15:42, 43, \"in
weakness, corruptible and in dishonor, and shall rise again in glory,
incorruptible and in power. \"2c. Therefore, Christians are to be
admonished that they give precedence to the feeling or sensation of the
eyes.

**[1662 VI, 23-2\". Interpretation of I Genesis 24, 1-4. W. 1.
24V5-24S2. 1663]{.underline}**

Faith will hold out against the dead, and in the midst of the decay and
dishonor of our dead bodies, behold the clarity that surpasses the sun
and stars in brightness and brilliance; in the shameful decay and great
abominable stench, as the worms consume the body, the beautiful fragrant
balsam and eternal glory. So when faith sees a dead man being buried in
the earth, it does not look at the carrion and decay, but at the perfect
body, the immortal honor and glory, and the spiritual life.

\(66\) So Abraham preached that in fornication and evil desire, as it
appears before our eyes and reason, we should look to the Seed, which
shall be without fornication, pure and undefiled, who shall save the
whole world, and said that he was chosen to be the father of the Seed.
Pious hearts and especially the servants in his house believed this, and
therefore held the hip in honor as a holy thing: but not in honor of
Abraham, as we used to show the service and honor due to God to the
creatures, but for the sake of faith and hope in the future seed. If the
Pope had the honor and glory that whoever kissed his feet kissed a holy
thing, God forbid, how hopeful and proud he would be! And yet, he
obtained and achieved such things from kings and potentates with nothing
but lies.

67 Abraham had the promise that his hip was the origin of the seed,
therefore he considered it a holy thing, not for his own glory, but for
God\'s: just as he was justified not by much seed, not by the flower,
nor by the will of man or flesh, but by God, that is, by the future
seed, which should have come from his hip; and thus in the midst of
dishonor he found glory, and in the midst of fornication he found the
highest chastity and discipline.

\(68\) But I am concerned that not long after this, the horrible
disgrace of the pagan Ishmaelites has followed. For human nature can
hold no measure, nor above that, so

The Midianites have heard this great glorious promise, that the hip or
child rearing of Abraham would have such great honor, and soon they have
fallen into a shameful idolatry. When the Midianites heard this great
glorious promise, namely, that Abraham\'s hip or child-breeding would
have such great honor, they soon fell into a shameful idolatry, and not
only stained themselves with the shame of fornication, as if that should
be a special holiness and righteousness, but also aligned and served a
special idol, which they called Priapus. For this is what idolaters do;
they accept only the works of outward ceremonies and abandon the word
and the spirit.

\(69\) This is what happened when it was not thought that Abraham had a
special commandment to sacrifice his son; for others also went and
slaughtered their children in honor of God without faith and God\'s
command, which means to conclude from the example how to serve God, and
not to learn from the faith of the fathers. They did the same work, but
their faith and heart were not like Abraham\'s faith and heart. Abraham
had a divine commandment: but they had no commandment, no promise, no
word, but were idolaters.

\(70\) Thus it is undoubtedly from Adam\'s teaching that the Gentiles
worshipped the sun and paid divine homage to it. For Adam taught his
servants and children that when the sun went out, they should bow the
knee and praise the Lord of heaven and earth, and recognize his many
innumerable benefits, which God shows through the beautiful, glorious
light of the world: then the descendants kept such a manner and the
outward ceremonies, that they bowed the knee to the sun, but forgot to
thank God for such benefits, who created the light and the sun, and
afterwards made an idol out of the sun. All this came from the godly
teachings and good order of the fathers; for the devil always, where
Christ builds a church and gathers a congregation, also serves Him there
like a

**[1664 8- VI. 25-27. interpretation of Genesis 24:1-4. W. I. S1SS-24S5.
1665]{.underline}**

But the promise and spirit of the fathers he snatches away and draws
away, and in the meantime sets up beautiful outward ceremonies and
splendid ostentation, so that with such an outward appearance of
religion and holiness he also preempts and obscures the worship and the
true church.

So the pope has turned the Lord\'s Supper into an abominable idolatry,
which Christ instituted that we should eat and drink his body and blood,
to build up our consciences and strengthen our faith; as he says Luc.
22:19: \"Do this in remembrance of me,\" that is, preach about me, give
thanks to me, and thereby awaken your faith. But the pope has kept the
outward work, and has even abolished the proper use of remembering
Christ the Lord; indeed, he has forbidden in a special commandment that
no one should publicly read the words of the institution of the Lord\'s
Supper. This is testified by the book that went out under the title: De
secretis sacerdotum: Of the priests\' secrets. No one may read the Canon
at Mass except the priests, and it would have been a great sin, which
would have been particularly penalized, if one had spoken the words of
the Lord\'s Supper in a loud voice.

After that, he took away the other form of the Lord\'s Supper from the
church and pretended that the mass was a sacrifice for the sin of the
whole world. This has been a rich handicraft for him, which has brought
him a lot of money; for that is why so many churches, altars,
monasteries and the whole papal service have come into being, with so
many innumerable ceremonies, just to strengthen and confirm this
shameful abomination of the sacrificial mass.

\(73\) Thus the world always wants to follow the works and the ways of
the fathers, but it cuts off their heads, that is, it takes away the
faith, the promise, and the commandment of God, and keeps only the
outward work for itself: then it makes a vapor to the people who are
inexperienced, and so they are filled with

The poor consciences were miserably deceived by the great pomp and
splendor of the works and outward ceremonies.

74 Thus it was said above of Ur in Chaldea, where they served the idol
Orimasda, that is, the sacred fire. This service came about because they
saw the fire fall from heaven and consume the sacrifice, which was a
sign of God\'s promise and will, so that he might show that the
sacrifice of the fathers had pleased him. Therefore they forcibly drew
this to their idolatry and also performed such sacrifices, serving the
light or the holy fire and showing divine honor, from which they called
themselves chasidim, that is, holy. For this is the devil\'s rule, that
he also builds a chapel for himself near the church and temple of
Christ, that is, that he accepts the examples and works of the fathers,
and disguises them, changing them into an outward work and abandoning
the faith.

Thus the Jews very clumsily imitate the fathers in their ceremonies, and
make circumcision only an outward work, and miserably torture the poor
children; but the faith and the promise they have cast away, and think
that much is attached to the work and outward ceremonies, and not to the
word and promise of God. In the same way, the Ishmaelites (knowing that
they were children of Abraham and came from his loins, and that the
loins had the blessing for the sake of the seed to be born from them)
took up the outward work and fornication without the promise and faith,
until they finally worshipped the male member. What shameful works the
Greeks and Romans followed them after; yes, the idol Baal Peor, although
I dread to say it, is nothing else but the shame of the human member in
its strengthening.

76\) But the rearing of children is a blessing and work of God;
therefore the loins and thighs of Abraham are blessed, not because of
the work itself, but because Christ, the divine Seed, is in the thighs,
since

**[1666 L. VI, 27-29. Interpretation of I Genesis 24, I-W. 1, 2tW-2tS8.
1667]{.underline}**

in the midst of fornication and lust is the blessing, and fornication is
covered and tolerated by divine forbearance and forgiveness.

\(77\) Abraham did not deny that evil desire should not be sin, nor that
the hips should be corrupted by the pestilence: but he added to it the
sanctity and remedy of the marriage state and divine order. Neither do
we deny that the body is buried in great dishonor: but we have a
plaster, that such dishonor may be covered and healed: for we know that
such dishonor shall be changed into great glory.

Dishonor is in itself nothing other than the highest impurity, but that
it is changed into honor is by the grace of God. If I were to accept the
thing and work in itself alone for honor, I would retain nothing but
vain dishonor. But the work must be done out of the Spirit, faith, and
according to the promise; then the work is no longer dishonorable, but
is transfigured and made glorious by a beautiful, glorious light, which
is brighter than the sun, and gives off a more sweet odor than any balm
or incense: but this comes not from dishonor, but from the grace of the
Holy Spirit.

\(79\) So the male or female member is also very shameful in itself, and
a shameful work is done with it; but because the promised seed came out
of the hips of Abraham, the same seed covers the shame and makes it a
holy thing. But the Ishmaelites ascribed purity, discipline,
righteousness and holiness to the work itself, saying, \"What can the
male or female member sin, since the Scriptures say that the hip of
Abraham was blessed?

\(80\) It is indeed to be lamented and wept over that human nature is so
horribly corrupted; for this reason, fornication should be diligently
restrained and the evil lust pestilence kept in check and condemned,
and, on the other hand, discipline and chastity should be practiced: and
wherever this great infirmity, which is planted in our nature by reason
of original sin

If one cannot resist and avoid the sin that is in him, one should sigh
and complain about it; as St. Paul complains in 1 Cor. 9, 27: \"I
stupefy my body and tame it\"; \"and yet I find nothing good in my
flesh\", Rom. 7, 18. But after that one should hold on to the seed and
call upon it, because of which God has blessed us that the remaining
sins are not imputed to us. For \"there is nothing condemnable in them
that are in Christ JEsu,\" Rom. 8:1. He does not say that there is no
sin in them, but nothing condemnable; otherwise we would pursue the work
of the flesh, fornication and adultery, and leave fornication in the
bridle, and thus accept the mere work in itself and exclude the
blessing. As is the case with all kinds of superstition and idolatry,
which commonly arises and has a very beautiful origin from the fathers.
But the idolaters do not rightly put together what belongs together, nor
do they know how to divide and distinguish it rightly; for they separate
the work from faith, and the work itself from that for which it was
primarily commanded and done. Thus they make righteousness out of the
work, which is a truly diabolical dialectic.

Now Abraham, who was able to discern these things aright, was a very
excellent man, who did not indulge in wantonness and carnal lust, and
yet taught and proved that under fornication and sin there was a secret
blessing hidden, for the sake of the future seed that should come out of
his loins, which was so wholly holy and chaste that it should bless the
whole world, and that for the sake of the blessing God would tolerate
conjugal intermarriage. For otherwise we would all be damned, since the
evil lust is in our legs and marrow, and there is no man who can
overcome or quench it; as it says in the 51st Psalm v. 7: \"Behold, my
mother conceived me in sins.\"

\(82\) Now this is the report and cause of this ceremony, which Abraham
first introduced into his church, namely, that with it, out of a great
and excellent spirit, the wonderful mystery of the incarnation of Christ
was indicated and signified, which he not only wanted to impress upon
his household, but also to make it known to them.

**[1668 L. VI, 29-31. interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-1. W. 1,
2498-2501. 1669]{.underline}**

with words, but also with an outward work and sign.

83\. The reader should also know that from the religion and worship of
the fathers always and much abominable superstition used to follow; as
it is certain that the Ishmaelites boasted of Abraham\'s hip, as that
they were born of the flesh, which was considered worthy that God should
be called upon over it: And yet they fell into a miserable blindness,
that they worshipped the very shame, and so embraced the flesh, not
spiritually, but as it is in itself. This pestilence has raged in human
nature at all times and has ruled by force, turning us into apes, so
that we follow the works and example of the fathers and abandon their
spirit. This is the main thing to be remembered here, for it is worthy
of careful attention.

So the pope had such clear testimonies of Scripture and explicit signs
of grace, and if someone looks at them, he will hardly believe that such
a great abomination could have followed. For what is clearer than the
sacrament of Holy Baptism? item, the Lord\'s Supper, the use of the
keys, the word of the Gospel, and that the passion of Christ was
preached, painted, and otherwise acted upon in various ways? And yet, in
such a multitude of sacraments, signs of grace, words and examples, the
Antichrist has reigned mightily for so many hundreds of years.

We have now, by the grace of God, swept away and cleansed this doctrine
again; but I have no doubt that there will soon follow some who will
reject the true doctrine of godliness and abandon the reason and root
cause of justification, and will again embrace works and human statutes.
For if Muenzer and the sacramentalists, having heard that we teach the
Spirit and reject works, have been able to abuse this doctrine and
despise the Word and sacraments, and can cry out about nothing but the
Spirit, the Spirit, and do so in our lives, in which we teach and argue
against them, what will become of them when our doctrine is no more?

be heard! They hold and preach with us that the pope\'s works do not
make righteous, and another righteousness of the Spirit belongs to it:
but the same Spirit they understand as a divine breathing on and inward
movement of revelation and of their thoughts.

86\. the antinomians have followed them, who teach badly that all sins
are abolished and that they should not be punished, that people should
not be frightened by the law; just as the Ishmaelites thought that
because the hip of their father Abraham was holy, everything was also
holy. And the antinomians still keep this secretly with diligence, do
not break out with it freely, and seek how they can embellish their
doctrine; but this is secretly still behind it, that they will say, sin
is forgiven, there is nothing condemnable about us, Rom. 8, 1. therefore
sin is nothing or is even abolished. And such error comes from the
beautiful teaching found in the writings of the apostles, 1 John 3:9:
\"He who is born of God does not commit sin\"; item, since we say: I
believe forgiveness of sin. For they do not understand that
righteousness and forgiveness of sin is in the midst of sins; but had
that they are wholly abolished and gone.

The Jews also conclude: \"If we are the seed and children of Abraham, we
are holy, blessed and pleasing to God alone. And this opinion could not
be taken away from them in so many miseries and misfortunes, which they
have suffered for many hundred years up to now. But that Abraham\'s hip
is holy, and his seed is sanctified, this is not for the sake of his hip
in the flesh, nor for Abraham\'s sake, according to the saying John
1:13: \"Not of the blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of the man\" 2c.: but because the holy seed is included and enclosed in
the hip. They cast away the seed and blaspheme it, and think that they
are the seed that is given; therefore they take the hips and understand
them only according to the flesh without the spirit, and become
Ishmaelites, Epicureans and Antinomians, who say that there is no more
sin at all for the forgiveness of sins.

**[1670 VI SI-S3. Interpretation of I Genesis 24, I-1. W. 1, 2SM-LO4.
1671]{.underline}**

But St. Paul describes the forgiveness of sins much differently, as he
says Rom. 7, 25: \"With the flesh I serve the law of sin\"; item, v. 19:
\"The good that I want to do, I do not do\", that is, I am still
attached to many evil, infirm tendencies and irritations, certainty,
doubt, impatience in misfortune and adversity. Therefore, we should
teach and believe about the forgiveness of sins, that sin will not
condemn us, because it is forgiven, not by the righteousness of the
flesh, but by the Son of God, who has put on our flesh. If then you
separate him from the flesh, you are already condemned.

\(89\) Those who are justified and have forgiveness of sins are still
sinners. For they complain, they cannot do what they would like to do;
they fight and resist the evil lusts and the pestilence that clings to
them; they crucify the flesh and yet cannot be completely redeemed; as
Paul laments and cries out Rom. 7:24: \"I wretched man, who will deliver
me from the body of this death?\" This teaching the antinomians will
obscure, and will make grace so great that they will suppress it and put
people under the wrath of God. For they will make them quite sure that
they will not regard the wrath and judgment of God, as if there were no
more sin, no more terror of death and hell.

\(90\) Therefore sin still hangs over the saints, against which grace
fights very fiercely in them, and there remains a conflict between the
spirit and the flesh, between the old serpent and the seed of the woman,
as long as this life lasts: the seed crushes the serpent\'s head, but
the serpent secretly pursues the seed and bites it in the heel. The
Ishmaelites cast away the seed and boast that they are children of the
flesh, thus understanding the blessing according to the outward work and
carnal; therefore they are damned sinners, even though they are born of
Abraham.

91 Thus we have said above that the married state is holy, and St. Paul
says in 1 Timothy 2:15 that wives who have children are holy.

be holy and blessed, but if they remain in the faith, that is, if they
will believe in Christ and contend with the serpent, that is, if they
will be chaste and chastened or resist the evil inclinations of their
flesh; otherwise a woman will be condemned according to the carnal
birth, without faith and without the seed.

\(92\) Therefore, because of necessity, we must keep the holiness and
blessing of the hips, or rather of the seed that is born of the hips and
has blessed all nations, and has also sanctified the chastity that is
defiled in the state of marriage, so that the impurity and defilement of
the flesh does not condemn us. If this does not happen, we will soon
fall into the error of the Ishmaelites and with them into the same
condemnation, and nothing else will remain of us but the name and false
delusion of holiness.

Thus the pope has taught holiness by rejecting the Word and the Spirit,
namely, that after baptism Christians, when they are grown up, should go
into the monasteries, torture their bodies, and do enough for sin; not
unlike the Turks, who also have many works and practices for which they
boast themselves holy, but it is only a pretense and name of holiness,
under which abominable sins lie hidden. Where therefore the doctrine of
the seed is abolished and taken away, there is no more salvation or
blessedness; for there sins become virtues, and become even common to
men, that they no longer regard them, and consider them no sin, as
Seneca says. It is taught that this, which should be punished as a sin,
is righteousness, wisdom, and blessedness, just as in the papacy
pilgrimages, caps, differences in food, and special clothing were
considered the highest righteousness; indeed, such things were
considered perfection.

94 Where sin, that is, idolatry and error, are held up to people as if
they were righteousness, what then are revealed sins? Therefore the word
of Christ is fulfilled, when he says Matth. 6, 23: \"If the light that
is in you is darkness,\" that is, if error and idolatry are held up to
people as if they were righteousness.

**[1672 2 VI, 33-ss. Interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-4. W. 1,
2501-250\". 1673]{.underline}**

If the lie is thy light, and thy life, and blessedness, and perfect
righteousness, \"how great then shall be the darkness itself?\" that is,
the flesh itself, which is hidden and adorned, and becomes sevenfold
sin.

95 Therefore I exhort you to study diligently and always keep fresh in
your minds the doctrine of justification. The false brethren also
condemn with us the works of the pope, and yet cry out against us; for
they conceive new and unusual works, and this is done while we still
live and teach against them. But the justification of Christians
consists in the fact that sin is weakened and does not reign over us. If
you take a wife, you will feel fornication; but you will be able to live
chastely and godly with your wife if you believe in Christ, by which sin
is weakened. But again, when you enter the marriage state with great
ardor and hope of many pleasures, soon in a month or two, when they have
passed, even often before the wedding, you will feel disgust, and
between you and the woman there will be more ill will and hatred and
enmity than there was love at first: So that you will desire with more
diligence how you may be divorced from her than you desired before to
become intimate with her; you will wish and desire that she would only
die soon, and any other woman will seem to you to be more beautiful and
to have better manners and ways about her than your wife; for sin then
reigns.

For this reason, we are given an example of the marriage state, where
grace reigns and sin is weakened. If you do not begin such a great thing
in this way, namely, with humble prayer and faith, you will have a
miserable, sorrowful marriage, which is always full of quarrels, strife,
and constant unwillingness, as is commonly written about it, as: Nec
tecum possum vivere, nec sine te, that is: I can neither live with you
nor without you. Item, that the pagans have said: A woman is a nuisance
that one cannot do without.

97 And this is what commonly happens to those who look at nothing but
the poor wretched flesh and fornication, and imagine for themselves how
they will have all kinds of pleasure and joy in marriage. But why do
they not call upon the Creator, who created both man and woman, who is
also the founder and best advisor in marriage? They follow only the
description of the marriage state, which is in imperial law and thus
reads: \"The marriage state is where man and woman are joined together
and live together without separation. In this description the right
distinction and the noblest parts are excluded; for they do not
understand the matter, how should they be able to describe it rightly?
Their definition says nothing more than that a marriage state is when
man and woman come together.

A proper definition and description, however, is to say that the
marriage state is where a man and a woman are joined together divinely
and properly, in the hope that they will beget children with each other,
or else that they may at least avoid fornication and sin and live in
honor of God in your state. The final cause is that one may be obedient
to God and seek help and counsel against sin, call upon God, strive for
children, love them and raise them in honor of God, live with the wife
in the fear of God and bear the cross; but if no children follow, that
you nevertheless live with your wife in the state and be content with
her and avoid fornication with others.

99\. And thus far we have dealt with the way of swearing which Abraham
used. Now let us see what the form of the oath was. It was even a new
ceremony, since the servant, when he was to swear, put his finger or
hand under Abraham\'s hip. We use two fingers, because two witnesses are
required for all things: therefore the two fingers, which instead of two
witnesses are raised up to God, point to the right God.

100\. the form of the oath is: Jurare te faciam, that is: \"I will take
an oath from you\", or: \"You shall swear to me by

**[1674 \". vi.W-s7. Interpretation of Genesis 24:1-4. W. i, Mve-Mos.
1675.]{.underline}**

The Lord, the gods of the heavens and the gods of the earth, that you
will not take a wife for my son from among the daughters of the
Cananites, among whom I dwell. Here the Scripture clearly testifies that
the mystery of the Godhead was not unknown to the fathers, and
especially to Abraham, who would not have suffered the oath to be made
with these words if he had not understood that the seed was something
more than a mere man.

For the Son of God is mixed into the flesh, and is sunk like a divine
leaven into such a dough, which is full of sin and corruption. That is
why Abraham speaks of a divine being, and yet at the same time he sets
as if he were speaking of many, since he says: \"by the LORD, the gods
of the heavens and the gods of the earth.\" Therefore God is a simple
being, and yet more than one in persons.

102\. But when we swear, we always put two things together, namely, that
we call upon God for help and protection and curse the punishment upon
ourselves. It is as if we want to say: If God helps me or not; if I keep
the oath, he will be merciful to me, but if I deceive someone with it,
he will punish me.

This is a very beautiful service and invocation. For he who swears
confesses that he is calling on God for mercy and favor, and expects him
to protect him and help him, and that he will curse divine vengeance and
punishment upon himself if he deceives anyone with his oath. Therefore a
threat is attached to the other commandment, so that those who swear a
false oath are threatened, Exodus 20:7: \"For God will not hold him
innocent who uselessly uses the name of the Lord\"; for it is a denial
and contempt of God.

But where you keep your oath, you do the greatest service to God. For
\"to swear\" means to confess that God is a protector and helper. But if
you take a false oath, you have already denied God, rejected His grace,
and provoked and drawn His wrath and displeasure upon your own head.

105\. since above (Cap. 21, v. 23.) Abimelech swore to Abraham, they
have

But this is a new way of swearing. For Abraham wants to include and draw
Christ into the oath; as it is written in the 63rd Psalm v. 12: \"He who
swears by him will be praised.\" For he who swears rightly serves and
honors God and calls upon His name: he who swears falsely and wrongly
blasphemes and curses the divine majesty, and dishonors it, despises it,
and thinks it nothing. Finally, he also sins who swears without need,
namely, if the authorities and the law of love do not require him to do
so.

\(106\) But why does Abraham forbid that the servant should not take a
wife for his son from among the daughters of the Cananites? Response:
Since Abraham was soon to die, he had experience in many things here on
earth, since he had lived with pagan people, whose customs and life he
had to observe somewhat diligently, had to deal with them, talk to them
and trade with them about many things, since all the goods and food was
in cattle breeding and farming, almost like the shepherds, from which he
not only fed and maintained his own household, but also sold meat,
butter, milk, cheese and such other things; This could not have happened
without the fellowship he had with the inhabitants and citizens.
Therefore, some may have been moved by such fellowship and kindness to
desire that Isaac, who was such an honest and handsome youth, become
their son-in-law or brother-in-law; and they may have been of the
noblest families of Ephron or the others. And it is also said above that
Abraham was rich through God\'s blessing and was well off for food.
Therefore, they alone may have desired to make friends with him.

107 Now Abraham, nevertheless, had many reasons to reject this, for he
was concerned about the household or the church being in danger because
of it; and perhaps he did not like the manner and manners of the virgins
in the land, seeing that they were either very rich or beautiful, or
were of

**[1676 D- VI. 37-39. interpretation of Genesis 24:1-4. W. I, 2S09-2S12.
1677]{.underline}**

great lineage and have therefore been all too hopeful. For it is a hard
thing to be an oath-keeper in a powerful and rich Hanseatic League, and
there is nothing on earth more unbearable or unpleasant than a rich wife
who always wants to rule. For a man must follow his wife, let her rule
over him and have power over him, or overcome and soften her, at least
such men as are captives of love.

\(108\) Therefore he thought of such danger in housekeeping that he did
not desire one who was too beautiful or too rich to be his son\'s wife,
but a plain, pious, simple and honest virgin who would be diligent in
housekeeping and accustomed to housework. For to serve the wives, who
want to be masters in the house, is not only annoying, but also
disgraceful, and the wives should not rule and reign over the men, but
over cattle, sheep and donkeys. But higher than this cause was his
consideration for the church. For this land was condemned by God; as God
said to Abraham above (Cap. 13, v. 15.), \"This land will I give thee\";
item (Cap. 15. v. 16.), \"The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet
full.\" Therefore he considered it to be such a land, rejected and
hostile to your God, who also threatened him that he would destroy it:
but in the meantime he dealt with them in a neighborly and friendly
manner in buying and selling and all kinds of dealings, and it was a
great miracle that he still found there a few remaining pious people, of
whom it was said above.

\(109\) Abraham understood all this well, for he was a spiritual and
understanding man. Therefore he did not want to mix his seed with the
blood of the Canaanites, so that his son would not become idolatrous and
with the mixing of the seed also the right worship and the idolatrous
worship would be mixed together. The worship of the saints seems simple,
and has no outward appearance and special appearance; but the ungodly
are puffed up and proud because of their righteousness, and with such
appearance they are able to convince the weak of heart.

easily deceive. Therefore Abraham saw that even though his son would not
be deceived, he would still be in great danger; therefore he took care
of him and his bride and household. And if this is part of the divine
right, it is also part of the description of the marriage state against
the priest, who makes of the marriage state a common house, in which
dishonest mixtures take place, and makes no distinction between the
union and the mingling of unreasonable animals and men.

110\. And I do not doubt that many virgins, among whom some were very
beautiful, rich and of great lineage, were offered to Isaac; but Abraham
simply closes his eyes and forbids his son not to take any of them, not
that he has refused his son that he might age with honor to the marriage
state, because he was fit and skilled for it in his old age, but that he
would gladly give him a pious, honest child in marriage, and not such a
one as would be harmful to him and annoying to the whole church.

Now Isaac is not against his father in this, but accepts his counsel
willingly and gladly. Therefore let all young people remember this
example, and learn to hold their parents in honor, and let them rule
over them, considering also the holy divine order: let them not think
that the married state is such a mixture as is among unreasonable
animals, as the pope understands and means; but let them first of all
call upon the right Father and Founder of all things with right faith,
that they may begin this state without sin, and thus say and pray: O
Lord God, thou hast made me a man; thou seest that I cannot live
chastely; I call upon thee, and beseech thee to govern my purpose, and
give me happiness in it. Give me good counsel and help me; choose me one
with whom I may live honestly and serve thee, and by faith and prayer
overcome the misfortunes and troubles that may befall the married state.
Now those who despise such admonition go up and run as if they were
blinded, without faith and without prayer.

**[1678 n vi, so\--\". Interpretation of Genesis 24:1-4. W. i,
2512-2515. 1679]{.underline}**

Prayer, such will finally also feel all kinds of unhappiness and be
crushed under it.

What could anyone want and desire more on earth than such a blessed and
peaceful marriage, where husband and wife love each other, and their
hearts are also friendly and united? Such a marriage is praised
everywhere as a great miracle. And since I was still a young journeyman
and heard that an honest and blissful marriage was praised and extolled,
item, I read in St. Paul that he says Eph. 5, 25: \"Husbands, love your
wives,\" 2c., I wondered why such a thing would happen, and why it
served to admonish and command that husbands and wives should love each
other, among whom often not only love, but also senseless rancor is
found.

But experience has taught me that among many marriages there is hardly
one to be praised. Hence it has come about that this state has been
commonly scolded by many; as a poet says: \"There is always quarreling
and strife in the marriage bed 2c. For this reason, there are also many
who are very shy about marriage.

\(114\) But one must not think or judge of this state, as the heathen
do; but in it one must recognize God the Creator, and bow the knee
before him with all humility, and call upon him in faith, that he may
give thee a helper and a bedfellow. If such a spirit and faith is
present in the invocation, then one may arrange the other according to
reason, and talk to the parents and listen to their advice. Afterwards,
when not everything goes according to your will, you still have this
comfort, that you think: I have prayed, I have asked the Lord for
advice, and also my parents and friends who are related to me: If
something unpleasant happens to me, I will suffer it with patience. For
this is a great comfort, where one has God as a witness and founder,
with whose counsel one has entered this state, and also with the
foreknowledge and counsel of parents and friends has begun the same.

115\. again, if by your own boldness and iniquity, without the
foreknowledge of your parents, you fall into

When you have entered this state, it will always bite and torment you in
your heart. You will say, \"Behold, I am now punished for my foolishness
and disobedience; I have angered my parents, and now I am again
afflicted with all kinds of displeasure. This is then an unbearable
cross. Therefore this is a very beautiful chapter, not only to honor the
marriage state with it, but also to comfort the consciences of those who
feel harm or burden of the marriage state with it.

Young people who are still inexperienced in these matters do not think
about the discomfort, trouble and burden of marriage, nor do they think
that they have the devil as an enemy, who is hostile to the discipline
of children, obedience, love and unity that spouses should have among
each other. A young bridegroom and bride are not concerned with these
things, therefore they must be taught to bring such faith with them into
the marriage state, that they pray and say: Lord God, I have entered
this state according to your command and will and have called upon you
for help, you will now also give me grace and blessing, so that I may
bear and endure the burden and burden that will be found in it. God is
undoubtedly pleased with such a prayer, says yes to it, and answers:
\"Whatever you ask shall be done.

\(117\) But the wicked remember how the married state is now and then
reproached by many, and what harm and accidents are wont to happen
therein. Therefore they flee this state and fall into the works of the
flesh, such as impurity, fornication, adultery; of which St. Paul says
Gal. 5:21: \"Those who do these things will not inherit the kingdom of
God.

118\. And I speak of it all the more diligently and extensively because
I see that the Holy Spirit has not disdained to describe this His own
work in so many words. The godless and unbelieving people of the world,
who think that everything happens by chance, do not understand anything
in the holy Scriptures and about the creatures of God: But it is our
duty to read diligently and to teach others, so that we learn to
recognize the creatures from the holy Scriptures and also the Creator
from the creatures.

**[1680 L. VI, 41. 42. interpretation of Genesis 24, 1-7. W. 1,
2S1S-2SM. 1681]{.underline}**

119\. For the Scripture herewith shows that the creature is darkened and
deformed, therefore it adorns and praises with so many words the honor
and worthiness of the marriage state, so that we may learn and also
teach and report to others that the marriage state is by no means to be
held in low esteem; As the flesh and the world hold it in very low
esteem, because they do not consider what the married state is, but look
only to lust, fornication, and other pleasures, and pursue only idleness
and riches, which is original sin itself, so that poor human nature is
horribly defiled. And that is why the world, instead of the pleasure and
joy it had hoped for, finally finds toil, pain and cross.

120 Therefore it is a strange thing about a well-born and happy marriage
state. For men do not distinguish the work of God from original sin; but
the holy Scriptures praise and extol the married state rightly and very
highly, and show how this state is the beginning and origin of the
household and worldly regiment, and also of the church, all of which are
derived and built up from it, as far as the matter is concerned. In the
church God\'s honor is sought, in the worldly regiment peace, in the
house regiment child discipline. According to all this, this state has a
lot of good works and fruits in it. For this reason, God and Abraham, as
well as those who are truly God-fearing, judge the marriage state much
differently than does the pope, who reads into the marriage state only
the fornication and lust of the flesh, that is, original sin, and then
also the cross and tribulation.

121 But God, according to His common grace and mercy, tolerates the sin
and punishment of the inheritance; for they are hidden under the
blessings and under the great heap of many good works that are done
therein. The papists do not see such fruits, but call them common,
worldly, and carnal works; therefore they regard this estate as a horse
or ass, not judging it according to the Scriptures, which point to the
fruits and good works of the marriage estate.

\(122\) Yea, the heathen also have vowed matrimony, and have willed that
the youth should be married.

should be forced to do so, so that the society of the human race might
be preserved. Those, however, who escaped the displeasure, toil and
labor of this state, as the papists and monks did, devised special works
and orders which should please themselves and also God, and thus could
not see these right works with seeing eyes.

\(123\) But be it so, that such things are commonly despised by
everyone, yet righteous bishops and pastors should learn them and also
teach other people. For our Lord God did not reveal His word to be
despised, but that we should hear it and handle it, and learn from it
what we do not know by nature. Those who study other arts, such as
physicians, lawyers and philosophers, have more listeners. But because
we despise this teaching, all kinds of punishments and a miserable
blindness follow; for we have the Scriptures and the creature of God: if
we do not diligently search and inquire therein, it is our own fault
that we must also be deprived of the benefits that are offered to us
there.

Lastly, Abraham calls the servant to go to his fatherland and therefore
bring a bride for his son Isaac. Abraham and Sarah were born in Babylon
and were Babylonian citizens, that is, they were at home in Chaldea. V.
31, that Tarah took his son Abram and his wife Sarai and led them from
Ur out of Chaldea; he was not born in Haran, as some would have it, and
they dare to prove this from this text.

**Third part.**

**How Abraham sends out Nieser and the latter \"ach Abrahams Befehl
seine Reise angetreten.**

**I.**

**V. 5-7 The servant said, \"If the woman will not follow me to this
land, shall I bring your son back to that land?**

[**1682 2- VI, IL-4S.** Interpretation of **Genesis** 24, 5-7. **W. 1,
2520-2S23. 1683**]{.underline}

**Land from whence thou camest? And Abraham said unto him, Take heed
lest thou bring my son thither again. The LORD God of heaven, which took
me from my father\'s house, and from my home, and spake unto me, and we
also sware, saying, This land will I give unto thy seed; and he shall
send his angel before thee, that thou mayest take a wife for my son
there.**

\(125\) These things are not described for the sake of Abraham, Isaac
and the servant, but for our sake and for the sake of all men until the
end of the world; for God has set before us in Abraham a beautiful,
glorious example of faith, which shines in his whole life and governs
it; for he lives and is wholly attached to the word of God, who makes
the promise to him, and according to it he directs all his undertakings
and works, relying on his wisdom or prudence of reason for nothing.

After that, he diligently does what he is supposed to do. Do not sit
idly and wait until an angel comes from heaven and brings the bride to
his son, and do not let any of the things a father should take care of,
so that he will not be regarded as trying to tempt God. For so it
behooves parents to feast diligently and take care how they may help
their children to an honest and godly marriage: they shall therefore
inquire and ask after the bride, and not think that she will come by
chance or by some new and unusual way of her own accord. And it is no
sin for a bachelor or a virgin to think of a bride or a bridegroom;
indeed, it is for this reason that banquets are held, where pious,
honest people come together and eat and drink with one another. Item,
one therefore also arranges the dances, which are not to be condemned by
any means, if it is done with fine chastity, morality and honesty.

For since we were not created for fornication, but for marriage, it is
not only lawful, but also godly and honest, for one to seek a spouse.

And ask and desire the same. This is to be done in the way mentioned
above, namely, by faith and prayer, and also with the advice of the
parents or those who are in their place, whoever they may be.

\(128\) So Abraham sends out his servant with silver and bride-gifts,
for such things are part of the making of a marriage: and they shall not
think that such things are displeasing to God, but shall know that they
are well pleasing to Him, provided they be done with godliness and
reverence.

129 But the commandment and the order, that he should dispatch the
servant, is full of faith. Beware,\" he says, \"that you do not bring my
son back to the land from which I came, for God has forbidden me not to
return there. I am brought forth by the LORD God of heaven, who hath
more dwellings and mansions than this land and my fatherland: he is the
LORD of heaven, therefore he hath appointed me another kingdom than this
fatherland: and I will not have thee to desire any virgin for a wife
unto my son out of this land wherein I dwell: for the Cananites shall be
destroyed for idolatry, that they may be defiled. And the same is also
indicated hereafter (Cap. 34) in the history of Dinah.

\(130\) In order that he might assure the servant and make him certain
of all this, he adds that God not only spoke to him, but also swore to
him. Thus Abraham praises and speaks of nothing else but God: he
believes in the divine promise, and in such faith he happily arranges
everything, both in terms of world and household government. Not only
did he perform the high works, such as sacrificing his son and winning
the victory over the kings, through his full and strong faith, but also
the common and daily works. Because God has spoken to me, he says,
promising and swearing to give me this land, beware and do not bring my
son back there, for that would be against the promise and against the
Bible or my Scriptures and faith. So

**[1684 L.VI, 4S-ts. Interpretation of Genesis 24:5-7. W. I, W23-AM.
1685]{.underline}**

He lives completely in faith even in the smallest things, which the pope
calls carnal and worldly; although these things are quite carnal, which
are done according to the flesh, as evil desire, fornication and the
like, Gal. 5:19. But to seek a wife is not carnal, but what is left of
the flesh in her is devoured by faith, so that it must be spiritual; for
the Spirit redeems us from corruption and from the harm of original sin.

Therefore Abraham keeps the promise and teaches that everything should
be done in certainty and joy of faith, no matter how great or small, and
so we should also learn that everything should be put in God\'s hands
and commanded, no matter whether it is special or ordinary and common,
high or low, so that we may rejoice and be strong in the Lord and cast
all our care upon Him, 1 Sam. 2, 1. 5, 7. It may be seen as an unseemly
and shameful thing to arrange a wedding for one\'s son; but see how it
is held in such great dignity and honor in Abraham\'s sight, so also
that he does not doubt that the angels are there, ordering, promoting,
protecting and handling such work. But he exalts his Bible, that is, his
promise, which he had instead of the Bible we have, very high. God of
heaven, he says, who has spoken to me, will send his angel before you.
For he concludes: To whomsoever God speaks, angels and all creatures
serve him; but to me God has spoken, therefore angels also will serve
me.

This is a beautiful conclusion from the divine promises, by which he
considers it certain that the angels will be with his servant. For I, he
says, have a God who has angels, who will send an angel to go with you
and help you. And is this a strange speech and trust, that he believes
that this work is commanded to the angels, that they should be with his
servant. I will do what is due to me, he will have thought, I will give
gifts to the servant and wedding rings, which he shall bring to the
bride, but God will not give my servant a gift.

Servants to give an angel who will align and promote the other.

He therefore commands God and His angels with strong and perfect faith,
believes that the heavenly spirits and princes are concerned with and
want to deal with such a small, carnal and foolish work as it outwardly
appears, and is so certain of their service that he not only knows and
believes that he has the angels around him at home, but that they also
want to be present wherever he sends his servant. Because we have the
God of heaven and earth, he says, the angels are our protectors,
administrators, yes, our servants, wherever we are.

The beautiful, glorious words and sayings in the Psalms come from this,
as in the 34th Psalm, v. 8: \"The angel of the Lord is encamped around
those who fear him and helps them out\"; item, in the 9th Psalm, v. 11:
\"He has commanded his angels over you. Psalm v. 11: \"He has commanded
his angels over you\" 2c. For David looked at these histories a little
more diligently than the pope and we are wont to do, who think that the
angels ask nothing of us, nor take care of us, but are quite idle and
amusing themselves up in heaven. Thus we all judge by nature, and if, in
addition to the harm of original sin, we have been taught and thought by
long habit that the angels are quite far from us, we see that through
their protection and service everything we have is preserved and
protected, and that men often perish horribly when they are abandoned by
the service of the angels. Abraham, however, judges it much differently
and better: \"The angel of God, who created me, promised me and swore to
me, will provide and lead the bride here. He does not say, \"My cousins
or close friends will think about my son getting a wife,\" but says,
\"The angel will be the speaker and messenger who will advertise and
persuade the bride and her parents to follow.

135 Who has ever heard or had such faith, and can be so sure of himself,
that Abraham was the one who was the one who was the one who was the one
who was the one who was the one who was the one who was the one who had
the faith?

**[1686 \". VI, 46-48. interpretation of Genesis 24:5-7. W. I,
2525-2528. 1687]{.underline}**

so certainly put off and assured. Ambrose, Augustine or such other
fathers are nothing to be counted against Abraham. And see what his
works are. He is a householder, a shepherd, lives among other men in the
ordinary and common way of this life, and does as all parents are wont
to do, that they take care of the children and arrange the wedding for
them; and there seems to be nothing spiritual about him, nor is there
any cap, plate or such foolish work on him.

For this reason it is necessary that our faith be awakened and that we
be moved to call upon God diligently; that whoever wishes to enter into
the marriage state, call upon God and believe that He will give him as a
wife the one whom he desires and who will be directed according to him.
Therefore, conclude with right confidence, saying, \"Lord, I know that
you will give me your angel to govern all things; I will give you my
hand and my tongue, and I will do what is right for me, but you will
take care of the rest.

We should also think this way when we want to administer church or
secular offices. When I am called to the office of pastor or teacher, I
will do what I can; the angel will be with me who will govern all
things. Upon such faith there follows peace, assurance, and joy of the
Spirit in all manner of temptations. For I am certain, even though much
misfortune oppresses and weighs me down, that the angels are watching
over me and are my guardians and watchmen; therefore they may also see
to it that my work in my office has a blessed outcome and that I may
also be delivered from the misfortune that comes my way.

Whoever believes this, we will say that he is truly blessed; but
unbelief and blindness is a very shameful fault among us, who neither
recognizes nor believes in such great benefits. That is why we are so
ungrateful, so unkind and hard, that the services which the angels
render to men grow cold among us, and one does not serve the other with
such diligence, so that the heavenly spirits may perform their service
with us daily and every moment in the most diligent manner.

Therefore, we will finally be punished for the sake of such ingratitude.

\(139\) And yet it is quite certain that the angels are present with us
and around us, of which one should not even doubt. It is certain that
they are not only waiting for our future in the future fatherland, but
that they are also truly with us in this life, taking care of and
governing our affairs, if only we firmly believe this.

If any misfortune or adversity befalls you in this life, think this: The
God of heaven has promised and sworn to be my God, therefore I will not
despair of His help and protection, because I hear that the great
princes in heaven have nothing else to do but to be couriers and
forerunners of the bridegroom at the wedding, to join bridegroom and
bride, to order the wedding, to keep the children and what belongs to
the house.

141\. and so they are commanded to take care of it; and if we will
believe it, everyone among us will experience such care of the angels as
they carry for us. For so we see that Abraham is quite sure that the
angels are with him and serve him, not otherwise than as if they were
there before his eyes, though they are invisible; so great is his faith.
And whoever has such confidence that the angels are among us and govern
and administer everything, he certainly also sees the angels, but with
spiritual and not with carnal eyes.

This is a great and excellent glory, and the angels are highly praised
by the fact that they allow themselves to be used for such minor
services, which, as it can be seen, do not befit them; and may we thank
God for our innate hope and pride that we are not created angels, for we
would not be able to bear such minor, contemptible service and would all
have followed Lucifer. For is this not a contemptible and unkind thing,
to give a bride to Isaac? For over and above the fact that human nature
is corrupt and horribly deformed because of sins and punishments, the
female sex also has a special accident and misfortune before men.

**[1688 571, 4A-5V. \' Interpretation of I Genesis 24, -7. W. 1,
2528-2SS1. 1689]{.underline}**

To bear a special cross: should such a holy angel allow himself to be
sent to a woman? that is not at all befitting the majesty of the angels.

Thus we, who are nothing but muck, stink and worms, are wont to do: if
some surpass others with special gifts, such as being eloquent, wise and
understanding, even having more wealth and beauty than others, help God,
how do such people exalt themselves above others who do not have these
gifts, to whom they are equal because of sins and all kinds of accidents
and miseries? So the devil also thought that it was not at all fitting
for the majesty of the angels to serve Rebekah, since Abraham did not
ask for it, but only wished and desired it, saying to his servant, \"Go,
the angel of the Lord will be with you\"; and let it be seen, indeed, as
a very cheap cause to be vehement and angry.

From this you can see what the nature of the good angels is, how it is
such a humble, sweet and kind nature, which does not think itself too
high and great to serve the poor sinners, both men and women. For they
are full of light, knowledge of God and wisdom of divine goodness.
Therefore, they understand that everything God commands is excellent and
very good, because it pleases God.

So the angel Gabriel does not refuse to be sent to a virgin who is far
inferior to him and bring her the message he was commanded by God. For
he knows that such a thing is pleasing to God; whether it be a special
or a common command, he asks nothing of it. The evil spirits, however,
not only despise such services, but also the Lord and God Himself.

Since we now understand that we enjoy the protection and friendship of
the holy angels when they have fellowship with us, let us give thanks to
God for this, and let us follow the virtue and works of love of the holy
angels, and also be friendly, kind and helpful to one another. No man is
so friendly and willing and inclined to all kinds of service and good
deeds as

the angels. But we do not believe this and we do not attribute such
virtues to the angels. But it is certain that Rebekah and Isaac had a
more faithful friend and guardian in the angel than in the servant and
their relatives. They knew very well that the servant was pious and
faithful, but that was nothing compared to the angel\'s faithfulness and
favor.

\(147\) Therefore we should learn that our very best and most constant
friends are invisible, namely, the dear angels, who far surpass the
visible friends we have in faithfulness and favor, as well as in all
kinds of service and true friendship; just as, on the other hand, the
evil angels and devils, who are invisible, are our much greater and more
harmful enemies than the corporeal and visible ones. All misfortune, and
whatever evil happens, comes much more from them than from the enemies
we see before us with our eyes; but where something good happens to us,
it is all directed together by the good angels.

If we then believe and fear God, the good angels are our very best
friends, as they were Isaac\'s and Rebecca\'s friends, who were also
poor sinners and unworthy of such great help: but because they believed,
they had the angels as servants with them.

We should also consider that we enjoy the fellowship of the heavenly
spirits, no matter how horribly we are disfigured and deformed because
of sin and unworthy of the service of such great creatures.

150 There is a saying of Bernard about the fall of the evil angels,
which poetically pretends, like the poets, that this was a cause for
Satan to fall from heaven, because he saw that the Son of God should
become man and take this poor lump of flesh of the human race to
himself, and after that the angels should be commanded to serve the
human nature, which was far inferior and more miserable than it, and to
take care of it. For this reason, he took offense at such inequity and
despised the Son of God, and therefore fell from heaven.

**[1690 vi, s\"-S2. Interpretation of Genesis 24:5-9. W. i, Wi-\"n.
1691]{.underline}**

These are indeed fine and Christian thoughts, and let us see that the
devil has also inflicted and instilled such plagues and afflictions on
all men through sin, that the richer, more learned and more beautiful
one is, the more he exalts himself; as the pagan poet also testifies
when he says (Lucan. 2, 38.): Nec servare modum rebus sublata secundis:
A man\'s heart can have no measure when it is puffed up by fortune and
prosperity; it exalts itself and breaks through.

For this reason, people should be admonished to beware of such devilish
hope and to recognize their misery and suffering. For if the angels have
fallen because of such hopefulness, which they had because of the great
and excellent gifts, such hopefulness will also do harm to men, and
especially to those who may presume with iniquity to judge divine things
according to their own discretion, and since they have scarcely a grain
of wisdom, let them think that they have a whole penny of it.

By appointing and ordaining the angels to have respect for us and to be
so kind and mean to us, God wants to show us how much He values us who
believe in Him and how fiercely He loves us. Oh, that we could recognize
this on account of our horribly corrupt nature, and in turn also love
God, who shows himself so gracious and friendly that he dwells among us
and deals with us, although invisibly, yet not insensibly, that I speak
thus, and has given us a pledge of this same love and friendly
fellowship, namely, his only begotten Son, as John 3:16 states. But men
are surely without all knowledge and fear of God, have ears and do not
hear: their heart is blinded and their ears are thick, Isa. 6, 10.

If we believed correctly, we would already be blessed and in heaven. For
faith restores all things: we have the fellowship of angels and heavenly
spirits, who delight in taking care of our lives and all our goods, and
have respect for us.

ben. But the devil opened our eyes in paradise so that we would think
that we are wiser and greater than God and the angels. But let us
recognize our weakness and exercise our faith, so that we consider and
also wait for such great benefits, which we enjoy because of the
protection of the dear angels, while the Son of God Himself is present.

But this is also part of the confirmation of our doctrine of the
marriage state, namely that God takes care of it, against the devilish
blasphemy of the pope, who calls this state an impurity: but we know
from the New Testament that John 2:2 ff. Christ Himself came to the
wedding; but here it is said of the holy angels that they are the
bride-servants, which God admits to His saints. Therefore, the parents
should keep this comfort, pray and believe, and also do what is due to
their office, send out their servants, seek the bride and have her
courted, so that the angel of the Lord will be there, and God Himself,
who will rule and accomplish everything.

**But if the woman will not follow thee, thou shalt be quit of this
oath**. **Do not bring my son back there alone. Then the servant put his
hand under the thigh of Abraham his master and swore to him.**

A very great care is described here, so Abraham had for it, that his son
would not be brought again to Chaldea, his fatherland, by his servant.
For he commands the servant to simply turn back if he does not find
anyone who wants to follow him. And as a father he did his part, he sent
the servant out to seek a virgin and to woo her, and he said to him: The
Lord will provide my son with a wife, if there is one there whom God has
given him; but if there is none to follow you, it is certain that they
are not worthy of it and that they please neither God nor the angels;
although he has a good hope that God will give the parents and also the
virgin such a heart that she will follow him:

**[1692 L. VI, ss-vt. Interpretation of Genesis 24, 8-II. W.I,WN-WS\".
1693]{.underline}**

However, if it would be otherwise, he shall absolve the servant of the
oath.

157 All this comes from a wonderfully strong faith and a certain
confidence. For he was certain that if he could not find a wife for his
son among his friends, God would raise up a bride from stones or from
some earthen lump or from a rib. For he arranges a wedding for his son,
although he is still uncertain whether the servant will bring the bride.
But the previous benefits and miracles that God had done for him
strengthened and increased his faith and hope, namely, the salvation of
his son, since he was to be slaughtered for sacrifice 2c.

\(158\) Therefore he said, \"If I cannot find anyone in Syria or Babylon
or in the whole world to marry my son, God will provide my son with a
wife.

Therefore, let us learn from this example that we should believe the
divine promises and wait for God\'s help and mercy, and be patient if we
have to suffer any misfortune or adversity. For Abraham had such a
heart, which was willing and ready: his things turned out as they always
wanted, for better or for worse, so that he could be satisfied with
them. He also dealt with outward things, which seem almost shameful,
with right and strong faith, by which he both hoped for good things from
God, and endured with patience the harm or accident he encountered. This
is a truly Christian heart, and is quite free, safe and cheerful. If you
find a bride, he says, bring her here; but if not, it is certain that
there was none worthy to follow you, or to be provided and given to my
son by God.

\(160\) As to the manner of swearing, it has been said above that not
only the descendants, but also the Son of God, who was to come from the
loins of Abraham, was honored; and by him one may swear, and by no one
else. But that Abraham

When his servant, when he was to swear, put his hand under his thigh,
the Scriptures indicate that this fruit from Abraham\'s loins is true
God. But the question of whether Christians may also swear has been
sufficiently dealt with elsewhere, and shows that Christians are
permitted to take an oath from others and do it themselves.

**II.**

**So the servant took ten camels from his master\'s camels, and went,
having with him all his master\'s goods, and arose, and went to
Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor**. **Then he camped the camels outside
the city by a well of water in the evening, when the women were going
out to draw water.**

161 All this can be seen as futile and worthless, or, as the papists
judge, a worldly and carnal thing. Do they say that the Holy Spirit has
nothing else to teach or write but about camels? Answer: God indicates
that He cares for the godly and faithful even in such small and lowly
things, and thus also proves that everything they do is pleasing to Him.

162 After that Moses also wanted to describe the splendor and the
preparation of the wedding, when he tells how the servant took ten
camels and led them with him. The pomp was not so glorious. For there
were no horsemen, and perhaps the camels were used so that they had to
wear the clothes and adornments of the women. For Abraham wanted the
bride to come home in good order.

For this reason, the ordering and preparation of this is not to be
punished, if it is in proportion and the expenses are not too great, so
that respectability is considered and what belongs to such
respectability and is appropriate, only that all this is done in
reverence and the fear of God. The monks condemn all this, even the
wedding itself,

**[1694 I?. VI, 54-SS. Interpretation of I]{.underline}**

The wedding is not held and celebrated for the sake of habit and
pleasure, but for the sake of the end and benefit of the marriage state,
namely, the household, secular and ecclesiastical regiment, which all
come from the marriage state, and the wedding is a preparation and
instruction for all of this.

Therefore Abraham gives the servant the camels and other gifts, which he
should honor the bride and her parents. But that in the text it is added
that the servant had with him all the goods of his master, this is what
the Jews understand, as Lyra tells us, from the tablets or registers in
which Abraham\'s possessions were listed and described, and that these
tablets or registers were given to the servant so that he might show
them to the bride and her friends, to soften their hearts and minds so
that they would be favorable and inclined toward Isaac. But this
understanding is better that it be understood of divers gifts, which the
servant took of all Abraham\'s goods, and had in his hand, that is,
power; which is a common use among all nations, that they send gifts one
to another, and therewith make their friendship and favor among
themselves.

So this servant took gold, silver, spices, and other such things to give
to the parents, brothers, and sisters of the bride, as we are wont to
give to the bridegroom or the bride at this time when we are invited to
a wedding, which is not to be punished at all, as the monks have said is
a sin. For the Scriptures indicate that this was also done by noble,
great and holy men.

166 Finally, Moses also adds the circumstances, such as the place, the
time, the city and the person: he has described all this so diligently.
And this is done so that we may undoubtedly believe that God governs all
our affairs and works, arranging and ordering them most diligently. The
angel, who is the recruiter and assigned to the servant by God, shows
him the way and governs all of his plans. It had

The servant was not commanded to go to the city of Nahor in particular,
but Abraham only said to him, \"Go to the land or to my father\'s
country,\" but by the angel\'s counsel and inspiration he went to the
city of Nahor; but because he was uncertain there where he should enter,
he made his prayer to God, as follows in the text.

v\. 12-14. **And said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, meet me this
day, and do mercy to my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the well
of water, and the daughters of the people of this city shall come forth
to draw water. If therefore a damsel come, to whom I say, Incline thy
pitcher, and let me drink; and she shall say: Drink, and I will drink
thy camellias also: that she may be she whom thou gavest unto Isaac thy
servant, and that I may know that thou hast shewed mercy unto my lord.**

There is one question that comes out of this prayer, namely, whether God
can determine and prescribe the time, place, person and measure of the
thing that we ask for in our prayer. For since God is free, we should
pray in such a way that we do not bind God to any circumstances, but
simply say: Your will be done. Thus, since in the history of Judith,
Cap. 7, 22, Osia said: \"Dear brothers, have patience, and let us wait
for five more days of help from God,\" Judith punished him severely and
said, Cap. 8, 11, 12: \"Will you determine the time and days for the
Lord of your favor, if he is to help?\" This does not serve to acquire
grace, but rather wrath and disfavor.

168 Therefore it is asked whether this servant has sinned by prescribing
to God the measure and manner in which he should do this thing, and
whether he has tempted God with it. Hezekiah the king also made such a
prayer in 2 Kings 20:8, when he asked the Lord for a sign that the Lord
would heal him and that he would go to the Lord\'s presence on the third
day. V. 17, when he said to the Lord, \"Dear one, if I have found favor
in your sight, let me go to the Lord.

**[1696 L. VI. ss-ss. Interpretation of Genesis 24:12-14. W. 1.
2S3K-2S42. 1697]{.underline}**

make me a sign that it is you\" 2c. He desires a sign of victory on the
skin with the wool; for he says afterwards v. 36. f. further: \"If thou
wilt redeem Israel by my hand, as thou hast spoken, then I will put a
skin with the wool on the threshing floor\" 2c.

169\. To this I answer recently: According to the law, it is not proper
to dictate to God, but according to the gospel, the pious who are
without law may do so, but it is not proper for the wicked. Therefore,
this servant is allowed to do this request because he has a command from
God. So one could answer this question recently, but we do not want to
use this evangelical liberty.

170 We would rather explain this question according to the law. And this
is to be noted, first, that the examples of the saints and children of
God are not to be taken to mean that one must follow them and make a
rule out of them, unless they are in accordance with the rule prescribed
for us in the Word. On the other hand, one may answer that the servant
did not speak in such a way that he determined something, but in such a
way that he desired something, that is, he did not determine such a goal
and measure for the Lord, but desired and wished that it should be so;
and it is well to be believed that he did not speak these words openly
or aloud, but with a sigh and heartfelt desire. For the Scriptures also
use to call this, when a man thinks, words; as in the 14th Psalm v. 1:
\"The foolish speak in their heart\"; item, Matth. 9, 21. it is written
of the woman who had the hemorrhage: \"She spoke by herself,\" that is,
she thought, \"If I would only touch his garment, I would be healed.\"
So this servant also thought, Behold, I am come to Mesopotamia; but what
I shall do now I know not, I have no command of it, where I shall stop,
and to what friends I shall go; dear Lord GOD, help me. And he wishes
for this and says: Oh, that the virgin would come who will be the bride
of my Lord\'s Son. He does not dictate to God what he must or should do,
as if He were going to command him, which in the

History Judith happens, but only wishes and desires that it would come
so; as if I would silently wish the future of a prince or otherwise a
good friend, on which no one has hoped or thought.

This is part of the consolation and strengthening of our faith in
prayer, for the Scriptures indicate in this place that God is so close
to the pious that He not only hears their prayers to Him, but also the
desires and wishes in their hearts. As every one, when he examines his
whole life, has experienced and will have to testify, that many things
have often happened to him without his hope, if he has only desired or
longed for them.

Therefore it is not necessary to resolve this question of the freedom of
the gospel, for it has no other meaning than that the servant silently
wishes and desires: O that now the virgin, who is given to Isaac as a
wife, would come to this well of water and bring a pitcher to draw
water.

\(173\) The Jews tell vain lies, but this mind is simple, that the
servant wished and desired that the virgin should come to the well of
water. And when he sees that she comes to him with the same sign, he is
frightened that what he wanted and desired happens so soon and
unexpectedly. Therefore it is not a temptation, but a sign of a great
desire, as if a young journeyman came to a place where virgins danced
with each other, and thought to himself, \"Oh, that I might see the one
who is to be my wife,\" or otherwise looked at one who would be
entrusted to him in marriage.

174 There are countless examples of this, even among the wicked, who at
times, before they think of it, obtain what they have previously
desired. But this is a great comfort to the pious, that they also pray
and call upon God with desires and wishes. This servant also had such a
heart about this that even if Rebekah had not come, he would still have
been able to-

**[1698 L.VI.S8-W. Interpretation of Genesis 24:12-14.W. I,W4S-W1S.
1699]{.underline}**

would have been satisfied with the will of God, otherwise it would
rightly be called a temptation; but according to the aforementioned
opinion it is not a temptation or a request for a sign.

175\. If, moreover, a quarrelsome man is not satisfied with this text,
he should answer in the same way as the example of King Hezekiah and
Gideon; for they humbly ask for mercy, and desire that they may be
forgiven for asking for a sign: And they are not moved to such a request
by unbelief, but the thing promised to them is so great that they can
hardly comprehend or understand it, and overwhelmed with joy and wonder
must desire and ask for a sign of such a great thing.

Gideon does not doubt that he was sent by God and called to the battle
that he was to lead; but out of special joy and because he is as it were
upset in spirit, he demands a sign from God, so that the others who
would hear this promise would also be strengthened by the sign. So this
servant could also silently ask for a sign, not for his own sake, but to
strengthen his heart and also the love of the virgin with it. This is
not an inconvenient answer, but I like the idea that we said it was a
wish and a heartfelt desire better, because it corresponds well with the
common experience of both the pious and the wicked.

Now let us also look at the words in this prayer. The Latin text says
that the servant said: Fac occurrere: Dear, let it befall or occur to
me, that it may be those whom thou hast prepared and provided. The
Hebrew word means, thou hast warded or punished; and the Jews are worthy
to be hated, because they obscure the quality and power of the words,
and make them as it were dull and feeble, by stretching and directing
them to various meanings; but we are to learn that we understand and
interpret them according to their right and proper meaning. As when the
Scripture says, \"God built a temple.

Woman from the rib, which he took from man,\" Genesis 2:22, which is how
the Jews interpret it: He made a woman; and although the interpretation
is not wrong, nor does it rhyme badly, the proper meaning and quality of
the word is not fully explained.

178\. Therefore, since it is probable that the servant did not express
this opinion in these words, but only had it in mind and thought, it can
be assumed that Moses wanted to express such an opinion with special and
emphatic words, as befits his great spirit, and will undoubtedly have
seen various obstacles that the devil is wont to throw in the way of all
things that are to be started and accomplished, which is why it is
necessary to call upon God to avert such obstacles and to give a happy
outcome; For where He Himself does not build and preserve the city,
house and church, all man\'s diligence and labor will be lost and in
vain.

The servant has considered this, for he has had a learned schoolmaster,
whom he has heard admonishing and reminding him many times that we have
the devil as our greatest and most fierce adversary in all our dealings
and schemes: therefore he asks that the devil\'s cunning schemes and
obstacles may be averted, and that God may promote this cause and bring
it to a good happy end. This is what he means when he says: \"Let it
happen to me, that is, give me grace, so that the parents and also their
daughter will follow and obey my request.

He had a certain command and did not doubt the presence of the angel,
even though he did not see him with his eyes; but as a disciple in
Abraham\'s church he knew well that the devil cannot celebrate or rest,
but tries all kinds of things he can and may to prevent the pious from
their Christian and good conduct. Therefore he will have thought: What
if they would not let me into the city, or at least into Laban\'s house?
What if the harlot would not consent to it? Therefore help, dear Lord

**[1700 L. VI. 60-62. interpretation of Genesis 24:1214 . w. i.
w4l-254s. 1701]{.underline}**

God, that everything will be happy and well directed. How to speak in
this way is also written in the prophet Isaiah in the 64th Cap. V. 5:
\"You met the happy ones\", that is, you stood with your own and saved
them. But who are they? The prophet says: \"They are the ones who
practiced righteousness,\" which means that however hard the devil and
his enemies opposed you, you still saved your people.

For this reason Moses used a very emphatic word, indicating that this
servant was a very good theologian, who understood the devil\'s cunning
very well, that he was careful to resist all good works and to prevent
them. Thus it is written in the prophet Daniel Cap. 10, 13: \"The prince
of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days; and behold,
Michael, one of the noblest princes, came to my rescue\"; and Zech. 3,
1: \"Satan stood at his right hand to resist him. Such great and various
dangers should certainly take away our security and awaken us to pray
that God will also meet us and make all our affairs prosperous and
blissful.

The married state has many innumerable obstacles and dangers; but prayer
and the angel of the Lord drive out such obstacles and dangers and
easily break through. In the same way, you should learn to pray in all
offices, whether you are a secular ruler or in the preaching ministry,
and, following the example of this servant, ask God and say: \"Oh, dear
God, let it happen to me, that is, give me grace, so that everything may
happen and take place of its own accord. And the servant could never
have wished or asked for this if he had not been well instructed in the
knowledge and experience of spiritual things and also of the devil\'s
temptation. For this reason we should begin all our business with
prayer, and after that we should also think of the protection of the
holy angels who are watching over us.

183 Hence also belongs the quality of the other word: \"Which you have
given to your servant Isaac. The Jews interpret it: You

You have made it, you have gained it. This is not a bad word, but it
does not express the power of the Hebrew word and the right spiritual
understanding. The same word is also found in Psalm 6, v. 2, and Psalm
50, v. 4, and above in chapter 20, v. 16. V. 16: \"This was Sarah\'s
punishment.\" Therefore, this is my interpretation: The servant was in
great fear, although the angel was with him, because he did not feel, or
did not believe so firmly, that the heavenly spirit was present with
him, as surely as it was with him. So also we do: although we know that
we have the holy angels to guard us, we often doubt, and therefore fear
and tremble; for the curse that is upon us and unbelief are a cause of
such doubt and hinder faith in us.

184 Therefore, I believe that the word hochachta, which means you have
punished, should be applied to the devil; that this is the opinion and
understanding that the servant said: Lord God, punish and overcome the
devil for Rebekah, so that she may become Isaac\'s wife and a mother of
the church and the promised seed.

185\. With this, Moses gives to understand that there is a strange fight
and dispute in all divine works, and that God directs everything through
the angels as in a dispute, which they hold with Satan about it: as the
example above from the prophet Daniel Cap. 10, V. 13 proves; because we
have the angels, who are present to us. But they must always dispute and
fight with the devil, who is in charge of preventing the work that the
holy angels desire to promote and continue.

The devil saw that Rebekah was a godly and chaste virgin, honest and
well-bred, and that she was to be Isaac\'s wife and the mother of his
seed; for therefore the servant was there with the command, which he had
received from his master, that he should bring her with him. Therefore,
the good angel who was with the servant had to argue with the devil and
shut him up. And

**[1702 V.VI, W-S4. Interpretation of Genesis 24:12-15. w. 1. 2548-2550.
1703]{.underline}**

The servant desired this alone and asked that the Lord would finally be
victorious and overcome through the good angels in such a conflict,
which he had to hold with the devil.

187 This right and proper meaning of the word is the right natural
understanding of this text, namely, that this virgin has been disputed,
that I speak thus, that is, that she had to be preserved with disputing,
because between the good angels and evil spirits there is a constant
disputation and dispute. The good angels preach and also promote what is
good, but the evil spirits, on the other hand, preach evil; and the holy
ones of the same resolve ungodly reproaches or pleas, and punish the
counsel and evil pretensions of the vile spirits. In this way Moses
wanted to describe the prayer of the servant poetically and with flowery
words.

V.15. **And before he had finished speaking, behold, Rebekah the
daughter of Bethuel, who was the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor
Abraham\'s brother, came out, bearing a pitcher on her shoulder.**

From this text, one can take the explanation of the previous question in
the servant\'s prayer, which comprehends almost all circumstances in
itself and prescribes them to God. This is contrary to Christian
doctrine and the word of God, for God\'s word teaches that one should
command God the time, place, measure and manner in which a thing is to
be done, and only ask for the thing with such confidence that He will
give the thing for which one asks in its time and place. But where the
help is delayed, one should not stop praying for it, and may
nevertheless, with a difference, present the time or such other
circumstances to God, and thus say: Lord God, if it should happen at
this time or in this place, as I would like, then I pray to you, you
will not leave me. As we are now praying for Mr. Philip, who is from us
and is lying down in Weimar, that God will restore him to strength and
health and keep him longer for the good of the Church and the good arts.

189\. therefore it is also plausible that the

Not only in this hour, when he stood by the well of water, but all along
the way he asked for it, and after he was commanded to go to these
places, and Abraham had promised him that the angel would go with him
and be his companion, he had to determine the place and time by
necessity according to the command and promise of his Lord. And even
though Abraham had said that he would not find a wife for his son who
would be suitable for him, he undoubtedly presented the whole matter to
God, so that he would be willing to give Isaac a wife from this land,
city or house, but that he would give him one from another place or in
another way who would be much more suitable for him.

190\] Here we also have a beautiful and glorious example of the grace
and goodness of God, that He hears the prayers of the devout, through
which we are stirred to prayer and our faith is also miraculously
strengthened against unbelief and doubt. For this is not written for the
servant\'s sake, but for your sake and mine. Before he had stopped
speaking, behold, his prayer was already answered, and while he was
still speaking, God said yes to his prayer and answered him.

Therefore, we should be certain without any doubt that God is completely
willing and inclined to hear our prayer and to give us what we ask; as
the 66th Psalm, v. 20, praises Him, saying: \"Praise be to God, who does
not reject my prayer, nor turn away His goodness from me. And this is
the right and proper name of God, that he is called a God who hears
prayer; and this name is as much his own as it is that he is called a
Creator of heaven and earth.

192\. not only does he hear the prayer that is offered to him without
difficulty, but we should take it for granted that at the same moment
that the prayer is uttered, that which is asked should be done or has
already been done; as many comforting words and sayings in the Psalms
testify, as in Psalm 22, v. 6:

**[1704 D. VI, S4-M. Interpretation of Genesis 24, 15. W. 1, 2SS0-26SL.
1705]{.underline}**

\"Our fathers cried unto thee, and were saved.\" This is what it says
quite simply, without any further additions.

Therefore, here is he who cries out, but there is God who hears cries
and prayers. If you cry out, you will be heard; as the 34th Psalm v. 6.
admonishes: \"Those who look at him and run to him will not be put to
shame. And therefore the prophet Isaiah took the beautiful promise in 65
Cap. V. 24. where he says: \"It shall come to pass, before they call,
that I will answer; while they yet speak, that I will hear.\" Thus St.
Bernard said in a glorious and Christian way: \"Dear brothers, do not
despise your prayer, but know that as soon as you begin to pray, your
prayer will soon be reported and written before the divine Majesty.

194 All monks know nothing of this way of praying, for they murmur their
prayer only for the sake of obedience to the church or its rule.
Therefore, we should learn to pray with such confidence and certainty
that you can be sure that your prayer will be answered before it bursts
out of your mouth: but if what you ask is not given to you as soon as
you ask it, the prayer will not be in vain, but it will be given to you
in its time, and you will be given what you desire, or something much
better and dearer.

Therefore, let it be far from us to doubt that it will be answered. When
I pray that God will sanctify His name against the Pope and the Turk, I
know that such a prayer will surely be answered before I say Amen to it;
for before I have begun to pray, God has seen my heart\'s desire and
longing, which He sees and hears long before the words pass through my
mouth.

But many obstacles are thrown in the way; for the devil contends against
this faith, and hinders it in every way that he can and is able: our
flesh and our hearts are not heated in the faith, neither are they
awakened by always handling such examples of the Scriptures as are to be
found in the heart.

and repeat them often, so that they may awaken us to prayer against the
pope and all princes who persecute sound doctrine. But if it does not
follow this year that it will be fulfilled and gain the outcome that we
have desired in prayer, it will follow in another year.

197: But among all the examples of prayer, this is very excellent, and
like a precious stone, as Daniel chapter 9, v. 20, 21, is described,
which I will diligently command all devout Christians: \"While I was yet
thus speaking and praying,\" 2c, \"therefore the man Gabriel flew,\" 2c.
For all these things are described, not that we are to read them only
once, as we do in secular examples, but that we are to be instructed by
them and believe that they concern us, and therefore not to doubt the
answer to prayer; but the place, time and all circumstances we are to
leave to the will and counsel of God and command.

198\. Whoever does this will also feel in reality how prayer has such
wonderful power. For in it, \"the Spirit helps our weakness and
represents us in the best way with inexpressible groaning,\" as St. Paul
says in Romans 8:26 and Ephesians 3:20: \"Who is able to do abundantly
above all that we ask or understand. We ask only for external goods,
such as peace, tranquility, health and whatever we need for this life,
but the power of God surpasses all understanding, hope and all our
requests. Therefore, God gives those who call upon Him many more and
greater gifts than the human heart can comprehend, understand or ask
for. For we worship Him whose power and benevolence are infinite;
indeed, He provides and arranges all circumstances, place, time and
person far better than we could have prescribed with our thoughts.
Therefore, we should get our hearts accustomed and awakened to prayer,
so that many pray with one another at the same time; for the more there
are who pray, the sooner and more abundantly they will also obtain what
they ask. But we must pray in the name of Christ, and not in the name of
Mary, St. Peter, or other saints, as the papists do, of which **we
have** often said in other places.

**[1706 \"-\"s. Interpretation of Genesis 24:15-18. W. i, MZ-\^ss8.
1707]{.underline}**

199\. Moses has thus far described the faith and prayer of this servant;
for faith must precede all our works and business, even in the most
trivial works that we do: we eat or sleep, conduct domestic or civil
business, so it must all come from faith, invocation and thanksgiving,
since the works of the pious must be good and pleasing to God; which
cannot happen unless there is a fervent faith and right invocation,
which must do and govern everything. St. Paul also exhorts us to this:
\"All things whatsoever ye do,\" he says, \"do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father through Him.

200\] After this praise of faith, which makes everything pleasant and
pleasing to God, now follows the description of hospitality, which is
also often praised in other places in the holy Scriptures. And Moses
gives an example of it in this whole and long chapter, which, however,
coarse and unchristian hearts or hypocrites will consider to be a vain,
rude and mean thing, and is also where it is without God, without faith
and right invocation; as they then consider it: but with God it is all
delicious, great and glorious thing.

**Fourth Part.**

**Of Rebekah and her behavior against Eliezer, and how Eliezer bestows
the same,**

**GOD thanks and is kindly received by Laban.**

V. 16-18. **And she was a very fair damsel in appearance, yet a virgin,
and no man had known her. She went down to the well, measured the
pitcher, and went up. Then the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me
drink a little water out of thy pitcher. And she said, Drink, my lord:
and she hasted, and let down the pitcher upon her hand, and gave him
drink.**

201\. the holy scripture also commends Rebekah for being beautiful in
appearance; for a beautiful form is a good creature.

It is not to be despised, and the flesh is allowed to have a little drop
of external pleasure, since nature is either so corrupt or so created
that we love more those who are beautiful in appearance, and especially
if they are also honest, chaste and of a good nature, and give good hope
that they can become good housemothers. Such are great high gifts of
God.

This also belongs to our teaching, because Moses tells us so diligently
how Rebekah was beautiful in appearance, and of a good nature, and
adorned with beautiful and glorious virtues, and was born of pious and
honest parents: but riches are not thought of at all, for riches are
nothing to be reckoned against these gifts.

In our time, it is common to desire and seek only great money and goods.
The holy scriptures, however, portray Isaac\'s bride as beautiful in
appearance, a chaste and chaste virgin and of good manners, intelligent,
prudent and obedient to her parents. Such a virgin does not need to have
great treasures, but God gives through her a great rich treasure: but
she who is naughty and of coarse manners, of a coarse mind, unwise and
foolish, and also suspicious of discipline, brings with her, however
rich she may be, all kinds of vices, mischief, harm and plagues. In sum,
whoever desires to have a pious wife, let him call upon God, and He will
hear him and give him one who, though not adorned with all the virtues
that Rebekah was graced with, will nevertheless be suitable, honest and
pious.

204 Here it is also illustrated and described what she had for customs
and how she was brought up, so that Moses tells how she went down to the
well and carried a pitcher to draw water. From this it seems that she
was not a lazy virgin, brought up to idleness and lazy days, but her
mother taught her and made her accustomed to housework, however naughty
and peevish she was, using her as a maid or servant; therefore she sends
her out to fetch water, but she serves her mother in simplicity and
obedience,

**[1708 D.VI, 6Ü-7V. Interpretation of I Most 24, 16-20. W.I, 2558-M0.
1709]{.underline}**

does not care for anything else, but how she diligently carries out what
the mother in the house commands her to do. That is why she had to
become a mother of the prophets, patriarchs and Christ.

Our virgins know nothing else, except that they dress and adorn
themselves exquisitely; but of the adornment of good manners they know
nothing. But here you see that Rebekah is so adorned that she is
suitable for the holy man and useful to him, and well worthy that she
should become such a glorious and famous mother, and that her womb
should bring forth the beautiful and divine fruit from which Christ was
born. However, I do not want to detract from the praise of the others;
they may have been rich and beautiful, but they cannot be compared to
Rebekah.

Now, in addition to the other virtues, she was hospitable. For when she
had come up again from the well, which, it seems, was so deep that one
had to descend a stairway, the servant says to her, \"Let me drink a
little water from your jar. And here see what good breeding has been
among the same peoples. The servant waits for Rebekah; when she comes
again from the well, he meets her, but asks her delicately, modestly and
shamefacedly, and says, \"Let me taste a little water from your jar.\"
So Lucas, in the stories of the Apostles of St. Paul, in the 20th
chapter, says how he broke the bread and took a bite, does not say that
he ate. It seems that this servant was very humble and chaste: as in the
Virgin also it seems that she was very kind and hospitable; for the text
says that she hurriedly let down the pitcher on her hand and gave him to
drink. She does not only tell him to taste, but also to drink as much as
he likes, and gives it to him herself.

This is a great praise of this people because of the special morality,
discipline and kindness that came from the religion of the fathers and
the knowledge of God. They address the servant very reverently and call
him \"Lord\". Which word St. Peter makes very great, since he says 1
Epist. 3, 6. says how Sarah honored Abraham.

not as one of her own kind or as her husband, but as her master. So
Rebekah also honors this guest and stranger and calls him a lord.

This fine discipline came from the fathers, who accustomed their youth
to be hospitable, to wash the feet of guests, and to offer them food and
drink as if they were well acquainted with them. So St. Paul says of
widows 1 Tim. 5, 10: \"If they have brought up children, if they have
been hospitable, if they have washed the saints\' feet, if they have
lent a hand to the afflicted.\"

Among us there are few examples of such virtues. For we do not dwell
here among men, but among sows, who neither understand nor learn
anything of faith or good and honest morals. Therefore we need to be
patient for the sake of the glory of God, who has placed us in this
place. Now Rebekah has learned such kind, courteous and lovely manners
from her parents, so she offers the servant to drink, saying, \"Drink,
my lord.\" Among other peoples, who are a little more friendly, you will
still find such politeness. The Italians say, Mi sere si, my lord, yes;
but the Germans, being a little better bred and a little more polite,
say, Dear friend, dear boy. In this coarse country, however, you will
hear nothing of the sort. Therefore, let us flee such vices and beware
of such coarse wild customs, and let us learn from such examples, draw
and direct our lives and customs to discipline and kindness.

**B. 19. 20. And when she had given him drink, she said: I will draw for
thy camels also, till they be all drunken. And she hasted, and poured
out the pitcher into the trough, and ran to draw water, and drew water
for all his camels.**

She does not let it be enough that she has given the guest drink; she
also gives drink to the camels and other servants. She is so servant and
pious that she does not think it too much to be a servant of the
stranger and his camels: therefore she will also afterwards attain such
great glory.

**[1710 D. VI, 70-72. interpretation of Genesis 24, 19-22. W. 1,
2560-2563. 1711]{.underline}**

that she becomes an old mother. And these have been the customs of the
oldest fathers, who have accustomed their children to such mean works of
kindness and reverence toward everyone, that they would be ready to
serve others, to speak kindly and sweetly to them.

In this place the Holy Spirit praises and extols such virtues, and
expresses all circumstances in particular, and also all gestures, so
that he may indicate that all the works of the pious, which come from a
pure and faithful heart, are very pleasing and pleasing to him. And
again Moses adds that they have hastened. For it has always been praised
that one should be quick and nimble in serving another; and St. Paul
also wants this from Christians, since he says Rom. 12:11: \"Do not be
slow to do what you ought to do.\" For slow service is not service, but
nimble service is double service. Therefore we should be willing, ready
and prepared to show kindness, hospitality and other friendship, because
we see that such virtues are inculcated and held out to us by the Holy
Spirit in so many words and so diligently.

212\. above (Cap. 19, 2. ff.) we have also heard of Lot in the same way,
how he accommodated the angels. But we should not be displeased to read
and hear such things often, for the Holy Spirit is not ashamed of them,
nor is he displeased to speak and act of such things in so many words.
For there are very beautiful teachings of good manners introduced in
this whole narrative, which are also to be drawn to God; for they are
gifts of God, which are not only in the spirit, but also by heart and
with honor toward men; for God is also a God over the body, therefore he
also gives gifts in the flesh, and wants us to use them with joy.

They seem to be worldly and vain, of which a stoic head or even a
Pharisee might well ask whether they are permissible: as they are very
hostile and morose people, who do not allow the body any pleasure or joy
at all; for their religion and spirituality is, as St. Paul describes
it, \"a very vain and vain religion.

Col. 2, 23, that they do not spare the body, but torture and kill it
until it is destroyed. As it is said of St. Bernard that he tortured his
body in such a way that it would force evil desire and fornication, so
that the brothers finally could not deal with him because of the foul
and stinking breath; yet God created body and soul, and wants that both
be allowed and given their refreshment, but that it have its measure and
goal.

V.21. **But the man wondered about them, and kept silent until he knew
whether the Lord had given grace to his maturity or not.**

The servant marvels at the haste and agility of the virgin, who is so
willing and inclined to serve him and his camels so kindly. And it soon
occurred to him in his heart that he had comforted himself, that his
prayer would certainly be answered. Therefore such astonishment and
horror came: Whether this should be the bride, he must have thought, who
comes so soon and unawares; yes, it will certainly be her. And all this
belongs to the previous consolation of the answer to prayer, that God
gives more than we can understand and ask. Thus, I could never have
thought and hoped that in such a short time the Gospel would be spread
as far as it has been so far by the great grace of God: when I began to
teach, I could not have even dreamed of such a thing. Therefore, it is
right to be surprised, and this should also strengthen us and assure us
of the great goodness and grace of God; \"that this servant now no
longer doubts the virgin, but is certain that she will be the bride;
remember, therefore, how he comes to the parents, and tells them how the
virgin is minded and what the cause of his coming is.

V.22. **When the camels had all drunk, he took a gold clasp weighing
half a shekel, and two bracelets on their hands weighing ten shekels of
gold.**

215: What is told here seems to be a very carnal and worldly thing
before reason.

**[1712 L. VI, 72-74. interpretation of Genesis 24, 22. w. I, Aisr-Ase.
1713]{.underline}**

I myself wonder why Moses spoke so much about such small things, when he
spoke so briefly about much higher things. But there is no doubt that
the Holy Spirit wanted this to be written for our instruction. For in
the holy Scriptures nothing is held against us that is small or vain,
but everything that is written is written for our learning, Rom. 15:4.
For God wants to be known in all things, whether they are great or
small.

216\. He has just described how Sodom was burned (Cap. 19:24) and the
temptation of Abraham to sacrifice his son (Cap. 22:2) in short words,
because these are great things that a man does not easily understand
when he is not spiritual: but what is external to the body we understand
more easily; therefore God speaks of such things to us in detail.
Therefore, we should not be distressed to read or consider these things,
which are described in some detail in this chapter. And although the
article of man\'s justification is not taught here, nevertheless the
teaching of fine honest manners is dealt with here; as examples of
kindness, service and goodness to strangers will now follow. And we have
been invited by this chapter to the wedding of Rebekah: therefore let us
hear the bridal song as an example to the youth, that they may learn of
weddings, and at the same time keep husband and wife honest; which
things are all despised among the heathen, as may be seen in the
writings of the poets, both Greek and Latin. For they look only at the
flesh, and thus revile and dishonor God the Creator. We should hold the
text of the holy scriptures under their noses.

217 The Hebrew word nezem occurs often in the holy scriptures, and I
think I have found its right and proper meaning by diligent attention.
In the Latin text it is inauris, which means a precious stone that is
hung on the ears; as the histories of the Moors and Cleopatra report, in
which this ornament was common. But this is still the right

It does not have the same meaning as the word, but actually means, as
Jerome also considers it, a headband that reaches from one ear to the
other. Our virgins use pearls and gold braids instead of the same
jewelry, but that was pure gold.

218 Thus it is written in the Proverbs of Solomon, Cap. 11, 22: \"A
beautiful woman without discipline is like a sow with a golden
hairband.\" This is as much as if you were to say, according to our
proverb, that in a foolish and lewd woman the beautiful is as much as if
a wreath were put on the head of a sow. Thus it is written in the 2nd
book of Moses Cap. 32, 2. ff. that Aaron made a cast calf out of the
earrings, and was not only an ornament of women, but also of men,
virgins and honest matrons; as the women wear their golden braids under
the veils.

219 Hence came also the forehead leaf of the high priest, which was half
a ring; for he had a hat of white silk and at the forehead half a ring
of gold. From there also came the crown of the kings, who used berets,
namely the Orientals white, as still today the Turk leads; the Romans
however from purple a red beautiful beret, around with a golden
decoration. In later times they used crowns of pure gold; as the pope
wears a triple crown, the Turkish emperor, as I hear, a sixfold one: but
with this they have fallen away from the simplicity of the ancients.

The servant of Rebekah gives such a golden jewel, a golden hair band or
braid around the hair and two bracelets. The German word, so we have,
comes with the Hebrew; because we call it Geschmeide, Armgeschmeide, in
Hebrew it is called zemidim. Noble matrons adorned one arm with gold or
precious stones, but this servant adorned both arms. But as I have said
before, this can be seen as a worldly thing and as an abundance, which a
Franciscan monk would undoubtedly condemn. For they are
conscience-stricken that they should touch gold or silver with their
hands, whether or not they are in the world.

**[1714 VI, 74-78. Interpretation of Genesis 24, 22. W. I, 2566-2569.
1715]{.underline}**

They have a great and insatiable devil of avarice sitting in their
hearts, coveting and worshipping the goods of the whole world.

For this reason, all these things are held up to us against such
hypocrites, so that we may learn the right middle road. For God does not
want to condemn such a thing, but wants the wedding to be held honestly,
to stimulate the youth with it, so that they gain desire and love for
honest marriage against all kinds of defilement and unseemly mixing.
Therefore, he praises and wants to describe such moderate and honest
splendor, which seems to be an abundance before the eyes of the monks,
so that God may testify that he is pleased with the adornment, the
banquet and the happiness of the wedding for the sake of the cause for
which the marriage state was primarily ordered, namely, to beget
children, to raise them, to order the house government, the police and
the church.

Let this be held under the noses of the sour hypocrites, who think from
spirituality that one should not wear gold or silver, nor abstain from
special food, clothing or such things. God does not like such holiness
at all; indeed, he has made us lords, that I should rule over all
things, over sheep and oxen, and over all the earth, as the 8th Psalm v.
7, 8 says, and as is also written in the first chapter above, v. 29 ff.
He not only grants us such authority that we may have and possess such
things, but that we may also use them. He wants us to take care of our
bodies, to preserve them and not to kill them; that is why he has given
us food, drink, the sun and the moon; and in this way he also permits
the arrangement, splendor and adornment at the wedding.

Those who are excluded from such a common order and manner of other
people may be so and use their gift of chastity, but for this reason the
others do not sin when they become married and make merry at the wedding
according to common usage; indeed, God praises this and makes so many
words about the married couple for this reason, and the Holy Spirit
beautifully adorns the bride here, as if He had nothing else to do and
teach.

With this, however, we do not want to applaud the godless Epicureans and
antinomians, who, when they hear this. They seek nothing else out of it,
but excessive feasting and stifling, so that they exceed all measure and
aim, as well as all Christian discipline and godliness; as can now be
seen in our people, that they are horribly wanton in clothing, excessive
adornment and living well. Everyone thinks he may do what he pleases,
regardless of his rank or common respectability. The burghers in cities
want to precede the nobility with great splendor and expense. The
nobility wants to do the same as princes and kings. This is called going
too far according to the law.

We condemn the stoic and sour minds and monks who think that these
worldly things, as they call them, are condemned by God, and in the
meantime praise their works highly as heavenly and spiritual works, and
abstain from such pleasures, in the very worst opinion, as if they were
doing God a special service, and thereby wanting to earn forgiveness of
sins for themselves and other people. Those who can do so may well adorn
themselves and put on a golden garment, so that they may punish and
trample underfoot such sour superstitions of the saints; for God has
given us the gifts of the flesh to be used, but with thanksgiving.

226 On the other hand, we also punish and condemn the wantonness and
debauchery of those who adorn and clothe themselves beyond measure and
always want to live in lavishness without any fear of God. For these
people, as Rebekah and her parents, likewise Abraham and Isaac, lived in
great humility and godliness, and need such adornment, firstly, in honor
of their married state; secondly, for the sake of future child rearing,
for the sake of the church and also of the worldly government, and do
this in the fear of God, in faith and with thanksgiving. This is not
done by the hypocrites, who think they are doing God a special service
by abstaining from it. And the gluttons, who always live in a state of
indulgence, also do not keep a proper measure with it, who think that it
is right and good to do so.

**[1716 2. v7, 7\^-78. interpretation of Genesis 24:22, 25-28. W. I.
M9-SS72. 1717]{.underline}**

that one is only free to always feast and abuse God\'s creatures. So
neither of them understands the Scripture correctly. Feasting, fasting,
suffering and being happy all have their time.

227\. with the weeping and mourning one should mourn, Rom. 12, 15. and
God says Isa. 66, 2. that He wants to dwell with the miserable and the
brokenhearted and fear His word. But again, he does not want to forbid,
yes, he praises and is pleased where a heart is sincere and believing in
the Lord. One should indeed lead a spiritual life, but so that the
bodily life may also have its refreshment, especially in the case of
those who have to deal with great work or are severely afflicted, so
that they are plagued with restlessness that they cannot sleep: they may
well drink a little more so that they may get some sleep. For this
reason, says the holy scripture Psalm 104:15, wine was created, that it
should gladden the heart of a man who is sad and distressed. For such a
man shall eat and drink, that body and soul may be joined together
again.

So we must always stay on the right middle road and not deviate either
to the right or to the left, so that we do not become epicureans and
wild people who even lead a wild and sour life, nor be hypocrites and
monks who can always see sour. The wedding should not be deprived of its
proper splendor and honest merriment, but feasting and living day and
night in revelry, excessive dress or shameful gambling should not suffer
at all, for all these things are strictly forbidden and condemned in the
Holy Scriptures.

229\. But God is hostile to sadness, but he loves a cheerful and sincere
heart. For otherwise it is enough for unhappiness and sadness, so that
the devil may tempt and afflict people; therefore one should do the body
honor and wait for it, but not let it become lustful, Rom. 13:14, and
indulge in all kinds of sins and shame. And a pious, God-fearing
husband, who has to do a lot of hard work in the worldly and
ecclesiastical government or in housekeeping, should have rest for his
heart and soul.

But where he is an idler and pursues only eating and drinking, he hardly
sins.

V. 25 **And said unto him, There is also plenty of straw and fodder with
us, and room enough to lodge.**

The Holy Spirit is pleased with this example, that these people are so
hospitable, therefore he praises it so highly and with so many words.
The virgin promises the servant that is not in her power: she has
invited him into her father\'s house, although she is only her mother\'s
maid. From this it appears what a custom and good practice it was in the
families of the holy fathers; as it is said above about Abraham and Lot
that they were always ready, sitting in front of the gates and waiting
for the guests. Therefore, Rebekah does not doubt that her parents will
receive and welcome the servant with great joy and gladness. This is a
great praise of charity, love and hospitality, to which virtues the
saints raised their children, that they should be charitable and
hospitable, especially to the patriarchs, prophets, and those who
carried and spread the word and heavenly teachings around. We should
also make an effort to follow such virtues.

(vv. 26-28) And the **man bowed himself, and worshipped the LORD,
saying, Blessed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, which hath not
left his mercy and his truth in my master: for the LORD hath led me by
the way to my master\'s brother\'s house. And the damsel ran and told
all these things in her mother\'s house.**

The servant has now been granted his request and is happy that the bride
has been shown to him and has found herself; now also think of the grace
and goodness of God, that he should be grateful to Him for this. For
this reason, we are told the right measure of joy and joyfulness,
namely, that it should be such that it does not trouble the conscience
or burden it with sins, but rather that in it one can feel the fear of
God.

**[1718 L VI. 78-\". Interpretation of I Genesis 24:26-28. W.
1:2S72-M75. 1719]{.underline}**

May God keep faith, prayer and thanksgiving.

The servant bows down and thanks God that he has accomplished his
journey blissfully; and over such small and worldly things he
nevertheless praises God. Nothing can be so small or insignificant that
it cannot become a sacrifice or service to God. And in all words and
works one should always look to God, so that people may understand the
gifts given to them by God and be grateful to Him for them. It is indeed
a small thing to see a virgin, to give her golden spangles; but they are
all gifts of God: if they are not great, they are small. For it is the
same God who gives both. Therefore, God is due His service in return,
namely, thanksgiving and gratitude in small things as well as in great
things, so that the pious may never let go from their hearts the fear of
God and the thought that God is the One who created all things and still
sustains them.

233 Thus a man will be perfect and fit for all good works, 2 Tim. 3:17,
because he is so instructed that he believes that God graciously gives
all goods, small and great, and therefore says with this servant:
\"Praise be to God the Lord, the God of heaven and earth. Such people\'s
lives are holy and pleasing to God in all their actions and deeds,
whether they eat or drink, sleep or wake.

In this place Moses shows, as he does in other places, the mystery of
the Trinity in the divine essence, since he says: \"The Lord, the
gods\"; as it is also written in Deut. 6:4: \"Hear, O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Elohim\", that is, \"gods\". In all things GOD is only
One GOD, and so He is to be honored by us where only the Word is
followed. But if any other way is made without the Word to invoke and
serve GOtt, He is not one Elohim (gods). Such testimonies should be
noted, for they show that the holy fathers understood the mystery of the
Trinity, which is preached to us clearly and publicly.

The servant repeats and summarizes in his heart the benefits that God
has shown his master, according to the promise made to him by Abraham,
namely, that the Lord would send his angel, and he feels that this
promise has now been fulfilled. As if he wanted to say: God has shown my
Lord many benefits and faithfully keeps his promise to him: he is true;
so he has led me here by the hand of the angel. I was traveling, but I
did not know the way, I could not guide myself; but God the Lord led me,
as a shepherd goes before his flock and leads them, John 10:4. His angel
went before me, Ex 23:23, according to His promise and truth, and led me
to my Lord\'s brother\'s house.

The virgin heard this thanksgiving and at the same time the name of
Abraham, her blood relative; but the servant did not speak of marriage
or marriage, but only handed over the gift. Now the virgin hurries home
and tells her mother all this, namely that Abraham, her oldest cousin,
sent his servant to the hut. And again it is put in the text that she
hurried or ran, as above (v. 8. 20.) also, to indicate how the virgin
was so nimble and spry.

237 But she goes to her mother\'s house, not that the houses were two or
more than one, but that the dwellings of the men and women were
distinct: the matron dwelt specially with the daughters and maids, as
they did woman\'s work; the men also had their separate place, which was
situated for their man\'s work. As it is the custom of some married
couples today that they have their separate sleeping chambers. Therefore
she hastens and runs to her mother\'s house, with whom she lived in the
same chamber; but Milcah and Laban lived in the same house.

The Jews dispute whether Bethuel died at that time, and they tell all
kinds of lies and leave the Scriptures aside, but the following text
brings them along,

**[1720 e VI, Sv-Ä2. interpretation of Genesis 24:26-33. W. 1. 257S-W77.
1721]{.underline}**

that Laban and Bethuel were brothers, Laban the firstborn and Bethuel
the other.

**V 29-33 And Rebekah had a brother, whose name was Laban: and Laban ran
unto the man without by the well. And when he saw the clasps and
bracelets on his sister\'s hands, and heard the words of Rebekah his
sister, saying, Thus said the man unto me, he came unto the man, and,
behold, he stood by the camels by the well. And he said, Come in, thou
blessed of the LORD; why standest thou without? So he led the man into
the house, and unharnessed the camels, and gave them straw and fodder,
and water to wash his feet, and the men that were with him, and set food
before him.**

Now we have here another example and praise of hospitality, not in a few
words, but as abundantly described as the previous example. Laban knows
nothing of the man except what he hears from his sister, and yet as soon
as he hears that there is a guest or stranger outside, he hastens to
invite him into his house. This they learned from the high patriarchs
Shem, Nahor, Tharah, namely, that one should receive and accommodate
guests with a willing and cheerful heart, especially pious God-fearing
brothers. Thus we have heard above (Cap. 19, v. 2. 3.) from Lot that he
compelled the angels to stay with him. Abraham runs to meet the three
men, and St. Peter 1 Epist. 4, 9 teaches that we should be hospitable
without murmuring, and with an inclined and cheerful heart.

240 Although it is not easy to accept someone in our very wicked and
corrupt times, unless he brings testimony from pious people, and Germany
now has a particularly large number of wicked boys and murderers, who
have already horribly destroyed many towns and villages. For in the
dominions now and then judgment and law and good discipline lie low and
are not respected at all.

We have received many insults and reproaches from the people who have
received them.

However, if some come to us with good honest testimonies, we should
invite them kindly and willingly, wait for them and care for them, and
require them to come to us; for we are instructed from the example of
the patriarchs and the teachings of Christ that we do not receive and
shelter men, but angels, yes, Christ, the Son of God, and the eternal
Father Himself, according to the saying of Christ Matth. 10, 40:
\"Whoever receives you, receives Me. And so your house will become a
true temple of God, yes, a paradise and kingdom of heaven; for where God
dwells, there is also His temple.

By such promises and examples the fathers were moved to gladly receive
and shelter holy and godly guests, and were certain that they would
receive God Himself. And in this way they made their houses a heaven and
dwelling place of God, and taught this also to their children and
accustomed them to hospitality. But in those days the discipline and
customs were better and the regiments more serious and strict than now
in our time, when we have to worry that we might be endangered by those
who are unknown to us and that they might poison our food and pasture.
For we have come to the last time, which unfortunately brings with it
all kinds of evil, sins and vices.

However, if someone who accommodates an evil guest out of a good heart
were to meet with some kind of accident on his part, he should
nevertheless retain the comfort that he has done it in honor of God and
out of a charitable heart to serve the same guest and to do good for
God\'s sake. But the fathers of the house should be careful that they do
not unknowingly bring danger and harm upon themselves.

Laban addresses this guest very kindly and honestly, calls him blessed
by the Lord, and therefore receives him as a holy man or a prophet. And
this is a beautiful example of the saying of Christ Matth. 10, 40:
\"Whoever receives you, receives me\". And add to this, \"I have cleared
the house, and for the camels I have given them a place.

**[1722 2-82-84 . interpretation of Genesis 24, 2933 . w. l, 2L77-25K.
1723]{.underline}**

Room made.\" In Hebrew there is a very emphatic word: \"I have cleared
out of every corner\", there is no corner in my house that shall not be
open to you. And it seems as if the Holy Spirit had a special pleasure
in telling this, so that he used such clear words, and wanted to show
that Laban was heartily willing and happy to accommodate this man and to
be hospitable to him.

Yes, he also serves him with servant and stable boy work, unbridles the
camels, washes his feet, which was a common practice among the people
and is still a praiseworthy habit, which St. Paul also praises, 1 Tim.
5, 10. Our bishops and papists do this on Green Thursday, but they only
play a child\'s game and pretend to be humble; afterwards, however, they
wash their hands in the blood of the saints who confess the true, pure
and sound doctrine.

**Fifth part.**

**How Eliezer woos Rebekah, receives the word of consent, distributes
gifts; how he returns home again and gives him**

**Isaac comes to meet you.**

V. 33. **But he said, I will not eat until I have first advertised my
cause. They answered: Tell me.**

In this entire chapter, we are presented with an example of a faithful
servant and a pious, God-fearing messenger: he was full of faith,
holiness and all kinds of virtues, and lacks none of the things that
should be in a faithful servant. He has now been given an excellent inn,
as well as a host who is willing and kind, with whom everything is very
well prepared for him and well ordered. But all this has not prevented
him from first doing his business and carrying out all the orders.

247 Therefore this Eliezer is an example to all those who are in the
office and profession of a servant; such examples we have none in our
time, but everyone complains.

The Holy Spirit does not commend such servants to the Holy Spirit, but
makes them an abomination in the eyes of God and a servant of the devil,
whom they also serve and obey. Such servants are not praised by the Holy
Spirit, but are an abomination in the eyes of God and the serfs of the
devil, whom they also serve and obey. St. Paul teaches and admonishes
the servants thus: \"You servants, be obedient in all things to your
physical masters, not with service in mind, as pleasing men, but with
simplicity of heart and fear of God.\" But you will hardly find one
among thousands who will do this; however, this must be taught and
inculcated into the people, and the willfulness and disobedience of the
servants must be punished and condemned.

For this reason this servant is praised, because he is godly, pious and
holy, who before all things wants to carry out the command of his lord,
however small it may have been, namely, to woo a wife for his son. For
he respects his master\'s command greatly, and knows that he serves God
in every work that belongs to his office; therefore, I say, he was full
of faith and the Holy Spirit. So Joseph also served his master
faithfully, and he was also gloriously rewarded for such faithfulness,
namely, that he was thereby raised to royal glory; and I have no doubt
that this servant will finally have come to all great honors, good and
happiness.

249\. for he has kept himself very fine according to the teaching of
Paul, since the same Col. 3, 22. says that the servants are to be
obedient to their masters, not with service before their eyes, when the
master sees it, but he is equally faithful and diligent, whether his
master is present or not. And as much as there has been in him, he has
disgraced and put to shame the common sayings, since it has been said:
The master\'s attention is the horse\'s food and prosperity; item: This
is the best dung that falls from the master\'s feet onto the field;
item: Attention is the best. All these sayings punish and lament the
deceit and laziness of the servants. Just as in the comedies of the
poets there are now and then many mean complaints about the wickedness
of the

**[1724 L. 84-86. interpretation of Genesis 24:33, 34. w. I, 2582-2585.
1725]{.underline}**

Servants. For from our own experience we must confess that this is true,
as is said in the Greek proverb: The master himself must be the servant,
where he wants to be right in the house. All such sayings are completely
nullified by Eliezer\'s faithfulness and diligence; for he himself is
Abraham\'s eye and the dung falls from his feet.

250\'. Such examples of piety are praised with words and writings of the
Holy Spirit, which are indeed small and domestic works. For the servant
does nothing else, except that he goes along with camels, carrying gold,
which are all human works, but very good and holy; for they come from
the supreme fear of God and faith in God, and from obedience and
faithfulness to his Lord.

251\. And such examples should be held up to the servants and the
servants, yes, they should be held up against the abominable works of
the monks. For such domestic, servile and worldly works, so that one
deals with the domestic and worldly regiment, are praised and extolled
in the holy scriptures to the highest degree; for they serve for the
breeding of children and the preservation of the domestic and worldly
regiment, yes, they also serve for the preservation of godliness and
right religion.

**V. 34. He said: I am Abraham\'s servant.**

252 This is a fine and godly court of the servant; for he boasts of his
lord, and exalts himself very highly that he is the servant of such a
great man. As if he wanted to say: I am a messenger of a king, prince or
other great potentate. It seems to us to be a small thing that he boasts
that he is Abraham\'s servant, but he considers this very great. For by
this he makes his way and access to the Syrians, yes, he wrests favor
and good will from them. Have you, he says, ever heard Abraham\'s name?
I am his messenger, he has sent me.

253 But in this courting there is still the highest kindness and
humility; for he says nothing of himself except that he is a servant,
and yet he is the chief of Abraham\'s house, to whom the administration
of the household regiment was commanded. And this is rightly called
honoring his master,

as St. Paul exhorts the servants to do, when he says Col. 3, 23: \"All
things whatsoever ye do, do from the heart, as unto the Lord, and not
unto men. This servant read and fulfilled the epistles of Paul before
Paul was born, and judged very rightly that he served Abraham not as a
man, but as a prophet and patriarch of God.

Therefore he does not say in vain: \"I am Abraham\'s servant,\" of which
I boast, although I am not worthy of the honor: but I serve him gladly
and from the heart, for I know that he is a son and man of God. Who
would not gladly serve such a man? For he certainly thinks that God
esteems his Lord so great and holds him so dear that for his sake he
sends his servant an angel as a companion.

Therefore, this is a fine example of good morals, which confirms and
teaches the teaching of St. Paul that servants should serve gladly,
because they are certain, when they serve their masters faithfully,
whether they are present or not, that they are serving the divine
Majesty. And if we were not so blind and senseless, we would thank God
for this knowledge that we are certain that we serve God and not men,
and that God so abundantly showers us with good works and His services.
For of all the work that a servant does in the house, even if he only
sweeps the house, he should be certain that he is doing God a service.

\(256\) But this is our foolishness, that we think, If I would serve God
the Lord in heaven, I would boast; these are first of all bad, low and
mean works. There our flesh betrays itself, which does not believe that
it is true that a servant who is obedient to his master serves God;
likewise also a son, a daughter, a maid or a pupil, where they are
obedient to father and mother and the schoolmaster. For if we believed
it, all our works would be done with glory, joy and gratitude. But since
we do not have the Holy Spirit, neither do we believe that a lord, a
lady, a pastor, a schoolmaster, and the like are God\'s order, so

**[1726 \" VI. ss-88. interpretation of I Genesis 24:34-44. W. I,
WW-2S88. 1727]{.underline}**

all obedience is cold and gone out of us, for otherwise we would gladly
be obedient.

If God told you to go and greet some good friend or prince with a new
and special commandment, you would do so with the greatest joy, without
any delay. But why do you not do the same when your master or parents
command you? For the same is said and commanded to you by God through
your Lord and your parents; as St. Paul testifies when he says Col.
3:24: \"You serve the Lord Christ.\"

But who recognizes or believes this? Help God, how vehemently the
authorities, lords, parents and schoolmasters are complaining today!
People are acting as if they were completely possessed and insane, yes,
they are full of horrible murder. For the children kill their own
parents, not with the sword, but with sadness of heart and sorrow: they
bring their parents down from strength and sap, who grieve and sorrow to
death because they mean their children warmly, but the children do not
want to obey, since obedience of the children should please and refresh
them. So also the household makes their masters grieve and mourn to
death because of their disobedience and wickedness, so that all the
ranks of those who should be submissive and obedient to others grieve
the Holy Spirit, which is the very worst, Eph. 4, 30. as the epistle to
the Hebrews Cap. 13, 17. says: \"Obey your teachers, and follow them;
that they may do it with joy, and not with sighing: for that is not good
for you.\"

Therefore, such examples should be diligently noted, so that we may
learn what a great thing it is to faithfully serve the lords who rule
over us. For however despised and small such service or obedience may be
regarded, nevertheless those who are in domestic or worldly rule over us
have such rule by God\'s order. Now if you do your duty of obedience,
you have a gracious God, a peaceful heart, and a Lord who blesses you:
but if not, God will be angry, and because of your disobedience you can

have no peaceful conscience: you have lost God the Lord from your heart,
along with your good conscience and all blessings.

**V.35-44: And the LORD blessed my lord abundantly, and became great,
and gave him sheep, and oxen, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and
maidservants, and camels, and asses. And Sarah my lord\'s wife bare a
son unto my lord in his old age: and unto him gave he all that he had.
And my lord took an oath of me, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife for
my son of the daughters of the Cananites, in whose land I dwell; but go
to my father\'s house, and to my family; there take a wife for my son.
And I said unto my lord, How if the wife will not follow me? Then said
he unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee,
and give grace unto thy journey, that thou mayest take a wife unto my
son of my friendship, and of my father\'s house. Then thou shalt be far
from my oath, when thou comest to my friendship: if they give thee not,
thou shalt be quit of my oath. So I came to the well this day, and said,
O LORD God of my master Abraham, if thou hast given grace unto my
journey, wherefore I have journeyed, behold, I stand here by the well of
water. And if a virgin come forth to draw, and I say unto her, Give me a
little water to drink out of thy pitcher; and she shall say, Drink thou,
and I will draw for thy camels also: that she may be the woman which the
LORD my lord hath given to his son.**

This is a long repetition of what has been said before, and a proof of
the faithfulness and diligence of this servant, who now praises his
master and thus wants to say: \"Not only do I serve this master of mine,
but also the angels. But he is a great man; for he is very richly
blessed by God and very famous, not only for his wisdom, faith and piety
in the church and world government, even among kings, as has been
reported above (Cap. 20.) in his history: but also in his household
because of the bodily blessings, gold, silver, servants and maids 2c.
Such

**[1728 VI, 88-so. Interpretation of Genesis 24:35-44. W. 1. 2SS8-MSI.
1729]{.underline}**

The servant in particular is so great that he has so much and so great a
good, and everything so abundantly through God\'s blessing. For he sees
all this in faith. The gifts he has for himself he holds in low esteem,
for the greatest thing is that everything he has is God\'s gift, and
everything he has in his administration comes through God\'s blessing
and help. But I am appointed to keep all this and to govern his Hans.
Therefore, you have here not an ordinary guest, but a messenger of God.

261\. Whoever understands this would not want unreasonably to be the
servant of such a master, above all other honor and glory of this life.
But no one considers it, nor ascribes it to God, that he should give as
this servant does; but especially the miser, and those who deal in
unseemly ways, do not recognize God\'s gift.

Therefore the servant adds more and says: \"I will not only relate these
great and excellent gifts of God, but also the great miracles which are
signs that God is with my master Abraham. Sarah, his wife, was barren
and half unable to bear children; she gave birth to my Lord\'s son
Isaac. Which miracle work he will have made then without doubt with more
words large, and somewhat more extensively tells, which is described
here recently.

And this is the praise and glory of the godly and Christian service
which this servant has rendered to his lord. Those who are in such a low
estate should know that they have the same glory and hope in their
profession that the lords or other high estates have. For whatever honor
and majesty there is in the high estates, all this the servants have in
common with them, and the servants are made worthy of the honor, that
they may glorify their masters.

But here one would say: What is the purpose of such a long repetition?
Answer: First of all, it serves to adorn and praise the betrothals,
which should not be done secretly in the corner. It seems to be a
worldly thing, that the servant of his master\'s and his son\'s property
so much

But it is told so that we may know that it is not only not a sin or
condemned by God to praise one who courts a virgin, but that it is also
honest and praiseworthy before God. For this long story does not belong
to Abraham or his servant alone, but it is a praise, so that the
bridegroom is praised, whom one should praise and extol in words to the
virgin, namely, that he is honorable, pious, beautiful and rich, the
child of pious and honorable people: as also in the virgin such praise
is sought, that she is virtuous, well brought up and born of pious
parents. This is all part of promoting marriage and marriage by it, and
all pleases God well. Therefore, in addition to the other command to woo
the bride, the servant also praised Isaac because of his virtue and
wealth, which his father had given him.

This also serves to confirm our opinion, namely, that the clandestine
marriage of convenience, by which a loose boy often steals his son or
daughter away from honest parents, should not be permitted. Therefore,
we fight with all our might against such devilish deceit, since the Holy
Spirit so diligently expresses the consent of parents, bride and groom.

266 And this glory and praise of Isaac is for this reason prepared, and
all the circumstances are read together, that thereby the virgin\'s mind
may be searched, so that it should not be thought that she must take to
marriage one to whom she has neither desire nor love. Therefore the
servant says that he is an honest and pious youth; item, that he has
pious God-fearing parents and in his whole family is the right religion
and pure healthy doctrine.

In his decree, the pope says that error and an unfulfilled condition can
divorce a marriage that has not only already been made and vowed by one
to the other, but has also already been decided and confirmed; and he
lists fifteen obstacles that can hinder a marriage. But these two, he
says, set aside the marriage that has already been established and
confirmed. So Jacob and Leah could be divorced according to his law.

**[1730 L. VI, W-92. interpretation of L. Genesis 24, 35-44. W. I,
AM-ÄNt. 1731]{.underline}**

because Jacob had not chosen Leah, but had been deceived by an error and
deceit of person.

268 Should not fraud here also annul the secret betrothal, since some
knave and swindler steals my daughter from me secretly without my will
and knowledge? In order that such fraud and error may be prevented, the
consent of the parents of both parties should come to the marriage, and
the persons, as bridegroom and bride, should know each other, so that
the marriage may be strong and confirmed, and it is not necessary to
separate the marriage for the sake of an unfulfilled condition or error.
Therefore, secret engagements should be punished and condemned as such a
thing, from which all kinds of mischief, harm and misfortune come in
heaps: which God has shown us a beautiful order to prevent, namely, that
marriage foundations should be established and made according to the
advice and with the consent of the parents of the bridegroom and the
bride. But I have also said above that the parents should not abuse
their right and exercise tyranny over the children.

Since all this repetition belongs to the description of the wedding and
betrothal ceremony, it should be applied to the common doctrine
mentioned above, namely, the dignity of the married state and that this
state is pleasing to God. For the whole world is blinded by original
sin, so that it cannot see the divine works, nor recognize the glory of
God in such works. Now and then in the writings of the Latin and Greek
writers, the married state is scolded and blasphemed, and what is evil
in it is drawn out and made dirty, but what is good in it is obscured.

There are two kinds of evil in the marriage state, which sin and the
devil have attached to this state. One is sin and natural infirmities,
the other is death. These two evils have disfigured and corrupted the
whole of nature to such an extent that reason can see no more in the
female sex than weakness and unwillingness. In addition, there are also
punishments and illnesses.

And there are also many other countless miseries and misfortunes, all of
which annoy men, and make great people more ill-disposed toward this
state, as if these two things were the fault of women alone, when we men
have many more shameful infirmities than greed, avarice, and such gross
vices, so that we cause trouble in the worldly government and also in
the church, and make them sad. Yes, add to this the punishment and all
kinds of diseases.

For this reason, if one were to compare these things with one another
and record them in a register or book, one would find much greater
faults and defects in men than in women. But this is our lamentation and
folly, that we cannot recognize or see anything that is good, but see
only that which the devil has attached to the senses and powers of body
and soul. Hence so much abuse has come, so that the female sex has been
more reviled than the male. Therefore, we should take care that as much
as the devil has obscured this divine order and made it worthless, so
much the more we should praise, extol, adorn and commend God\'s work and
order and the divine glory in it.

For everyone will have to admit that the female gender is a creature of
God. Now the Scripture says (Gen. 1, 31): \"God looked at all that he
had made, and behold, it was very good. The devil suppresses this good
with invective, and is wont to sweep out and reject the evil. On the
other hand, we should read the right use and the good together; for the
same surpasses the infirmities and the evil so much more, how much
greater is God\'s goodness than the devil\'s wickedness. Now if we could
know the goodness of nature as it is created, we would then be blessed,
as we will fully understand this in eternal life.

273\. there are, as I have said before, in this poor female sex certain
infirmities and defects, as, death, that is, all kinds of punishments,
diseases, and troubles, which all belong to death, in the mother as well
as in the children: she is

**[1732 L. vi, W-si. Interpretation of Genesis 24:35-44. W. i, E-E.
1733]{.underline}**

The children are disobedient and wild, the neighbors are wicked and
unpleasant; but now we speak of the infirmities that are within the
marriage state and do not divorce the marriage, as adultery does. But
such infirmities should all be covered up with the good and benefits we
have taught against them. For though the female sex is very weak, and
both in mind and body is afflicted with many infirmities, yet the one
good covers all such infirmities, namely, childbearing and childbearing.
This dialectical argument and proof is very strong, passes through and
overcomes, and there is nothing else that can so powerfully conclude and
so certainly convince as this, be it beauty, good manners, wealth, or
whatever other gifts may be in women.

274 And with this gift Adam also covered all infirmities and damages,
when he gave his wife the name that she should be called Eve, Genesis
3:20, which is said to be life; which overcomes all other things,
whether they be evil or good, and has its beginning from the woman. For
nothing lives unless it is borne and born in the womb, and suckled with
the mother\'s breasts and milk; hence all kingdoms and dominions, all
prophets and fathers, have come: that therefore God has placed on the
woman and bound to her His creation of all men, and also the use and
manner of creation, that is, that she should conceive, bear children,
nurture and rear them, and serve the man and rule the house. Thus this
ineffable good shines forth among all the evil infirmities and damages
that may be found in the female sex. This is a very short praise, which
comprehends everything in itself, and which Adam also comprehended in
one word by calling his wife Eve.

Therefore the woman is a mother of all men, who carries men in her womb,
gives birth to them in this world, nourishes them with her milk, waits
for them with bathing and all other services. For what would kings,
princes, prophets and all the saints be, if Eve had not been? For God
makes

the people not from stones, but from man and woman.

This argument should be held under the noses of the papists, God\'s
enemies, and all who despise the female sex; and at the same time, the
examples of the fathers and the saints who lived in matrimony should be
cited. This is how the married state is adorned, which the whole world
otherwise disdains and reviles, as can be seen in the poets Juvenal and
Martial.

But what is it that they complain so vehemently about harm alone and do
not also consider life in death and punishment, namely, that men are
born, nurtured and preserved for this and eternal life? Such
immeasurable, incomprehensible and quite divine good they should not do
with their eyes, so they would judge better of the female sex.

278 In Gellius there are strange words from the speech of Metellus, who
had admonished the citizens of Rome to take wives. Knowing that everyone
is disgusted by the unpleasantness and toil of sin and death, he sets
forth his exhortation thus, saying: \"Dear citizens, if we could live
without wives, we could be free from all this toil and trouble. But
since nature has made it so that we cannot live comfortably with women,
nor can we live at all without them, it is better to take that over
ourselves, by which we can always be advised and helped in life, than to
strive for shorter pleasure and joy.

In those days wise people were annoyed by these words. For they thought
that he should have kept silent and covered up the unwillingness. And it
is true that you might say that he, in advising them to enter into
matrimony, was in fact advising them against it; but it is just the same
misgiving that Adam had. He does not deny the unpleasantness, toil, and
trouble of this state, but sets the good against it, saying thus: \"If
you take no wives, you shall be saved from much toil and unpleasantness;
but if you have dominion over the whole race, you shall have no more
toil and unpleasantness.

**[1734 VI, 94-W. Interpretation of I Genesis 24, 35-48. W. I, M7-26M.
1735]{.underline}**

If you want to rule and govern, wage war and expand your regiment, there
must be people who are alive. Therefore, the first thing you must think
about is life, for those who are not alive will not rule, nor will they
wage war on and conquer other nations and countries.

For this reason life is the highest good of the female sex, which alone
rejects and refutes the invectives of Juvenal and the Auderns, who have
reviled this state and the female sex. If a city is to be filled with
children and citizens, it is necessary that the people become married.
And all this rhymes finely with the one name our first father gave to
his wife, calling her Eve, that is, a mother of the living, who gives
birth to children who can then administer the temporal government, rule
the church and the house, learn to know God, and be saved in eternal
life.

The patriarchs also felt and experienced the discomfort and hardship of
the married state. Abraham, Lot and the others were strangers, traveled
around and suffered many miseries and great misfortunes, but they
endured them with patience and absorbed them, remembering this great
comfort, that Eve is a mother of the living, who bears children and
brings them forth.

That is why we have to struggle with such trouble, unpleasantness and
burden of the married state, because we always have the present
misfortune most before our eyes and in our mind. For we are not yet in
the blessed life for which we are waiting, but in such a life in which
we must struggle and struggle with many misfortunes; all of which we
must learn to consider with the knowledge of creation and order, which
is good and divine, and the youth must become accustomed to think of the
female sex and of the marriage state what is right and Christian to
think of it.

Yes, you say, yet the whole world and many wise people despise this
state and shun it. Answer: In this way they show their folly, because
they only pay attention to infirmities.

But they do not open their eyes to see the motherhood that nullifies all
evil and trouble. In addition to this, God Himself praises and honors
the marriage state in the fourth commandment, when He says in Exodus
20:12: \"You shall honor your father and your mother. But all that he
has established and honored in his commandments is not to be reproached
and blasphemed.

He who is able to abstain and live chastely may well abstain, but he
should nevertheless speak honestly and much about marriage and
motherhood, for these are God\'s blessing and order, by which God
sustains the entire human race in this life. And this is what I wanted
to repeat about the praise of matrimony. For Rebekah gives cause for the
Holy Spirit to speak so much about the marriage state and betrothal,
even to us as a lesson and example.

**Before I had spoken these words in my heart, behold, Rebekah came out
with a pitcher on her shoulder, and went down to the well and drew
water. Then said I unto her, Give me to drink. And she hasted and took
the pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will water thy
camels also. So I drank, and she watered the camels also. And I asked
her, saying, What daughter art thou? She answered: I am the daughter of
Bethuel, the son of Nahor, whom Milcah bare unto him. Then I put a clasp
on her forehead, and bracelets on her hands, and bowed myself, and
worshipped the LORD, and praised the LORD God of my master Abraham,
which led me in the right way, to take my master\'s brother\'s daughter
unto his son.**

Here the servant declares to himself that he did not speak the words of
his prayer in clear terms, but thought of them silently; and again he
himself testifies that God heard him, since he called upon him before he
had finished his prayer. The whole speech, however, which repeats all
the circumstances, how he came to the virgin and desired to drink from
her and other things, has already been discussed.

**[1736 L. VI, 96-98. interpretation of Genesis 24, 49-52. w. 1,
2609-2603. 1737]{.underline}**

**V. 49. Now if you are the ones who want to prove friendship and
faithfulness to my Lord, tell me; if not, tell me, so that I turn to the
right or to the left.**

Now this is the request, in which the servant says after the report has
been made: Be you such people as you are worthy, that you show
friendship and faithfulness to my Lord; for this is how the words read
in Hebrew. The Latin word, misericordia, in this place means benevolence
or friendship, and veritas means, where one does that which others have
provided for one and hoped for. Here again the Holy Spirit uses
beautiful, excellent words. The servant calls this friendship, or
benevolence and faithfulness, when these people give their daughter in
marriage to his master\'s son.

287\. And all this is so that the evil and shameful thoughts that the
world has about marriage, and which Satan and the enemies of the
marriage state have given to the flesh, may be torn out of the hearts of
men: And the holy scripture praises this here as a very great gift and
blessing, to give this virgin to Isaac as a wife, so that thereby the
burden and displeasure of the marriage state might be taken out of
sight, and Eve, the maternal body, birth and motherhood might be held up
to the hearts of men. And up to this point the servant has wooed the
bride; now the answer follows.

**Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said: This is from the LORD;
therefore we cannot speak evil against thee, neither can we speak good
against thee: there is Rebekah before thee; take her, and go, that she
may be thy master\'s son\'s wife, as the LORD hath spoken. When
Abraham\'s servant heard these words, he bowed down to the ground before
the LORD.**

288\. so easily, blissfully and nimbly this whole thing goes on and goes
well, because God and the angels are there, who help it and continue it;
and if God\'s word takes place with Laban and Bethuel, therefore they
answer thus: That you are Abraham\'s servant and that Abraham himself is
a servant of God, we can conclude from your words.

and accept them. For they understand and receive the words no
differently than if God Himself had spoken them.

And it would be well for us if we could also be sure that when we hear a
brother or servant speak God\'s word, we then hear God Himself: if we
believe this, we would be truly blessed, and this would help us greatly
to increase and strengthen our faith, and awaken hope and all virtues in
us. And we should indeed do this, accepting the verbal word of man as a
voice of God from heaven. The word of this servant is also an oral word,
as in the ministry of preaching; and yet these holy men testify that
such work is from God. Therefore, this is a very beautiful and excellent
answer, which also teaches and assures us, namely, that as often as we
hear a pastor or church servant, or a servant of God, we then hear
God\'s word.

290 Let this be diligently remembered for the sake of the common
temptation. For in the whole world there is no disciple who is more
subject, and has more masters and teachers to suffer over him, than the
wisdom of God; as Christ says Matth. 11, 19: \"Wisdom must be justified
by her children. Everything that God speaks or does finds innumerable
judges in the world who master and reprove it; so that one should rather
say with these men here: \"This comes from the Lord\"; therefore he
himself should change and improve what needs to be changed, what he
thinks should be done or taken away from it, but such things are not due
to me. But in this the papists, Turks, Jews, sacramental worms, and all
the red spirits sin. God grant that we may be those who keep the right
and pure understanding of His word.

291 And so this marriage was established and confirmed by the Lord, who
brought Rebekah to Isaac, just as he brought Eve to Adam. And the Holy
Spirit has described these things so that we may know that where a man
and a woman are joined in matrimony, they will be joined together.

**[1738 vi\" W-ioi. Interpretation of Genesis 24:50-61. W. i, ssor-A\".
1739]{.underline}**

The servant adds a thanksgiving for the fact that his master\'s bride is
given by God to his master\'s son. For this reason, the servant adds a
thanksgiving for the fact that his master\'s son is given a bride by
God. Thus, everything is full of godliness, so that he will go around.
For one should give thanks to God in small things as well as in great
things.

**V. 53, 54: And he brought forth jewels of silver and gold, and
raiment, and gave them to Rebekah; and to her brother and to her mother
he gave spices. Then he ate and drank with the men who were with him,
and stayed there overnight.**

The fact that the bride and her friends were honored with gifts and that
a merry feast was prepared is described here, so that we do not think
that such things are unseemly or forbidden by God, but rather they are
honest and pleasing to God, but in such a way that they are done in
moderation. The golden jewels were not golden cups, but jewelry and
women\'s clothing, such as hair bands, skirts, bustles, veils, and
hoods. But the gifts he gives to her brother and mother are the noblest
and most delicious fruits, such as pomegranates, spices, myrrh, balsam
and the like; as they are enumerated in Joseph\'s blessing, Deut. 33,
13. ff: \"There are noble fruits from heaven, from the dew, and from the
deep that lies beneath; there are noble fruits from the sun, and noble
fruits of the moons, and noble fruits from the earth, and what is
within\" 2c. He has no money, but brings such jewelry as serves the
bride; in addition, to the mother and friends he brings gifts that
Abraham had deemed suitable for them. Such things are necessary for good
manners and this common life, and Christians should not despise such
things; for they are not forbidden even in the holy Scriptures, but are
commended therein.

**V. 54-61: And he arose in the morning, and said, Let me go unto my
lord. But her brother and mother said: Let the damsel stay with us a day
or ten, and then you shall go. Then he said to them: Do not stop me, for
the Lord has mercy on me.**

**given to me for my journey. Let me go to my master. Then said they,
Let us call the damsel, and ask what she saith. And they called unto
Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she
answered, Yea, I will go with him. So they sent Rebekah her sister away
with her nurse and Abraham\'s servant and his men. And they blessed
Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister; increase thou in many
thousands of thousands, and let thy seed possess the gates of his
enemies. So Rebekah arose with her maidens, and sat upon the camels, and
went after the man. And the servant took Rebekah, and went.**

This is a strange example of the servant, that he hastens to bring the
bride to his master, by which we are admonished that we should never
delay or be tardy in God\'s works, but should put out of the way all
hindrance and everything else that can hinder us from the work we have
begun. And the pagans have also admonished to this in their writings,
namely, that where one has discussed a matter, one should hasten with
it, so that it may soon be set in motion; as Sallust says: Cum
consulueris mature, opus facto est (After well-trodden counsel proceed
quickly to action); item, as Cato says: Fronte capillata post haec
occasio calva, that is: Where one has opportunity at first and neglects
it, it is afterwards too long delayed and neglected. And Bonaventure has
a fine splendid saying about it: Qui deserit occasionem, deseretur ab
occasione: Who leaves the opportunity, the same will be left by it
again. Much less, then, is indolence permissible in God\'s ways, because
it brings serious harm. As the bride complains in the Song of Songs,
Cap. 5, 2-6, that while she had promised to go out, the bridegroom would
only wait a little while, but he had turned and passed by, because she
had not immediately, after hearing his voice, opened the door without
deliberation and delay.

He who does not look at the very hour or moment when the Holy Spirit
calls him will never take hold of him.

**[1740 vi, ivi-ivs. Interpretation of 1 Most 24, 54-67. w. i, M06-2M.
1741]{.underline}**

For once he departs, he will not return. Just as daily experience
teaches that those who are slow in dealing with things never get rich,
so such people will never be taught or become great in the church. For
this saying, whether a pagan poet may have composed it, applies
everywhere: Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit: He who is not
skillful today will be much less skillful tomorrow.

And I have learned this from my own experience, as often as I wanted to
pray, read, or receive the reverend sacrament: the longer I delayed with
it, the more I felt and found that I was unfit for it and least of all
capable. For delay is a secret plague, but does cruel harm. The Holy
Spirit does not give His gifts to those who are slow and lazy, but to
those who are willing, ready and quick; as Ps. 119:60 says: \"I make
haste, and do not delay to keep Your commandments.\" So the Holy Spirit
also praised Rebekah for hastening, as the text says: \"And hastening
she let down the pitcher upon her hand\"; item: \"The damsel ran, and
told all these things in her mother\'s hand.\"

Therefore let the example of this servant move us to learn to beware of
this affliction and to be enemies of it. It often takes more than a
month or a whole year to do a thing right and well. The men of war also
understand this, and the devil pays close attention to all kinds of
opportunities; that is why he often wins.

The last part is about the consent of the virgin. For before the servant
departs, they call to her and ask her, \"Will you go with this man?\"
This is why marriage should take place, so that we may have God present,
who created this state for innumerable benefits; and He Himself joins
the spouses together, and is not only the one who joins them together
and pronounces marriage, but also blesses them. But he wills that the
consent of both parents and virgin be present, that they may come
together properly and rightly divinely.

**And Isaac came from the well of the living and seeing (for he dwelt in
the land toward the south), and went out to pray in the field about
even, and lifted up his eyes, and saw camels coming. And Rebekah lifted
up her eyes, and saw Isaac: and she fell down from off the camel, and
said unto the servant, Who is this man that cometh to meet us in the
field? And the servant said, This is my lord. Then she took her cloak,
and covered herself. And the servant told Isaac all the things which he
had set forth. And Isaac brought her into the tabernacle of Sarah his
mother, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife, and loved her. So
Isaac was comforted concerning his mother.**

298 Mesopotamia, whence the servant brought the bride, is toward the
north; but Isaac dwelt in the land toward the south. And it is as if
Abraham had given Isaac a special house and servants of his own, over
which he was to preside and rule, in the place where the well of the
living and the seeing was. Abraham stayed in Hebron; therefore Isaac
went out either to his father in Hebron or to some other place.

The Latin text says that he went \"to remember,\" which the Hebrews
interpret as praying; but I like the other better. For the Hebrew word,
siach, has two meanings: first, it means shrub, as above in chapter 2;
second, the Scriptures use it to mean speech, when one speaks to himself
or to another; as in the title of the 102nd Psalm, \"As he pours out his
speech or lamentation,\" 2c. It is called a special and secret
conversationwo two walk together and talk to each other. Isaac did not
think about his bride at that time, but went out for a walk with a good
friend, with whom he talked on the way either about the divine promises,
or about marriage, or about housekeeping. He kept himself as a
householder should, talking about God and God\'s blessings, and also
about how to govern the household, and about farming.

**[1742 8- Vl. 1S3.!M. Interpretation of Genesis 24, 62-67. cap. 25,
1-4. W. 1, 2MS-2M2. 1743]{.underline}**

Lastly, Moses says that Isaac received the bride brought by the servant
with joy and loved her. Because his mother died, he mourned and grieved
for three whole years, but when the bride was brought, his mourning was
relieved.

And this opinion pleases God well, so that I may love our spouse, even
though it is difficult for the corrupt nature to do so. For she looks
only at the misfortune of sins and punishments, and at the toil and
discomfort and trouble that occur in this state, both from within and
from without. But this is rather to be considered, that the female sex
has the gifts, that they become mothers; to this one should look. Many,
however, do not seek this, that they may beget children, but seek only
carnal pleasure.

Therefore, when they are tired and weary of it, they begin to be hostile
to this union by which man and woman come together, to despise and abhor
it. But there is a difference between these two things, loving the woman
and being lusted after by her. Loving the woman does not come from the
corrupted nature, but from the nature that has been corrupted and made
right again.

302 After that it is praised here also to Rebekka that she was chaste
and shamefaced, therefore that she covered herself with a veil when she
saw Isaac. These are customs that come from the fact that she was raised
by her parents in a finely chaste and modest way, and shied away from
looking at men, even her own bridegroom.

**The twenty-fifth chapter.**

First Part.

**First piece.**

**How Abraham remarries and bears children.**

**V. 1-4 Abraham took a wife again, whose name was Keturah. She bore him
Simran and Jaksan, Medan and Midian, Jezbak and Shuah. And Jaksan begat
Seba and Dedan. And the children of Dedan were: Assurim, Letusim and
Leumim. The children of Mdian were: Epha, Epher, Hanoch, Abida and
Eldaa. These are all the children of Keturah.**

Here we will bury the holy patriarch Abraham, an example that is well
worth keeping in the church of God. But in this chapter there is a piece
and an example that can be seen as very evil, and everyone is very angry
about it. For since Abraham is an old and gray man and

Now that he is close to the grave, he can have nothing else in mind or
in his thoughts but certain death, so he takes a young wife and has many
children with her.

In the previous chapter he decided the time of his life, made his will
and appointed Isaac as heir to all his goods. But now that his son is
married and has married, he himself takes a wife. What one is to answer
to this is uncertain: whether it is to be understood in such a way that
the scripture puts \'one thing before another, the last before the first
or vice versa the first before the last, about this I am completely
uncertain. Now that we follow the order in the text, we find a strange
question. St. Paul Rom. 4, 19 describes Abraham himself that his body
had already died and he was not able to bear children because he was
almost a hundred years old. Therefore, it can be considered that this
part of the chapter should have been placed before and at the beginning.

**[1744 L. VI, 1V4-1\". Interpretation of I Moses 25, 1-4. W. 1,
26I2-26IS. 1745]{.underline}**

and that Abraham took Keturah to wife before he begat Isaac. So perhaps
one could answer this important question. But I cannot say anything
certain about it.

003 For though we should suppose that he had taken Keturah, when he had
cast out Hagar, yet at that time he was not far from an hundred years
old. For Hagar gave birth to Ishmael when Abraham was six and eighty
years old, and Sarah to Isaac when he was a hundred years old.
Therefore, this answer is not yet sufficient, but the question still
remains in doubt.

But let us follow the common way according to the description in the
text. St. Paul says that Abraham\'s body died after he begot Isaac. And
when Isaac took Rebekah to wife, Abraham was 140 years old; there may
have been another year or two between his and his son\'s marriage: what
shall we answer then, nevertheless? Some want to say that Keturah is
Hagar, whom Abraham, after the death of Sarah, his wife, again accepted
as a favor and then also took as his wife, since she had now humbled
herself and repented. This is a fine thought and full of kindness, which
I would like to believe and agree with, that he would have taken Hagar
and her son into his house again and provided for them: but it is
nothing certain.

Jerome is very angry at this, and would gladly blaspheme this great man
if he could: but he stops his anger and says that Abraham is excused by
his gray age, that he cannot be blamed for the fact that he, as an old
man, was still so horny after the death of his old Sarah that he took
another wife.

6 But this opinion is the meanest, which Lyra also allows himself,
namely, that it is Hagar, although he sees that in the text it is
written, which is contrary to that, that the children of the concubines
were given gifts, among which Hagar must have been the one and Ketura
the other. My opinion is that Keturah was not Hagar,

and most of all I am moved by this cause, because the chronology does
not agree with that opinion. For Hagar gave birth to Ishmael when
Abraham was six and eighty years old, to whom she was given in marriage
when she was thirty years old, and she raised Sarah from her fifteenth
year, when she first took her into the house, until the thirtieth, when
she became Ishmael\'s mother; but Isaac is born in the fourteenth year
after Ishmael. If one adds now these years together, then they make four
and forty or yes at least forty years. Add to this the forty years of
Isaac, who takes Rebekah in the fortieth year of his age. So it is to be
counted from it that Hagar was at four and eighty years, in which age
her body naturally must have been outdated and barren. And it follows
from all this that it is impossible that she should have borne six
children at such an age.

007 Therefore I hold that Hagar cannot be Keturah, unless it be
understood that the scripture puts one thing before another, and that
Abraham took Keturah, when Hagar was given unto him above. After it also
the text calls the concubines, and speaks of it, as that her more than
one had been. Therefore Keturah is another wife than Hagar, and Abraham
had two concubines, one with and beside his wife Sarah, who is called a
concubine, the other because his wife had died. So there is still the
very serious annoyance that Abraham, when he was a hundred and forty
years old and now had a dead body, took a young wife and fathered six
sons with her, since he had previously had no children by Sarah, except
Isaac.

\(8\) Now, first, there is the question of this being an impossible
thing for the sake of the dead body of Abraham. Secondly, of the
vexation. To the first I answer thus: That at times old men can and do
beget children. Therefore it was also possible by nature that Abraham
was still able to beget children in the hundred and fortieth year of his
age. For he was of a good age, that is to say

**[1746 D- vi. ivs-ias. Interpretation\' of Genesis 25:1 -4. W. i, 2
\"is-26i8. 1747]{.underline}**

He has not been burdensome or annoying with anything, and has not been
like our people, among whom the majority, when they have barely reached
their fiftieth year, have already completely dried up and become weak;
but he has undoubtedly had a strong, able body, as even today some are
so strong and able in their old age that they can carry great burdens
and heavy work in secular or domestic regiment.

\(9\) After this, it is also believed that God strengthened Abraham over
nature, and he became much stronger both in mind and body, since his son
Isaac, who was to be the heir of the promise, was born to him.

\(10\) Now, as for the other question of the trouble, namely, that he
takes a young wife, Lyra puts forward this reason, that the young
prostitutes tend to get pregnant more easily from the old than otherwise
women who are a little older. But in this way, the trouble will be
better repelled if we distinguish the time and customs of the fathers
from the time and customs that exist now. Many are offended by the fact
that Moses writes so much in this first book about the childbearing of
the fathers: but people who are offended by this do not consider that in
many times there are also many customs. At that time faith reigned in
the fathers, and also the faith of this article, that GOD said, \"Grow
and multiply.\" In our time, and especially after the abominable works
of papist monasticism or celibacy have taken over, the married state has
been deprived of its dignity and due honor, and the true knowledge of
the Word and divine order, which was pure and righteous in the Fathers,
has died out.

011 Therefore it shall not be thought that Abraham was driven by lust to
take Keturah to wife. For before, when Sarah was still alive, he waited
long enough for the divine blessing, and was never suspected of
lewdness. Therefore, he did this out of love, children and

Especially since he heard in the promise that God said to him Gen. 17:4:
\"You shall become a father of many nations,\" not only of Isaac, but
\"of many nations,\" so that God would multiply him not only
spiritually, but also physically.

12 Then Shem, Eber, and Salah lived, and Abraham lived with Noah eight
and fifty years, who heard Shem before and after the flood. But Shem
outlived Abraham by one and thirty years. Therefore there was a glorious
time then, in which many excellent men lived, all of whom would not have
allowed Abraham to do anything shameful or foolhardy; indeed, what is
more, it can be seen as if they had advised him to do so. Such
counselors and rulers do not have other wicked men, who are more like
sows than Abraham. Therefore they had a completely different intention
and purpose in marriage than Abraham. But one should not rumble into it,
as such sows and papists do, who seek only fornication, shame and the
pleasure of the flesh, in which they are not only immersed, but almost
devoured.

\(13\) Therefore, in this place, consider the time of the most holy
patriarchs, which undoubtedly belonged to Abraham; as it follows, how
Rebekah asked counsel of Shem the patriarch. Therefore this is an honest
marriage, and therefore belongs the saying of Malachi in the 2nd Cap. V.
15: \"What did the one do? He sought the seed promised by God.\" He was
not a lecherous old man, but everything he did, he did out of love and
desire, so he had for children, and on divine command, and finally also
on the advice of the most holy patriarchs, who will have said: Dear one,
take the other wife, so that your church may become great and spread
over the whole world.

Jerome had the same thoughts that I had when I was still a monk; but one
must judge differently of these great men, who were the most holy and
full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and also of those who were the most
holy and full of the Holy Spirit and faith.

**[1748 D. vi. iW-iiv. Interpretation of Genesis 25:1-\^4. w. i.
\"is-\"so. 1749]{.underline}**

The greatest patriarchs, Shem and the others, were governed. And I say
this to excuse Abraham, the most holy man, so that no one may interpret
this deed as if he had done it out of pride, lust or fornication; but it
should be considered that obedience and the love of children led him to
take Keturah as his wife. After this, a special counsel of God is seen
in this place; for the Holy Spirit, who foresees the future errors long
beforehand, takes care to prevent and refute them, so that the heretics
may be put to shame who in the future have wanted to condemn the second
marriage. One of them is Jerome, who is so vehemently against the second
marriage that he considers it an adultery.

15 Therefore in this place God has given us an example and a perfect
testimony of His will, that He does not condemn the second marriage that
takes place when one\'s first wife has died, but rather that He has
commanded through His patriarch Shem that this old man should still take
another wife when Sarah had died.

16\. and it can be seen that God wanted to teach and testify that child
rearing is very pleasant and pleasing to Him, so that we think that He
wants to protect and defend His word when He says: \"Grow up\". 2c. He
is not hostile to children, as we are; for many of us ask nothing of
children: but God is so firm about His word, that at times He gives
children even to those who do not desire them, even to those who are
hostile to children; without at times giving to those who fiercely
desire children any to tempt them with. And that is even more, it can be
seen that he wants to have promoted the childbearing so much that he
also lets children be born to adulterers and prostitutes against their
will.

17 How great then is the wickedness of human nature! how many are the
harlots who prevent them from conceiving, killing and driving away the
fruit, when bearing children is a work of God! and even the spouses
themselves, who have been married with honor and dwell with each other,
see also

on many benefits and causes of marriage, but rarely on children.

\(18\) The first group of married couples are those who seek and desire
children, and therefore enter this state so that they may become parents
and have children; and although original sin also comes to this, it is
the most prominent cause. Such people are indeed angels compared to
others, for they desire to use the marriage state so that they may
produce children therein: but of these there are almost few, and I
simply count them among the angels and not among men. For this is a
great gift of God, if I desire children only from the wife, especially
if I understand the toil and trouble of the marriage state, and also the
stings and arrows of the devil. Such a husband was Abraham, whom I count
among the angelic husbands who seek the seed promised by God, as Malachi
Cap. 2, 15.

\(19\) The other company of husbands and wives are those who take wives
to avoid fornication; they do not despise children, nor are they hostile
to them; but the chief cause they look to is that they may live chastely
and modestly. These are also good, but are not equal to the first: where
God gives them children, they delight in them, and love wife and
children, and do diligently what is due them in their profession.

20\] The third is those who desire to take wives only for pleasure, who
do not ask for children, but want to live a gentle and tender life, want
to have a beautiful virgin to amuse themselves with.

\(21\) The fourth is those who take old women for great good and honor
and let them be their masters. To them give God the cup of suffering, as
Bernard says; for they seek only good and honor, not that they may beget
children; and yet they are not to be rejected for the honor and glory of
the married state.

22 But let it be diligently said unto the people, that it is not
necessary to follow such examples of the fathers: for there is a great
difference between the pleasure that Abraham had, and that which is now
about an old hag.

**[1750 L. VI, Iic-inr. interpretation of Genesis 25, I-1. W. i, 2W\"-2
\"W. 1751]{.underline}**

who frees a young journeyman. For though Abraham also is subject to the
sin of fornication, as well as other men, yet he is a lord, and not a
servant of it; yea, there is in him a purity and a right love of
children. For the love of children and of the seed surpasses all; as
among the Gentiles, as well as among the Christians, there were many
who, for various reasons, had a great desire for children.

\(23\) First, then, I hold that Ketnrah is not Hagar; then I hold that
Abraham is not to be punished, but that the chastity of the married
state is to be spoken of gloriously, and the love which Abraham had for
children is to be praised. For he had love and care for them, so that
the household, the secular and church government might be increased.
Where other weaknesses may have been involved, this is not the most
important thing.

024 And I think that Keturah was the daughter of some pious and faithful
servant, as Eliezer was. She was not an Egyptian, nor a Cananite. For so
the word Keturah is, as if thou wouldest say, One bound to one; for she
was kinswoman to Abraham by reason of his servants, or by reason of the
family of Lot.

025 Now why is Keturah called Abraham\'s wife in this place, when it
follows that Abraham gave gifts to the concubines? If she was a
concubine, how is she called his wife? Above Gen. 16, 3. it is written
in the same way: \"Sarah gave Hagar to her husband Abram as a wife. I
leave the grammatical disputes to the grammarians. The Latins call
pellex a woman who is given to a man who already has a wife, and they
have had many such concubines. But concubina, a concubine, is the name
given to one who has no wife or lives outside the married state, to whom
he adheres; such a one is neither a concubine nor a proper wife; and
such a concubine or concubine Augustine had.

26\. but time also changes the laws

and customs of the people; therefore one must pay attention to how in
this place and before the law of Moses these names are to be
distinguished. For there is a difference between woman and wife. Abraham
never had two wives. Lamech had two wives for the first time, but
Abraham is said to have had only one, and yet there were two of them.

27 The Latin word uxor actually means and once such a woman, who is free
and begets heirs to all goods. Such a woman is Sarah. In another way,
however, it is called improperly one who is in bondage, who bears
children, but not heirs. Moses changed everything afterwards. Jacob had
four wives and the two maids also brought him heirs. But here \"wife\"
actually means the one who is free and bears children. Then it is also
called she who is in bondage, who bears children, but not heirs. Keturah
is Abraham\'s wife and yet is a concubine, as follows in the text; and
in the first book of Chronicles in 1 Cap. V. 32. the children of Ketnra,
the concubine of Abraham, are listed one after the other. In Hebrew it
is called pilegesch, from which the Latin word pellex comes. Therefore
it can be seen that this woman Keturah was a maidservant and bondwoman,
because she is counted among the concubines. She is not considered the
wife of the house or an heiress, but is assumed only to be a mother and
to bear children. Such women are not the right free wives or women in
the Hanseatic League.

28 The names of the children of Keturah are mostly lost. Midian has been
praised in the holy scriptures, the others have died out and are not
remembered at all; as the scriptures indicate, that the children of the
maidservant are servants, who do not remain in the house. In the prophet
Isaiah, 60 Cap. V. 6, Midian and Ephesus are remembered, who dwelt in
stony Arabia, situated after Egypt, and held a large portion of the rich
and blessed Arabia. Midian is situated after the Red Sea; Ephah is a
part of the rich and blessed Arabia and has had the name from this
father.

**[1752 8. VI, N2-114. Interpretation of Genesis 25, 1-10. W. 1,
2623-2627. 1753]{.underline}**

29 This is the new and different marriage of the most holy man Abraham,
of which this should be noted primarily, that God thereby praises the
work of childbearing, and thus counters the anger and error of the
heretics who condemn the second marriage. For all this is written in
praise and honor of the marriage state, in which God looks upon
childbearing, and after that also upon chastity, which two things adorn
the marriage state. For where there is childbearing, there is also the
highest blessing; but where no children follow, marital chastity is
nevertheless to be praised. And this is a useful and necessary doctrine
against the heretics, who approve only of the first marriage, or that
which is always fruitful; item, those who want that like should come
together with like in this state, as that an old man should take an old
wife. But we should pay attention to the two things I have said, and
whether the man is satisfied with his wife, be she what she will, and
live with her honestly and chastely.

**Second piece.**

**How Abraham makes his will, gets everything right and dies blessed.**

**V. 5, 6: And Abraham gave all his goods to Isaac. But to the children
whom he had of the concubines he gave gifts, and let them go by his son
Isaac, because he was yet alive, toward the going forth into the east
country.**

30 Now the holy father gives good night to the world and makes his will
with a good peaceful heart. For he respects death as he respects life.
We are taught in this example that we should take care that we depart
from this life in good peace, and that we do not leave behind us a cause
of quarreling and strife for the sake of our goods and possessions; but
while the father is still alive, the children or heirs should be assured
of how much of the good should belong to each, either according to the
content of the will or by virtue of law.

31 So Abraham lets the children, if he has them

The name of the woman, who had been given by the concubines, went away
with her gift and sent her to the Orient. Some of them came to India,
but the names that are given here are names of the rocky and blissful
Arabia. To the same place, which at that time was still desolate and
unbuilt, he sends them, after he has given each one his gift. But Isaac
alone is the heir. And this should also be noted for the sake of the
heretics, who either confuse or condemn these works of the common life.
While Abraham was still alive, he decreed this out of good counsel, so
that after his death no one would have cause to quarrel or argue.

But Abraham also showed us many and great benefits, because we have all
the holy scriptures from him. Adam may have preached the doctrine of God
and the right worship orally to the patriarch Noah in the beginning, and
Noah in turn to Abraham, and delivered it as it were with his hand, so
that it came from one to the other: But I think that Abraham will have
compiled a booklet or a small history from Adam to his time; but
finally, after he had left behind him the seed or his son Isaac, from
whom Christ was to be born, and after he had also ordered and ordained
the church and the house government, he departs from this life and bids
the world good night.

V. 7-10: **Now these are the days of Abraham, which he lived an hundred
and five and seventy years. And he departed, and died in a quiet old
age, being full of life, and was gathered unto his people. And his sons
Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the twofold cave of the field of Ephron
the son of Zoar the Hittite, which is toward Mamre, in the field which
Abraham bought of the children of Heth. There Abraham is buried with
Sarah his wife.**

\(33\) Abraham was a stranger in the land of Canaan a hundred years,
after he went out of Ur of Chaldea in the fifth and seventieth year of
his age. But this

**[1754 L vi. iit-117. interpretation of Genesis 25:7-10. w. i,
2627-2629. 1755]{.underline}**

Above Cap. 15, 15. the Lord said to Abraham: \"And you shall return to
your fathers in peace, and be buried in a good old age\", of which it is
written here in this place that it was fulfilled, \"He declined\", says
Moses, and died. This belongs to our consolation. For it is not written
for the sake of oxen or other unreasonable animals. \"He decreased,\"
says Moses, as another man, \"and died.\" Behold, such a great man, full
of all virtues, a father of promise, of faith, of the children of GOD
and of all nations, dies away as we do. He dies, but in a good, gentle,
quiet age, being old and tired of life and full.

\(34\) Therefore this is the first text in all Scripture that testifies
that the death of the saints is gentle and quiet, and that it is also
esteemed in the sight of the Lord, and that they do not taste of death,
but gently fall asleep. The prophet Isaiah also read this text and
interpreted it diligently. For that is where the comforting sayings came
from, as, in 57 Cap. V. 1. ff: \"The righteous perish; and there is none
that taketh it to heart; and holy men are raised up from calamity, and
come to peace, and rest in their chambers.\" And in 26 Cap. V. 20: \"Go,
my people, into thy chamber, and shut the door upon thee; hide thyself a
little while, till wrath pass.\"

\(35\) The righteous and the pious are despised, lowly and rejected in
the eyes of the world, and their death is seen to be very sad; but they
sleep a most sweet and very gentle sleep. When they lie in bed and die,
they die in no other way, than as if a sleep were quietly coming upon
them in all their limbs and senses. For they have been humbled by many a
trial, and have become peaceful and quiet, so that they say: \"Dear Lord
God, I will gladly die, if it will please you. They are not afraid of
death like the wicked, who tremble and are terrified when they die. This
serves to awaken us, so that we learn to be obedient to God when He
calls us out of this pit of misery, and then we can say

nen: I would not desire to live one hour longer, dear Lord JEsu Christe,
come thou when thou wilt; as Abraham dies, being full of life and well
satisfied.

But where did Abraham go? Moses says, \"He was gathered to his people.\"
Are there any nations left after this life? For so the words are, as if
he had gone from one people to another, from one city to another. Now
this is an excellent and remarkable testimony of the resurrection and
future life, which should be held up for comfort to all who believe in
God. For although even more excellent and clearer testimonies are
presented to us in the New Testament, it is nevertheless worth the
effort to see what the holy fathers had in the Old Testament and what
they believed. We have grace and gift, plus a manifest and manifold
knowledge of death and life, since we are certain that our Savior Jesus
Christ is seated at the right hand of God the Father, waiting for us
when we depart from this life. When we depart from this life, we go to
the bishop of our souls, who takes us into his hands: he is our Abraham,
in whose bosom we are, who lives, yes, reigns forever.

\(37\) We must speak differently of the fathers, and our consolation is
much more glorious and rich, whether they also had the same testimony
and consolation of eternal life and resurrection of the dead; as Moses
testifies here that Abraham was gathered to his people, and as he also
heard in the promise above Cap. 15:15 that he would go to his fathers.
And these are the first two texts in all of Scripture that speak of the
dead after this life. In the fifth chapter above, it is said of all:
\"And died\", except for the only Enoch, whom God took away: but of
Abraham it is said that he would go to his fathers and was gathered to
his people.

\(36\) Such words of the Holy Spirit are not in vain, neither are they
spoken to unreasonable animals, which do not go to their fathers or to
their people, but are spoken to men.

**[1756 k. VI. 117. 118. interpretation of Genesis 25:7-10. W. I,
2628-2632. 1757]{.underline}**

and testify that after this life there is another and better life, even
that before the future of Christ there was a people who dwelt in the
land of the living and to whom the pious from this life were gathered.
According to this, the Fathers understood the article of the
resurrection and eternal life, and the words are actually and
emphatically set forth in both texts: You will be gathered to the other
saints who died before you. Therefore the fathers live and are nations,
which is not said of the wicked, but is spoken only of the righteous and
holy.

39 In the first book of Kings Cap. 2, 2. David speaks in a different way
when he says: \"I go the way of all the earth. But afterwards Moses kept
the same form and manner of speaking, when he spoke of Ishmael, Isaac
and Jacob: \"He departed, and was gathered unto his people.\" Therefore
the fathers concluded from these testimonies of the Scriptures that
there was another life, and that the saints did not die and perish like
unreasonable animals, but were gathered to the people in the land of the
living. And this is also the reason why they are so honestly buried by
their children, which is not done to unreasonable animals, namely, for
the sake of a certain hope, through which they waited for another life.

\(40\) Therefore all these things belong to and serve for our comfort,
so that we may not be afraid or fear death as much as the Audern who
have no hope. For to those who believe in Christ, death is not bitter or
hard, as it is to the wicked, but a change, whereby this miserable and
wretched life is changed into a quiet and blessed life; which article we
ought to consider the most certain, that we do not depart from a meek
life into a miserable one, but from sorrow and affliction into rest and
peace. For if the fathers long before Christ\'s coming had this comfort
from so few testimonies of Scripture, is it not much more reasonable
that we should also hold fast and keep it above the same, which we now
have much more abundantly?

In the gospel Christ called it the treasury of Abraham, to which Lazarus
and all the other saints were gathered; the explanation and description
of which, or what, how, and where it is, I leave to each one his own
opinion according to his own understanding, and do not want to conclude
anything certain from it, since even Augustine says that he does not
know this. But in this we do not do right, if we keep in the New
Testament the Abraham\'s lock. For just as before the death of Abraham
there was no Abraham\'s storehouse, so after the future of Christ there
will be none. For this reason I do not make a bosom of Abraham at this
time, nor do I think that there is any such place in which Abraham keeps
us as in a bosom: but the bosom of Abraham, in which he keeps and has
received all the saints who have died until the death of Christ, is the
promise made to him: \"Through your seed shall all nations be blessed,\"
Genesis 22:18.

\(42\) Thus the bosom of Adam was also the promise given in Paradise
Genesis 3:15: \"The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the
serpent\"; and those who have departed from this life in faith based on
such a promise have also become blessed. For God\'s word is wider and
greater than heaven and earth. Therefore Abraham\'s bosom is the promise
of Christ to come, which promise is father Abraham\'s; but it has now
been changed into the word which we have of Christ revealed in the
flesh; and whoever would believe otherwise would be a Jew and condemned.

\(43\) For the bosom of Abraham was destroyed after the resurrection of
Christ, and a better bosom came in its place, that is, the bosom of
Christ. For when we depart from this life, we are received into the
bosom of Christ. And just as the fathers died believing in the Christ
who was to come, and so were gathered into the bosom of Abraham, that
is, in the hope of the Savior who is to come, so we must die believing
in the Lord Christ our Savior, who has already come, and after this life
we will be gathered into the bosom of Christ, who became man for us,
suffered, was crucified, and returned to the cross.

**[1758 vi, iiö-iso. Interpretation of Genesis 25:7-10. W. i, 2632-2634.
1759]{.underline}**

um rose from the dead, and so we no longer worry about the bosom of
Abraham.

\(44\) Then the question may be asked in this text, \"What is the fate
of souls after this life? The body rots and is devoured by worms, but
how the soul will fare before the Day of Judgment is asked. And I am
touching on this dispute for this reason, so that I may cut off and
avert other people\'s foolish questions and disputations. But there is a
simple answer to this question, which Christ prescribes to us in Matth.
22, 32, when he says: \"God is not a God of the dead, but of the living.
From this we are certain that the souls live and sleep in peace, and
suffer no torment or pain.

45 And many sayings in the holy scriptures prove the same, namely, that
we do not die after death, but simply live, as the sayings from the
prophet Isaiah quite clearly testify, as, in the 57th Cap. V. I. 2:
\"Holy people are gathered up, and no one pays attention to them. For
the righteous are taken away from calamity, and come to peace, and rest
in their chambers.\" These are very apt words, which clearly indicate
how the dead are after this life. They go, he says, or come, not to
death, purgatory or hell, but to peace and rest in their chambers. And
it is a great comfort that he says that the righteous will be taken away
before the calamity; so we will also die in peace before the calamity
and misery will come upon Germany.

46 Therefore the testimonies and sayings of the prophets agree with this
text, since Moses says that Abraham was gathered to his people; and we
must not doubt these testimonies, for the holy Scriptures do not lie or
lack. The saints lie down and rest gently and in peace; as in the
Revelation of John Cap. 14, 13. the voice from heaven also testifies:
\"Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: yea, the Spirit saith,
that they may rest from their labor.\"

47\. this rest is at the time of the lock

Abraham, and from the beginning, before Abraham, the bosom of Adam. For
the saints who believed the promise of Christ all died, being taken away
from the miseries and labors which they had in this life, and went into
their chamber to sleep and rest there in peace. This is all true and
correct, and agrees with Scripture and with the saying of Christ Matt.
22:32, that God is not God of the dead, but of the living.

Now another question comes to mind, namely: \"Since it is certain that
souls are alive and at peace, what kind of life or peace is that? But
this question is somewhat higher and more difficult than that we can
conclude something real or certain from it. For God did not want us to
understand such things in this life. Therefore, we should be satisfied
with this knowledge and understanding, so that we know that the souls do
not depart from the body in such a way that they should come into
danger, torment or pain of hell, but that a sleeping chamber has been
prepared for them, in which they sleep and rest in peace.

But there is a difference between the sleep and rest of this life and
the future. For a man who has grown weary in this life from daily labor
goes, when night comes, to his bedchamber as in peace, that he may sleep
there, and has the night\'s rest, and knows of no misfortune or harm,
whether by fire or by death. But the soul does not sleep in this way,
but wakes and has its visions, namely, conversations of the angels and
God. Therefore, the sleep in the life to come is deeper than in this
life, and yet the soul lives before God. I am satisfied with this
likeness, which I have of the sleep of a living person. For in such a
man there is peace and rest, and he thinks that he has hardly slept an
hour or two, and yet he sees that the soul sleeps in such a way that it
nevertheless also wakes.

50 Thus, after death, the soul goes to its chamber and peace, and by
sleeping, it does not feel its sleep, and yet God preserves the waking
soul. So

**[1760 VI, 120-12\". Interpretation of Genesis 25, 7-10. W. 1,
2631-263\". 1761]{.underline}**

God will raise up Elijah, Genesis 2c. and rule them so that they live.
But how does this happen? We do not know, we are content with the
likeness of bodily sleep, and that God says it is sleep, rest and peace.
He who sleeps naturally knows nothing of what happens in his neighbor\'s
house; and yet he lives, even though he feels nothing in sleep, contrary
to the nature of life. The same will happen in that life, but in a
different and better way. Just as the mother carries the child into the
sleeping chamber and lays it in the cradle, not that it should die, but
that it should sleep and rest gently: so before the coming of Christ,
and much more now that he has come, all the souls of the faithful have
gone and are still going into the bosom of Christ.

\(51\) They have also discussed the places where the souls have their
containers. Augustine, in the Enchiridion ad Laurentium, says that such
containers are hidden, and these are his words there: \"The time between
the death of man and the last resurrection keeps the souls in some
hidden containers, according as every soul is worth either rest or
sorrow for that which it obtained in the flesh while it was alive. There
one feels the weakness of the human mind. But one should look at the
word and the omnipotence of God; for as God grasps the heavens with a
span and grasps the earth with a threefold, as Isaiah says in the 40th
chapter, v. 12. V. 12, then truly His word is much greater and reaches
further. His word is infinitely great and wide. That is why the
container of souls is God\'s word or the divine promises, in which we
fall asleep. It seems bad and small when it is spoken through the mouth
of man, but when we take hold of it with faith and fall asleep in the
word, the soul comes into an infinite space.

\(52\) I have said this to put an end to the useless and futile thoughts
of these questions and to ward them off. For it is abundantly sufficient
for us to know that we shall depart from this life into the bosom of
Christ with safety and tranquility, that is, if we have faith in the
Word of God.

and keep the promise,\" then we escape the tribulation and misery of
this life, and come to eternal peace and rest, as the saying of Christ
is, John 8:51: \"Verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man keep my
word, he shall never see death.\" Therefore it follows that he will be
in eternal life.

\(53\) Here we must also punish the folly of the papists, who have made
five kinds of places for the souls after death. The first, hell, for the
damned; the second, for the unbaptized children; the third, purgatory;
the fourth, the bosom of the fathers. In the New Testament they have
added paradise for the sake of the saying Luc. 23, 43: \"Today you are
cast with me into paradise.\" The fifth place they call the open heaven.

The first place, they say, is for the damned, which is the torment and
torture of eternal fire. But whether the souls of the wicked are
tormented immediately after death, I cannot say for sure, although the
example of the rich man Luc. 16, v. 23, belongs here. But in the other
epistle of Peter in 2 Cap. V. 4, there is a saying that is completely
contrary to this, namely, that he speaks of the evil angels, that they
will be kept for judgment. And the words of Paul 2 Cor. 5:10 are also
contrary to this, when he says: \"We must all be made manifest before
the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive after he has
acted in the life of the body, whether good or evil.\" Therefore, it
seems that they also sleep and rest. But I cannot say anything about it.

The other place is for the children who have not been baptized. Of them
they say that although they shall be damned, they suffer no torment from
fire or worms, but they alone must be \"deprived\" of seeing God\'s
face. The light, they say, they do not have, so that they might see God
and the angels, and yet they are not tormented.

The third circle is purgatory, where neither the damned nor the children
go, but those who believe but have not done enough for their sin. The
same souls are redeemed with papal indulgences and are therefore the
taint of the innumerable

**[1762 L. VI, I23-1A. Interpretation of Genesis 25, . 7-10. W. I,
W36-S63S. 1763]{.underline}**

Indulgences and the whole Papist religion have come.

57 They call the fourth place limbus patrum, the bosom of the fathers:
to it, they say, Christ descended and broke it, and delivered the
fathers not from hell but from this circle, who had been tormented by
great longing and waiting for the Lord Christ, for they had suffered no
other torment or torture.

\(58\) With such lies the papists have filled the church and the whole
world; but we overthrow such things and say that the unbaptized children
do not have such a circle. But how it is with them, or what is to be
done with them, we command to divine goodness. They do not have faith
and baptism, but whether God receives them in a special way and gives
them faith is not written in God\'s Word, nor may we conclude anything
from it. To be deprived of the face of God is hell itself. They admit
that they have a will and a mind, especially of the divine vision and
life, but they are lies.

\(59\) And they especially lie about purgatory, because it is based on
ungodliness and unbelief. For they deny the doctrine that faith saves,
and set satisfaction for sin as the cause of salvation. He who is
therefore in purgatory is in hell itself, for he thinks thus: I am a
poor sinner and must do enough for my sin; therefore I make no will. I
will give a certain sum of money for the building of churches, so that
with it I may solve the prayers and sacrifices of the monks and priests
for the dead. Such people die in faith in their good works and know
nothing of Christ; indeed, they are enemies of him. But we die believing
in Christ, who died for our sins and has done enough for us: he is my
salvation, my paradise, my comfort and my hope.

60 They did not actually speak of the limbo or circle of the fathers;
they should rather have called it the bosom of Abraham, which would have
been better. For those who died before the future of Christ have been
preserved and saved in the promise of the Word of God.

tes in which they lived in this life; and having died, they also entered
into life and were quite alive.

This is the meaning of the words of Christ, which he spoke to the thief
on the cross, Luc. 23, 43: \"Today you will be with me in paradise\",
that is, in my bosom: where I am, there you will also be: there heaven
and paradise are one thing, except that there is still rest and peace
among the saints and the kingdom is not yet. Christ is in heaven or
paradise, ruling, judging and guiding his church, sending his angels to
serve the church. To distribute gifts among men, to exalt the wretched
and lowly 2c. For he is always at work, not resting, as the saints do
who sleep, of whom it is said in Isa. 63:16, \"Abraham knows not of us,
neither does Israel know us.\" Therefore there is a great difference
between the saints who sleep and Christ who rules and reigns: they
sleep, or do not know what is happening, and yet they rest.

\(62\) But when the wicked die, whether they depart before the coming of
Christ, or whether they depart this day, when Christ is come, they
simply go into everlasting damnation. But whether damnation begins
immediately after your death, we cannot know, because it is written in
Romans 14:10 that we shall all be presented before the judgment seat of
Christ; and they that have done good shall come forth unto the
resurrection of life, but they that have done evil shall come forth unto
the resurrection of judgment.

\(63\) Therefore we should know to remember that after the future of
Christ the bosom of Abraham has ceased, and the promises of the future
seed have all been fulfilled; and now we have other promises much
greater than these, which the Son of God gave us, when he suffered and
rose again; and they that believe not the same shall be eternally
damned. But how it may be about those who are condemned in the New
Testament, of this I cannot say anything certain; I therefore leave it
undecided. But of the pious it is certain that they live and go into
peace, of which we have many more and clearer examples and testimonies.

**[1764 L. VI, I2S. I\". Interpretation of Genesis 25, 7-10. W. 1, 2638.
SSM. 1765]{.underline}**

In the New Testament, from the sermons of Christ and the apostles,
because the fathers had only a few sayings, in which the resurrection
and eternal life were obviously indicated. The saying in the Book of
Wisdom in the 3rd Cap. V. 1: \"The souls of the righteous are in God\'s
hand, and no torment touches them\" 2c. is taken from the prophet
Isaiah.

This is both the faith of the fathers and also our common and one faith,
that after this life there is another and a better life; and if
Christians were to doubt it in such great light, it would be the
greatest disgrace. Therefore, let us accept this teaching and cling to
it with a firm heart, which is revealed to us by the great grace of God
in many clear testimonies.

For a very evil and harmful time is now coming, and many epicureans are
now becoming, which is a certain sign of a great confusion and disorder
in all things, and that God\'s judgments are approaching. For what need
have I of God and the knowledge of Christ, if I do not believe in a
future life and resurrection of the dead? Or how can I believe that
there is a God who wants to punish the wicked and do good to the
righteous? For where one denies the life to come, one simply takes away
God, and thus we would become like horses and mouths that ask nothing,
neither for death nor for life. And one can certainly notice this in the
Epicureans, with whom everything they hear is ridiculous and a loose
fable, either where God promises something or where he threatens to
punish. We Christians, however, should flee from such gruesome certainty
and hold fast to the testimonies of eternal life and the resurrection,
as they have always been revealed and taught in Scripture from the
beginning of the world.

66\. Moses describes the death of Abraham only with two words, which
both mean to die: \"He took off,\" he says, \"and died.\" Above in the
7th Cap. V. 21, it says of the Flood: \"All flesh perished that creepeth
upon the earth\"; there he has used the first word, gava,

Afterwards, when he speaks of Jacob, Gen. 49, 33, there is only the
other word: \"He passed away and was gathered to his people. Here he
puts both words together. And I think that the difference is: With the
first word he wants to indicate the behavior of a dying man when he is
in the last stages. As if he wanted to say: He has been very ill, has
lain hard in bed, has wrestled with death, so that there was no longer
any hope of life, and yet he had not died. Therefore I give it thus:
Abraham died and died, that is, he lay in the last stages and wrestled
with death, after which he soon died and went into eternal life.

67 And Moses was so diligent to tell us this for our comfort, that we
should know that Abraham departed from this life, as other men also
depart, and that he had no advantage at all over other men, but suffered
such a death as is common to all men. Since this is said of the greatest
and holiest men, we should also be patient and make do with the state in
which all men are, and with the same patience, faith and hope for a
better life, prepare ourselves for departure from this present miserable
life and for the immortality to come.

68 We have buried the holy patriarch Abraham, and it is very useful and
good that his memory should always remain in the church, for the sake of
the promise of the future seed, which was repeated and declared to him;
and also for Abraham\'s faith, and for the sake of the various and very
beautiful examples of many virtues that were in him. And that we may
keep all these things fresh in our minds, and be thankful for them, and
so follow him, may Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who sits at the right
hand of the Father, and gives gifts to men, help us to gather and
maintain a church; to whom be praise and glory with the Father and the
Holy Spirit forever and ever, amen.

x
