---
title: House Postil 1.part
description: House Postils part 1, Luther sermons for one year, compiled by Veit Dietrich
---

This page is under construction and what you see can be called the first step or the beginning of a work or process to get the best responsive websites for mobile phones and devices, which until now (2024) has not been created yet with Lutheran writings and books.

## Part 1 - House Postil

Dr. Martin Luther's

**Complete Writings,**

**published by**

**Dr. Joh. Georg Walch.**

**Thirteenth volume.**

**First section.**

**The house postilion according to Veit Dietrich.**

**New revised stereotype edition.**

St. Louis, Mo.

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

1883.

**
Martin Luther's**

**House Postil,**

**according to Veit Dietrich**

**Published anew on behalf of the Ministry of the German Evangelical
Lutheran Synod**

**of Missouri, Ohio and Other States.**

St. Louis, Mo.

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

1883.

### Preface.

Plochmann provides the best information about the origin of the
Hauspostille in the preface to the first edition of the Erlangen
edition. The historical notes are more clearly arranged than in the
preface of Walch's edition. Therefore, we print Plochmann's words
here:

This collection of sermons is called "Hauspostille" because it
contains mostly sermons that Luther preached at home on Sundays and
feast days. "These sermons," he writes in the preface to Dietrich's
edition, "I have sometimes done in my house, before my servants, so
that I, as a householder, would also do my part with my servants, to
teach them to lead a Christian life. Veit Dietrich, of whom we will
speak later, confirms this in his letter by saying: Luther did these
sermons at home on Sundays, when he could not preach in church due to
weakness, to his children and his servants.

Unfortunately, we have the sermons contained in the Hauspostille not
from Luther's pen, but from his mouth, through the faithful but often
not fortunate diligence of two of his listeners, Veit Dietrich and Georg
Rörer. Hence it comes that gradually two editions differed so much from
each other.

of the house postilion, which one later tried to unite into one under
the name double house postilion. Veit Dietrich spent a long time in
Wittenberg with Luther, enjoyed his special confidence, was his table
companion, his traveling companion, and carefully copied his lectures
and sermons. Later he came as a Lutheran preacher to the church of St.
Sebald in Nuremberg, and died there in 1549. Georg Rörer was the first
whom Luther ordained as a Lutheran preacher and deacon in Wittenberg in
1525. He was a faithful assistant and co-worker of Luther, took special
care of correct editions of Luther's writings, and died in Halle in
1557. Among other things, both of them copied the sermons that Luther
had preached in his house in the years 1530 to 1534, and from their
manuscripts the two so variously different editions of Luther's house
postilion were created.

Dietrich's was first published in Nuremberg in 1544 with a letter of
dedication to the mayor and council of the city of Nuremberg, in which
the editor says that he had received these sermons with a hurried hand
and kept them with him, but now wanted to pass them on to other
Christians as a noble treasure, and that the

VI Foreword . VII

The book is a good example of a work that can be used by unlearned
pastors in the countryside as well as by fathers of the household.
Luther wrote a preface to this edition, which is also printed in ours,
in which he not only acknowledges the sermons transcribed by Dietrich as
his own, but also praises the efforts and enterprise of the editor. In
the same year, this edition of Dietrich's sermons was printed in
Leipzig, a year later again in Nuremberg and Wittenberg under Luther's
eyes, and later in Wittenberg, Frankfurt, Augsburg, Lüneburg and other
places, and was translated into Latin as early as 1545 by Michael
Roting, professor of Greek and Latin at the Aegidian Gymnasium in
Nuremberg, a close friend of Veit Dietrich.

In the letter to the Nuremberg council Veit Dietrich had said among
other things: he had added many sermons, which were omitted by him
(Luther), especially from the festivals, which are not kept in the Saxon
order, so that this work would be perfect for the whole year and
therefore all the more useful and useful for everyone. After Luther's
death, this statement may have given rise to doubts about the
authenticity of Dietrich's house postilion, since it was believed from
his own confession that he had added his own sermons to those of Luther;
Therefore, in 1559 a new house postilla of Luther appeared, which a
certain Andreas Poach, also a student of Luther, who had been Diaconus
at Halle, Archidiaconus at Jena, pastor at Nordhausen and professor at
Erfurt, and died as pastor at Utenbach in 1585, edited from the
manuscript of the late Georg Rörer at Jena. To this the famous Nicolaus
von Amsdorf wrote a preface, in which he declared that this new

It was also later reprinted in many places, namely in Jena in 1501 and
in Torgau in 1601, and in Leipzig in 1655, 1655 and 1702. It was later
reprinted in many places, namely in Jena in 1562 and 1579, in Torgau in
1601, and in Leipzig in 1655, 1679 and 1702, and was translated into
Latin by Johann Wanckel, professor of history at Wittenberg, and into
Dutch in 1567 (printed in Oberursel).

In the preliminary report to this edition of Luther's Hauspostille,
organized in Jena by Andreas Poach, Poach reproaches Dietrich for
including his own sermons in Luther's Hauspostille, for often combining
two or three sermons that Luther did not preach in one year, and for
inserting others, especially on feast days, when there were no sermons
by Luther. In contrast, all of this has been avoided in his edition; he
has omitted the foreign sermons that were not Luther's work, since
Luther preached three years in a row and sometimes several times on a
gospel in his house, he has included all of the sermons that he
preached, and he has left them in the state in which they were preached
by Luther; "whoever therefore likes to have Dr. Luther's sermons
alone, is hereby served.

Against these reproaches, which were made to Dietrich's edition of
Luther's house postilla, however, a certain Christoph Walther,
typesetter in the Luftschen Buchdruckerei in Wittenberg, soon stood up
with a writing, titled: Antwort auf die Flacian Lügen und falschen
Bericht wider die Hauspostille Doctoris Martini Lutheri, Wittenberg 1559
in 4., in which he not only defended and justified Dietrich's edition,
but also cast the most serious doubt on the authenticity of the new Jena
house postilla.

VIII Preface . IX

To draw sought. "The house postilion Lutheri", he states in this
writing, "the dear, learned man M. Vitus Dietrich has taken up from the
mouth of the venerable father in Christ D. Martin Lutheri with a hurried
hand, and when he became pastor at Nuremberg, he had it printed with the
approval and permission of our dear father Lutheri. Luther also had them
printed several times in Wittenberg, and ordered the magistrate Georgen
Rörer to correct them. Therefore, I, as an old servant in the printing
house, who also, along with M. Georg Rörer, often helped to read and
correct such house postilions in Wittenberg, must respond to such
sacrilegious interrogations of the Flacianists". And now he continues
to claim: Veit Dietrich has not added anything of his own work, the
passage in the Zueignungsschrift an den Nürnberger Rath, where he says
that he has added many sermons, so omitted by Luther, is to be
understood in such a way that he has inserted instead of such omitted
house sermons some church sermons held by Luther, which he copied from
him just like the house sermons. The Poach edition of the house
postilion is therefore unauthentic, because Veit Dietrich copied the
blessed Luther, since he preached at home, [alone]{.underline}, but not
also Georg Rörer, because he was at that time still Diaconus at
Wittenberg, and had not at all the gift, especially with hurrying hand
to copy and to compose. - Be that as it may, it cannot be denied that
both such different editions of Luther's Hauspostille have their
peculiar merits and shortcomings. While Dietrich's preface has the seal
of authentication ahead of Rörer's, it nevertheless suffers from the
reproach that several of the sermons contained in it have grown to an
unusual length, and necessarily consist of two or more sermons.

The sermons in Rörer's collection, on the other hand, are shorter. In
contrast, the sermons in Rörer's collection are shorter, and there are
probably two or even three sermons included for each Sunday, which could
very well have been given by Luther and collected by Georg Rörer. For
according to their content as well as their language, they have
absolutely nothing that would contradict this assumption. However, the
reason for the different readings, both in individual words as well as
in whole sentences and sections, which occur in those sermons that both
editions give together, cannot be determined with any certainty.

Only in the two most recently published editions of Luther's complete
works, the Leipzig and the Walch editions, has the double Hauspostille
been included. In the former it makes up the 15th and 16th, in the
latter the 13th part. Dr. Börner, the editor of the Leipzig edition, had
each of the two house postils printed separately, Dietrich's in the
soldered and Rörer's in the 16th part. Walch, on the other hand,
combined both postilles and brought them into one work in such a way
that all the sermons that are not in Dietrich's edition were inserted
from Rörer's in the appropriate place, and the difference between the
sermons found in the two editions was carefully noted. This procedure
has something very annoying for those who want to read Luther's sermons
for edification, in that they encounter eternal repetitions, often have
to read the same thought two or three times on the same page, usually
only with highly insignificant deviations, and cannot remain coherent at
all. -

So much for Plochmann. We share the last expressed concern about the
procedure

X Preface . XI

Walch's. Therefore, we give the two house postils, the one by Dietrich
and the one by Rörer, separately, according to the process and according
to the text of the Erlangen edition.

In Dietrich's Postille, the latter was based on the 1547 edition. This
was titled: "Hauspostille D. Martin Luthers über die Sonntags- und der
fürnehmsten Feste Evangelia, durch das ganze Jahr. With diligence newly
corrected and augmented with 13 sermons on the Passion or History of the
Passion of Christ. Nuremberg 1547." The deviating readings of the three
previous editions are marked with the same letters as the Erlangen
edition, namely with *a* the Nuremberg edition of 1544, with d the
Wittenberg edition of 1544, and with *c the* Nuremberg edition of 1545.
Since these are corrections and improvements by Dietrich, not the words
of Luther, and since most of the deviations are of very minor
importance, we have noted only a few variants.

Dietrich's Postilla appears herewith as a special volume, which is to
form the first half of the 13th volume of Luther's works, and

The book is also available as a jubilee edition, commemorating the 400th
anniversary of the Reformer's birth.

May Luther's Hauspostille also find its due place in this new guise in
the homes of Lutherans, and especially in the home services, as well as
in the public reading services! We recall the words of Luther, which he
wrote four years before his end, to which Walch also refers in his
preface to the Hauspostille (Walch, Hall. Ausg. XXI, 214 *):

"When we are thus clothed with the sacred ornament, whether we be men
or women, we come forth publicly, and do right priestly offices, and
confess Christ, and preach and teach our children, servants, and
journeymen. For this is what St. Augustine says to his citizens: What we
are in the church, you are also in your homes, that is, we are bishops
or preachers in the church, and you are required to be bishops or
preachers in your homes. Therefore look to it, you must care for your
household with God's word, as well as we for the whole church."

St. Louis, Pentecost 1883.

> **The Editors.**

### Table of Contents.

Columne

Preface by Dr. Martin Luther to this House Postilla XVI

M. Veit Dietrich's letterXVIII

A common preface to the house sermons 1

#### Winter part.

On the first Sunday of Advent. Matth. 21, 1-9 1

On the second Sunday of Advent. Luc. 21, 25-36 10

On the third Sunday of Advent. Matth. 11, 2-10 20

On the Fourth Sunday of Advent. Joh. 1, 19-28. 32

On the Holy Day of Christ. (First sermon.) Luc. 2, 1-15 44

On the Holy Day of Christ. (Second sermon.) Luc. 2, 1-15 52

On the Holy Day of Christ. (Third sermon.) 64

On the second day of Christ. Luc. 2, 15-20 78

On the Sunday before the new year. Luc. 2, 33-40 86

On the new day of the year. (First sermon.) Luc. 2, 21. 102

On the new day of the year. (Second sermon.) Luc. 2, 21. 114

On Colonel's Day or "Feast of the Apparition. Matth.

> 2, 1-12. The first part, from the history 122

The other part, from the saying Micah 128

On the chief day or feast of the Epiphany. (Second sermon.) Matth. 3,
13-17 136

On the first Sunday after Epiphany. Luc. 2, 41-52 144

The next Sunday after Epiphany. Joh. 2, 1-11 154

On the third Sunday after Epiphany. Matth. 8, 1-13 164

On the fourth Sunday after Epiphany. Matth. 8, 23-27 174

On the fifth Sunday after Epiphany. Matth. 13, 24-30 184

On Sunday Septuagint. Matth. 20, 1-16... 192

On SundaySexagesimä . Luc. 8, 4-15 202

On the Day of the Purification of Mary. (First sermon.) Luc. 2, 22-32
212

On the Day of the Purification of Mary. (Second sermon.) Luc. 2, 22-32
220

On the Sunday of Estomihi. Luc. 18, 31-43 234

On the Sunday of Invocavit. Matth. 4, 1-11 244

On the Sunday of Reminiscere. Matth. 15, 21-28.... 254

On the Sunday of Oculi. Luc. 11, 14-28 262

On the Sunday of Lent. Joh. 6, 1-15 276

On the Sunday of Judica. John 8: 46-59 286

Palm Sunday. Matth. 21, 1-9 296

Columne

On the day of the Lord's Supper. (First sermon.) 1 Cor. 11, 23-26 298

On the day of the Lord's Supper. (Second sermon.) 1 Cor. 11, 27-34 310

Am GreenThursday . John 13: 1-17 316

Sermons on the Passion. Of the fruit of the passion of Christ 330

Preface to the Passion Sermon 330

Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. Rom.

5, 8-11 334

Passion or History of the Passion of Christ our Savior 346

> The first sermon. Matth. 26, 36-46 346
>
> The other sermon. Matt. 26:47-50.... 360
>
> The third sermon. Matth. 26, 51-56 372
>
> The fourth sermon. Matth. 26, 57-68 382
>
> The fifth sermon. Matth. 26, 69-75 390
>
> The sixth sermon. Matth. 27, 1-10 398
>
> The seventh sermon. Matt. 27:11-31.... 412
>
> The Eighth Sermon: Explanation of Several Pieces from History 420
>
> The ninth sermon. Luc. 23, 26-31 430

The tenth sermon. Matth. 27, 33-56 442

The eleventh sermon. Luc. 23, 32-43 456

Char Friday. Luc. 23, 32-43 468

The twelfth sermon. Joh. 19, 25-37 480

The thirteenth sermon. Matth. 27, 57-66. 494

#### Summer part.

On the Holy Day of Easter. (First sermon.) Matth. 28, 1-10 506

On the Holy Day of Easter. (Second sermon.) Matth. 28, 1-10 518

On Easter Tuesday. Luc. 24, 36-48 528

On the first Sunday after Easter, Quasimodogeniti. Joh. 20, 19-31 538

On the second Sunday after Easter, Misericordias Domini. Joh. 10, 12-16
552

On the third Sunday after Easter, Jubilate. (First sermon.) Joh. 16,
16-23 564

On the third Sunday after Easter, Jubilate. (Second sermon^ Joh. 16,
16-23 574

On the fourth Sunday after Easter, Cantate. Joh. 16, 5-15 586

On the fifth Sunday after Easter, Rogate. Joh. 16, 23-30 598

On the day of Christ's ascension. Luc. 24, 50-53 610

Ain Sundays after the Ascension of Christ, Exaudi.

Joh. 15, 26. to 16, 4 620

[XIV Index of contents XV]{.underline}

Columne

On the Holy Day of Pentecost. (First sermon.) Apost. 2, 1-14 632

On the holy day of Pentecost. (Second sermon.) Joh. 14, 23-31 642

On Pentecost mount. Joh. 3, 16-21 652

On the Sunday of Trinity. (First sermon:) From

Feast of the Holy Trinity 664

On the Sunday of Trinity. (Second sermon.) Joh. 3, 1-15 , 680

On the first Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 16, 19-31 697

On the second Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 14, 16-24 708

On the third Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 15, 1-10 726

On the fourth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 6, 36-42 736

On the fifth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 5, 1-11 752

Appendix to the Sermon on the Fifth Sunday after Trinity 766

On the sixth Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 5, 20-26 768

On the seventh Sunday after Trinity. Marc. 8, 1-9 780

On the eighth Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 7, 15-23 790

On the ninth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 16, 1-9 802

On the tenth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 19, 41-48 814

On the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 18, 9-14 828

On the twelfth Sunday after Trinity. Marc. 7, 31-37 838

On the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 10, 23-37 846

On the fourteenth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 17, 11-19 860

On the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. Match. 6, 24-34 868

On the sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 7, 11-17 884

On the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. Luc. 14, 1-11 892

On the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 22, 34-46 900

On the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 9, 1-8 912

On the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 22, 1-14 924

On the twenty-first Sunday after Trinity. Joh. 4, 47 -54 938

On the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 18, 21-35 950

On the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. Matth. 22, 15-22 960

On the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity.

Marc. 5, 21-43 972

Columne

On the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity.

Matth. 24, 15-28 984

On the twenty-sixth Sunday after Trinity.

Joh. 6, 1-15 996

To the Christian reader 996

On the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity.

Matth. 5, 1-12 998

#### Fixed part.

St. Andrew's Day. Joh. 1, 35-42 1020

St. Thomas Day. Joh. 20, 24-31 1032

On the Holy Day of Christ. Isa. 9, 1-9 1042

On the day of St. Stephen. Apost. 6. and ch. 7, 1. 2.

44-59 1056

About the innocent infants. Matth. 2, 13-23. 1072

On the feast day of the Visitation. Matth.

2, 1-12 1082

On the day of the conversion of St. Paul. Apost. 9, 1-22 1090

On the day of Matthew. Matth. 11, 25-30 1102

On the day of the Annunciation. Luc. 1, 26-38... 1112

On the day of Philippi and Jacobi. Joh. 14, 1-14.... 1126

On the day of St. John the Baptist. Luc. 1, 57-80 1140

On the feast of the beheading of John the Baptist.

Marc. 6, 17-29 1158

On the day of Peter and Paul. Matth. 16, 13-19.... 1166

On the day of the Visitation of Mary. Luc. 1, 39-56. 1180

On the day of Magdalene. Luc. 7, 36-50 1182

St. James's Day. Marc. 10, 35-45 1196

On the day of the Visitation of the Virgin Mary, which feast after

> Brandenburg and Nuremberg order is held on the day of the Assumption
> of Mary. (First sermon.) Luc. 1, 39-56 1208

On the day of the Visitation of Mary. (Second sermon:) From the
Magnificat 1220

On the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. Luc. 22, 24-30. 1234

On the day of the beheading of John. Marc. 6, 29 1244

On the day of St. Matthew. Matth. 9, 9-13 1244

On St. Michael's Day. (First sermon:) From the

Angels 1258

On St. Michael's Day. (Second sermon.) Matth.

18, 1-10 1266

On the day of Simonis and Jude. Joh. 15, 17-25... 1274

On the day of the consecration of the church. Luc. 19, 1-10 1286

A wedding predrgt. Hebr. 13, 4 1298

A brief admonition to the spouses as to how they should

shall keep in matrimony 1314

The first funeral sermon. How the Christians talk about the

deceased shall comfort themselves 1320

The other funeral sermon. What the Christians should think when they go
with the corpse, and of some special cases, how we should comfort
ourselves inside 1330

A common form of exhorting the people to common prayer at the end of the
sermon 1342

### Luther's preface
**Dr. Martin Luther's preface to this house postils.**

I have preached these sermons in my house in the presence of my
servants, so that I, as a householder, might also do my part to teach my
servants to lead a Christian life. If God would have them all enter not
only into the ears but also into the heart, I hope it would not have
gone without fruit, as Isaiah says in 55, v. 11: "My word shall not
return to me alone, but shall accomplish that for which I have sent it.
But though some fall by the wayside, some on the stony ground, some
among thorns, yet they find a good field where they bear fruit and do
not come home alone. So also the German man says: A good word finds a
good place. Not every place is good, but at least a good place, and not
a vain evil place.

The patriarchs had such a way of preaching in their houses, with their
servants; as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob were known to have built altars from
time to time to call upon God the Lord, that is, to gather there with
their servants, to preach, to pray and to praise God. In time, the
neighbors and surrounding people and towns were also drawn to it. For it
is not to be believed that a patriarch built an altar for himself alone,
but his wife, children, servants and maids came there with him and did
as they had seen the father of the house do. Then he did not have to be
silent, but, as a priest and preacher, gave them

and they teach from the promises God has given them. And so the
neighbors also joined in; thus the house sermon became a parish sermon
2c. As we also see in the Acts of the Apostles and Matthew 10, Christ
commands that the apostles' sermons also take place first in the
houses, and so the neighbors were added, finally with whole cities and
countries.

However, I did not know that these sermons of mine were collected and
kept by M. Vito Dietrich, who was my table assistant at the time, much
less that I thought that they would come to be printed among other
people and strangers. It has been to my mind as if they were even
forgotten. But to whom they please, I will gladly grant them, like the
crumbs, chunks and lumps that are left. Because, praise God! the Biblia
itself is in the day, with many learned people rich and useful books, in
which a Christian man can well feast. For (as they say, the cow goes in
the grass up to the belly) so we are now also abundantly provided in our
time, truly with rich full pasture of divine word; God grant that we may
gratefully use it, grow fat and strong from it, before the drought comes
and punishment of our ingratitude, so that we do not have to eat stones
and thorns again, as happened to us before under the papacy, but bear
much fruit, and become disciples of the Lord, John 16. To Him be praise
and glory forever, amen.

### M. Veit Dietrich's letter.

To the prudent, honorable and wise gentlemen, mayors and council of the
city of Nuremberg,

My commanding and favorable lords.

Grace, Mercy and Peace from God our Father and our Lord

JEsu Christo.

Many will consider this house postilla as unnecessary work, because at
this time not only many other postillas are available, but also the
venerable Doctor Martin Luther himself has overlooked his postilla again
and let it go out in print. For since the Scriptures have only a few
meanings, many consider that, where many books have been made, either
they are wrong and lack the right opinion; or else that one should leave
it at that which others have previously taught and written rightly.
Therefore it seems better and more useful in many ways to have few books
that are pure and righteous, than many, since one must either worry that
one will not find anything special inside, or, if one finds something
special and new, that it will be wrong and unjust; as one learns that
the devil does not celebrate, and has just as much his book writers, who
mislead and deceive the world, as our Lord God. Because Doctor Martin
Luther's Postilla, which he himself sent out, is undoubtedly the best,
since the doctrine is presented in a pure and certain manner, many will
consider this house postilla unnecessary and will be satisfied with that
one.

But in truth, whoever does this shows sufficiently that he does not know
what a glorious gift it is to interpret the Scriptures correctly, and
how highly we should esteem them and cherish them. For this is what we
all experience when we read a gospel.

lium twenty years in a row, that those who have such a gift of the Holy
Spirit always speak differently and differently of the same thing. Not
because the Scriptures should have more than one opinion, but because
they are so rich and an inexhaustible sea: the more one draws out, the
more flows in again; and it will be impossible for the best preacher, if
he does not intend to preach more than a few of the least Sunday gospels
all his life, to exhaust them and preach in such a way that he leaves
nothing behind.

St. Paul, when he wrote to the Ephesians Cap. 4, 18. ff. of the
Ascension of Christ and the glorious gifts we have received through it,
he is silent about all the others, and praises only this gift, that God
through Christ has made some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists,
some shepherds and teachers, all of whom help with their ministry that
the body of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, that is, the Christian church,
may be built up, and that everyone may come to the same faith and
knowledge of the Son of God. Therefore, although other gifts are more,
which are also glorious and great, for which we should thank God from
the bottom of our hearts, it is nothing compared to this gift if God
gives an excellent man who can handle the Scriptures and interpret and
present them correctly.

It is a glorious and very beautiful gift of GOD to have a fine regent
who can deal with

XXVeit Dietrich's letter. XXI

The ruler, as required by his office, takes the common good seriously,
and values the benefit and welfare of his subjects more highly than his
own life and limb. And we learn that where rulers are so earnest and
diligent, God gives them happiness and salvation, and under such rule
the land and the people grow green and flourish; just as everything
withers and decays where rulers neglect their office and look more to
their own benefit than to their subjects. For God is displeased with
such indolence and self-interest; for this reason he will not give
happiness or salvation to them.

There are also many other beautiful and useful gifts, such as that God
has opened and preserved many arts in the world, which are also gifts of
the Holy Spirit, and has brought them down to us. But what is all this
compared to the gifts we are now talking about? Is it not true that
everything serves only here, in this short temporal life? When it falls
away, all these things lie together; they remain behind, and it is as if
they had never been, as if we had never had them. But this gift of the
Holy Spirit, which is called the interpretation of the Scriptures, is an
eternal treasure, by which we learn to know God, obtain the Holy Spirit,
who changes our hearts and purifies them through faith and the
forgiveness of sins, and sanctifies them with right obedience and makes
them blessed for eternity. Just as St. Paul calls the ministry of
preaching a ministry of the Spirit, so that we receive the Holy Spirit
through it and become alive, who otherwise would have to remain in death
because of our sins.

Who would not cherish such a gift and keep it beautifully? Look behind
you, from the time of the apostles until now, how many you will find who
have had such grace? In the Latin Church, St. Augustine was almost the
only one who took care of the doctrine, formulated it with fineness and
certainty, and presented the most noble articles of the Church clearly
and intelligently. The Greek Church has had many more learned and
excellent people than the Latin. But there is no one who would equal St.
Augustine in this case. Where now the pious Christians of the same pious
bishops and teachers have writings as a special blessing,

If the huts had not been kept and the sermons had not been diligently
copied, we would be deprived of a great treasure today. According to
Augustine, it has decreased from year to year, and the right doctrine
has fallen the longer the more, until the Antichrist, the pope, became
powerful in the church, and not only did not care about the doctrine,
but also, because it was contrary to his tyrannical, godless authority,
falsified and changed it; As anyone can see who holds the pope's
scribes against the old teachers, that for more than four hundred years,
outside of St. Bernard, there is almost no one who has written that one
could improve in matters of faith by a hair's breadth. Nevertheless,
St. Bernhardt is not pure either; monasticism and other papal rubbish is
attached to him, so that he is not always straightforward, as a preacher
should be.

Such a lack, which we have experienced in the papacy and with such great
damage, should also move us to not disregard such a gift, and to
beautifully raise up their work, which God has enlightened with His
Spirit, and has given them such a glorious gift, the interpretation of
the Scriptures. As we must especially praise the venerable Doctor Martin
Luther, through whom God first attacked and exposed the Antichrist,
brought to light the Scriptures and the knowledge of God, and removed
the abominable abuses introduced into the Church by the Pope, and
brought about both pure doctrine and right worship in the Church. And
the excellent testimony stands with him that in such work God has
preserved him so wonderfully, against the devil and the world, for such
a long time, praise God! and still that it was humanly impossible to
hope that he should escape with his life. But through God's miraculous
protection and gracious assistance, it happened this way, so that
through him, as a special vessel, God's word would shine longer and
brighter and farther from day to day, and many would come to the
knowledge of God and be saved; as, praise be to God, is happening
everywhere, and the number of those who hear God's word is increasing.

XXIIM . Veit Dietrich's letter. XXIII

not become smaller, but larger and larger day by day.

Therefore, although the interpretation of the Sunday Epistles and
Gospels is already in hand and among the people, as the aforementioned
D. Martin Luther himself ordered in print, I have not left these
sermons, which he preached at home in his house on Sundays, when he
could not preach in church due to weakness, to his children and
servants, and which I alone have recorded with a hurried hand and have
kept with me until now, but want to pass them on to other Christians as
a noble treasure. Most of all because these sermons are finely concise
and simple, and are especially useful for the young simple-minded
people. For in the case of the latter, it is not necessary to pretend to
great artistry, but rather to present the doctrine briefly and simply,
and to use words to make it seem as if they can grasp and remember
something of it.

But I was especially moved by this, because I see how necessity demands
that a common form of Sunday sermons be given to the unlearned pastors
in the countryside. For the churches are in a bad way, no one wants to
give that one could have learned, suitable people. That is why, as they
used to say: copper money, copper souls. Poor parishes, poor unlearned
parish priests. For he who is able to do something thinks that he wants
to enjoy his art more than to beg with his wife and child among the
wicked peasants. Nevertheless, one must have people, and not let the
church lie desolate, and be content, because one cannot go on having
such pastors, even if they cannot preach themselves, that they read it
from the books. Both the authorities and the listeners have no worries,
because they know that nothing bad will be said to them, if they only
remember it well and want to live their lives diligently according to
it; for if the teaching is pure and clear to us, it will be orderly,
simple and understandable, and will not go without fruit, as it did
among the poor peasants.

However, the fathers of the house can also use such work with special
benefit; as it is

for it often happens that one cannot come to church on Sunday because of
illness or other need. Let no one be so careless; if he cannot hear
God's word in church, let him hear it at home, or read it himself, so
that the Sabbath may be properly sanctified and God may be served, which
he has commanded us all to do, that we may hear his word, and thus
practice faith, and strengthen and nourish the soul with eternal food.

I have, however, careful, honorable and wise dear gentlemen, such house
postilion E. F. E. W. give, and in your name go out want: First of all,
I have preached these sermons publicly in my parish church this year, so
that everyone who reads them can see (because there are so many
divisions and sects now and then) what our doctrine and gospel is, so
that E. F. E. W. is considered a Christian leader. F. E. W., as a
Christian authority, have held so long ago and so nobly, and still;
that, praise God! the doctrine is pure and clean of baptism, of the
sacrament of the altar, of the right knowledge of Christ and God, and
other articles. Such is the right and best treasure of which we can
boast and take comfort. For where this doctrine is, there will be
forgiveness of sins and the right of the church, however thin it may be.

Secondly, also because I hope that E. F. E. W. will be served with such
work in this case, for the sake of the poor pastors, who are now and
then under E. F. E. W. in the countryside, and are not all equally
suitable for preaching. For since F. F. E. W. have always taken special
care that the doctrine remains pure, and that annoying sects do not
become established, this cannot be prevented better in any way, than if
those who are not fit to preach without this have a certain form, in
which they remain, and thus avoid strange, unfounded doctrine, or do not
have cause to preach about it.

Therefore, I ask E. F. E. W. to put up with such work and to accept it
with a favorable will. For I have never sought anything else with it,
but that such sermons,

**XXIVM . Veit Dietrich's letter. XXV**

which I consider useful and comforting in many ways, would not be lost,
because no one would have them but me; nor could they be useful to
anyone, because they were written with a hurried hand, but to me alone.

Now, however, I hope that many people who read them will enjoy them and
not only live their lives according to them, but also grasp a proper
form of doctrine from them, and avoid and flee annoying, seductive
preachers; but I especially hope that many churches will be served in
our time. Although there is a lack of skill on the part of the church
ministers, they will nevertheless read something useful to the poor,
unintelligent people, from which everyone who only wants to listen may
improve himself.

It grieves me from the bottom of my heart when I hear how our bishops in
Germany do not pay attention to their office and do not ask anything
about their subjects, how they are taught Christian doctrine. Not only
do they have the name of bishops, who should look after their sheep and
feed them properly themselves, but they also have a splendidly large
income, which is not endowed for the purpose of drawing idle, lazy,
unlearned people who are of no use to anyone, who can do no more than
eat, drink, play, and commit all kinds of shame and fornication;
otherwise great kings and emperors would have left such an endowment
behind, and such property with their tribes. The pious hearts have
therefore been concerned that they have thought: If the churches and
true religion are to be preserved, then one must have suitable people
for this purpose, who will lead the common man with right doctrine and
unruly conduct, so that everyone may come to the knowledge of God and be
saved. But how is it done? Where is a bishop who preaches himself?

As the bishops hold themselves, so do their capitulars. There is no one
who would care that the poor people have proper instruction in Christian
doctrine. Those parishes that are not at all cowardly and good stand
desolate; the peasants believe and live as they wish, they are not
interested in anything but that they give what they owe. Such is a
lamentation that should go to the heart of a stone and make it lament.

But the blind people are not content with this; the holy gospel has no
greater enemies than these very people who promote it, and who are
ordained to handle it, and they would be sorry that in a whole diocese
there were a few church ministers who preached God's word rightly and
loudly. Yes, they still forbid that their people hear proper preachers
in other places and take the sacrament according to Christ's command;
just as if they wanted to go to the devil gladly and willingly, only
that others would have to go with them. That is why the poor people who
sit under such rulers need these and other books, because they cannot
hear the right doctrine in public, but they read it at home. I have also
gladly wanted to serve them with such work, as our dear brothers who
have been baptized with us and would like to be saved with us, and it
grieves them that they remain among such harmful wolves and must be
deprived of the ministry of preaching. May God give His grace that they
may be well served, amen.

For although there is a deficiency in that these sermons, because I
alone have copied them with a hurried hand, are better spoken by the
venerable D. Martin Luther than written by me, I have nevertheless
presented the opinion to the best of my ability, also added many sermons
that were omitted by him, especially from the festivals that are not
kept in the Saxon order, so that this work would be perfect throughout
the year, and therefore all the more useful and useful to everyone. And
so that many people would be served by it, I was glad to see that it was
also brought to you in Latin by a learned man, my friend instead. All
together so that this treasure, which I do not consider small, would
become known to many people, who would read such sermons, strengthen
their faith from them, and improve their lives, and praise and thank God
for them.

Primarily, however, as reported above, I wanted to serve E. F. E. W. and
her subjects with such work. God, our dear Father in Heaven, has highly
honored E. F. E. W., not only in that E. F. E. W. has been able to serve
her.

**XXVIM**. Veit Dietrich's letter. **XXVII**

E. W. have a well-ordered police and good government, and for this
reason are praised far and wide; but much more in that E. F. E. W. have
abolished the old annoying abuses, and have confessed the currency, more
than in an imperial assembly, with special earnestness and heart, also
not without great danger, almost alone among all imperial cities, have
remained so far, and have seen to it with special diligence that
annoying doctrines of baptism, of the sacrament, and other articles of
faith, as in other places in the empire, do not arise. Such is
undoubtedly the highest grace that God bestows on secular authorities
here on earth. And again, secular authorities cannot serve God any
better than to take care of God's Word with earnestness, to ward off
all troubles in doctrine and in life, and to provide their subjects with
proper preachers.

And this will be found fine, although one must suffer and dare a little
over it; for the world and the devil are bitter enemies to the Word,
that nevertheless God will not only protect in all danger, but will also
pay for such diligence with rich blessings, temporal and eternal goods;
as he says to the priest Eli, 1 Sam. 2, 30.: "Whoever honors me, him I
will also honor; but whoever despises me, he shall be despised again."

May our dear Lord God and Father in Heaven, for the sake of Jesus
Christ, His dear Son, further govern and lead F. F. E. W. by His Holy
Spirit in such a way that you hold His word dear and valuable, and
further shelter His poor church, so that God's name may be sanctified
among you, His kingdom may be increased, and His holy will may be
directed, and F. F. E. W. may prosper in the worldly government from
heaven, as is especially necessary in these dangerous times. F. E. W.
may prosper in the temporal government all the more happiness and
salvation from heaven, as is especially necessary in these perilous
times, amen.

> E. F. E. W.

subservient

**Vitus Dietrich,**

> Preacher in the Sebald parish church.

Dr. Martin Luther's Home Postil.

A mean preface to home sermons.

In order that we may render service to our dear Lord God today and,
according to His command, sanctify the holiday, that is, spend it with
God's Word, which alone is holy and sanctifies all things; let us now
hear the holy Gospel and ask God's mercy that we may hear it so that
His glory may be praised, our faith started, and our lives improved.
Pray one Our Father.

## On the first Sunday of Advent.

**Matth. 21, 1-9.**

Now when they were come near Jerusalem to Bethphage, unto the mount of
Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples, and said unto them: Go into the
village which is before you, and soon ye shall find an ass tied, and a
colt with her: loose her, and bring her unto me. And if any man say any
thing unto you, say, The LORD hath need of her; and he will soon let her
go unto you. Now all these things came to pass, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Tell the daughter of
Zion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee meekly, riding upon an ass, and
upon a colt of the burthen of an ass. The disciples went and did as
Jesus had commanded them, and brought the ass and the colt, and laid
their garments thereon, and set him thereon. But many of the people
spread the garments on the road; the others cut branches from the trees
and scattered them on the road. And the people that went before and
followed cried out, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed be he
that cometh in the name of the LORD, Hosanna in the highest.

The Jews had many beautiful and glorious promises of the Messiah or
Christ, how he would come on earth, establish an eternal kingdom, and
deliver his people from all evil and help them forever; as is seen in
all the sermons of the prophets, that they speak exceedingly gloriously
of the future kingdom of Christ. And such sermons were very well known
among the Jews.

Held in the house 1533.

(2) But there were false preachers and carnal teachers, who led the
people to think that Christ should come with worldly splendor, riding
in, and as worldly kings usually do, since everything is most splendid
and delicious; and then should make of the Jews in all the world vain
great and mighty princes and rulers. As they still think today, when
their Messiah will come, they will be lords of all the world and the
Gentiles will be their servants.

[2 **IL. 1, 10-12. On the first Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 10-16.**
3]{.underline}

They are still gawking at such a Messiah or Christ, not desiring the
Messiah, that is, the Lord Christ anywhere, to save them from sins and
eternal death.

3 So that the Jews might be warned and not be deceived by such carnal
teachers, God proclaimed long before through the prophet Zechariah:
Christ would not come as a worldly king, with great splendor and
splendid armor; but as a poor beggar he would ride into Jerusalem, his
capital, on an ass, as the history of today's Gospel indicates. Lest
the Jews should excuse themselves, saying, If we had known that he
should be such a poor king, we would have accepted him. For the prophet
had indicated this to them clearly enough so long before. So the story
also happened publicly in broad daylight, that Christ rode on a borrowed
donkey, which had neither saddle nor other equipment, and because of
this the disciples had to put their clothes on the donkey, so that the
poor king could help himself. For this reason, the Jews can hardly
excuse themselves. For here is a bright and clear prophecy: When Christ
rides into Jerusalem, he will not come on high horses, with armor,
spear, swords and guns, as worldly kings usually do, which all belong to
seriousness and indicate violence; but he will come, as the evangelist
calls it, "meekly," or as the prophet says, "poor and miserable. As
if the prophet wanted to warn everyone and say: Take good heed to the
ass, and know that he who comes on it is the true Messiah. Therefore
beware, and do not look on the golden crown, or on the garments of gold,
or on the golden pieces, or on the great stuff of rice. For Christ will
come miserable, with a sorrowful and meek heart, and will be seen on an
ass. This is all his splendor and glory, which he will display before
the world as he rides into Jerusalem.

4 Now the prophecy caused the Lord to make this entry, and he was very
anxious about it. For this reason, he so diligently commands the
disciples to do the thing.

not by night, nor secretly, but publicly, in broad daylight, entering
Jerusalem, not alone, but with many people going before and after,
shouting to him as the right king and son of David, wishing him
happiness and salvation for his kingdom; So that all Jerusalem must be
aware of this entry, see and hear the donkey and this poor king, of whom
Zechariah had prophesied and warned the Jews that they should not be
offended at the poor figure and the beggarly entry, but should drop the
delusion that they thought Christ would come with worldly splendor. He
will be a king, says Zechariah, but a poor, miserable king, who has
absolutely no appearance of a king, if one wants to count and regard him
according to the outward splendor, which the worldly kings and princes
lead before the world.

5 But Zacharias says that this poor and beggarly king will have another
power than all the kings and emperors who ever came on earth have,
because they were as great and powerful lords as they were able to be.
For his name is Justus et Salvator. Not a rich, splendid, glorious king
before the world; but a righteous man and a savior, who shall bring
righteousness and salvation, and shall attack sin and death, and be an
enemy of sin and death, and shall save from sin and eternal death all
them that believe on him, and receive him as their king, and shall not
suffer the poor borrowed ass to offend them. Those who do this will be
forgiven of sin and will not be harmed by death, but will have eternal
life. And though they die and be buried in the flesh, yet shall it not
be called death, but only sleep. This is what the prophet wants to teach
us about this king by giving him these two names and calling him
righteous and a savior who will break the teeth of death, tear the belly
of the devil, and thus free us who believe in him from sins and death,
and lead us to the angels, where there is eternal life and bliss.

(6) He leaves the other kings their splendor, their castles, their
houses, their money and their goods, and makes them delicious.

**4 L. 1.12-14. On the first Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 16-19. 5**

They can certainly eat, drink, clothe, build, than other people; but
they cannot do this art, which this poor mendicant Christ can do. For
there is neither emperor, nor king, nor pope with all his power, who
could help from the least sin, and with his money and goods heal the
least disease; let alone help against eternal death and hell. But this
beggar Christ does not help against one sin alone, but against all my
sin; and not against my sin alone, but against the whole world's sin.
He comes to take away, not the sickness alone, but death; and not my
death alone, but the death of the whole world.

7th These things, saith the prophet, tell the daughter of Zion, that she
be not offended at his miserable future: but shut thine eyes, and open
thine ears, and see not how poorly he goeth, but hear what is preached
and said of this poor king. The misery and poverty are seen, that he
rides on a donkey without saddle and spurs like a beggar; but that he
will take away sin from us, strangle death, give eternal holiness,
eternal blessedness and eternal life, that is not seen. Therefore we
must hear it and believe it. Therefore Zacharias says: "Tell it to the
daughter of Zion", so that she knows it, and does not take offense at
it, nor is offended that he rides in so miserably and dies so
shamefully. For all these things are well done for thee, O Zion, that he
will save thee as a Saviour against the devil and death, and sanctify
thee, and cleanse thee from sins.

(8) Whoever will not grasp these things with his ears, but will see
them with his eyes and grasp them with his hands, will fall short; for
this king is far different from other kings. What they do, they do with
splendor, and everything has a great, brave appearance. This is not the
case with Christ, who put his work of saving from sins and death first
in baptism. There the eyes see nothing but bad water like other water.
He put it in the word and in the sermon. There the eyes see nothing but
a man's breath. But we must beware and not follow our eyes.

but close your eyes and open your ears, and hear the word. The same
teaches how our Lord Jesus Christ shed his blood for the forgiveness of
our sins and eternal life. He will give us such gifts in holy baptism,
in the Lord's Supper, in the sermon or absolution, where we shall
surely find it. Well, it is true that it seems small and insignificant
that through the water bath, word and sacrament such things are to be
accomplished; but do not let your eyes be deceived. There it was also
small and insignificant, that he who rode in on a borrowed donkey and
was crucified afterwards should take away sin, death and hell. No one
could see him, but the prophet says so. Therefore it must also be
believed and grasped with the ears, with the eyes it will not be seen.

9 Therefore saith the evangelist, Tell the daughter of Zion. And the
prophet says, "Zion, rejoice, be glad," dance and leap, "for your
king is coming." What king? A holy, righteous king, and a savior or
helper, who wants to be your sanctifier and your savior. For he will put
his holiness and righteousness upon thee, that thou mayest be delivered
from sin; and he will lay down his life for thee, that by his' death
thou mayest be delivered from everlasting death. Therefore do not be
offended at his wretched and poor form, but thank him for it and be
comforted. For all things are done for your sake and for your good; so
he will save you from your sins and death, and make you righteous and
saved.

(10) Now this is our King, the dear Lord Jesus Christ, and this is his
kingdom and office. He does not deal in thalers, crowns, great kingdoms,
and worldly splendor; no, but when we must die, and can no longer keep
life here, this is his office and work, that by his suffering and death
we may know where we are to abide; that we may say, I am sanctified by
my King JESUS Christ, who for this cause came in such misery, and for
this cause suffered himself to be crucified, that he might sanctify me,
and in me drown my sin and death. Whoever believes this, as he hears it
and as it is preached in the Gospel, has it. For therefore is the

6 **L. 1, 14-16. On the first Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 19-21.** 7

Holy baptism instituted by Christ, that by it he might put on thee his
righteousness, that his holiness might be thine and his innocence thine
also. For we are wretched, poor sinners, but in baptism Christ comforts
us and says: "Give me your sin, and have my righteousness and holiness;
let your death be taken away, and put on my life. This actually means
Christ's regiment. For all his office and work is this, that he should
daily put off our sin and death, and put on his holiness and life.

This sermon should be heard and accepted with great joy, and one should
improve and become pious from it. Unfortunately, this is how things turn
around, and the world only gets worse the longer this teaching lasts;
this is the work and business of the devil. As you can see, people are
now more stingy, merciless, lewd, impudent and angry than before under
the papacy. What does it matter? Nothing else, but that people do not
accept this sermon with joy, but rather everyone throws it to the wind,
cares more about money and goods than about the blessed treasure, which
our Lord Christ brings to us. Therefore our Lord God punishes them again
and says: "Will you not thank me because I have taken away sin and
death through the death and dying of my only begotten Son? Well then, I
will make sin and death enough for you, because you want it that way;
and where only one devil possessed you and rode you before, seven worse
devils shall ride you now. As can be seen in citizens and peasants with
the shameful, stingy, disorderly life, fornication and other
naughtiness.

(12) For this reason I urge you to listen to such preaching with joy
and love, and to accept it with all thankfulness, and to ask our Lord
God from the bottom of your hearts to give you strong faith so that you
may keep such teaching; then the fruit will surely follow, that you will
become more humble, obedient, kind, disciplined and pious from day to
day. For this doctrine is of this kind and nature, that it makes chaste,
obedient, pious people. But those who will not accept it with love will
become seven times worse than they were,

before they have come to this teaching, as is seen everywhere. Therefore
beware, for the hour will surely come when God will punish such
ingratitude. Then it will be found what the world has earned with it.

Therefore learn well this history of today's gospel. For because the
Jews would not follow the prophet, we are told that our King will come
meek and poor, so that we may not be offended at such poverty, nor gape
at worldly splendor and riches with the Jews; but learn that in our Lord
Christ we have such a King, who is righteous and a Savior, and will save
us from sins and eternal death. You should accept such preaching with
willingness and joy, and thank God for it from the bottom of your heart;
otherwise you will have to accept the sorrowful devil with weeping,
wailing and gnashing of teeth.

14 The example of the apostles and others who enter Jerusalem with the
Lord Christ reminds us of this. For since the Lord Christ is a king, he
must also have a kingdom or people, and the same people must show proper
service to this king. What such service is, the Historia shows very
finely. For here we find people who recognize the Lord Christ as a king
and are not afraid to walk beside the miserable donkey and poor king.
Among them, the apostles are the first to recognize the Lord Christ as
the true Messiah, who will make righteous and be a savior against sin
and death. For this reason they bring the donkey to the Lord Christ,
that is, they bring to Christ the Jews who had lived under the law until
then and had carried such a burden as a donkey. Then, with the donkey,
they also bring to Christ the young flock, the Gentiles, who were still
untamed and had not been under any law. For Christ is a Savior of all
men. Therefore all righteous preachers and teachers should lead and
guide the people to Christ. This is the one worship that is due to this
king, that he should be recognized, accepted, praised and glorified as a
righteous man and a savior, and that everyone should be directed to him.

**8 L. 1, 16.17. On the first Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 22.23. 9**

The other service is to sing Osanna to the Lord Christ on the donkey,
that is, after recognizing him and accepting him as a savior, to wish
him happiness and salvation in his kingdom, and to do everything that
serves to increase and promote his kingdom. God grant it; say the
Pharisees and high priests to it what they will. For "Osanna" means as
much in German as: HErr, hilf, HErr, geben Glück dem Sohn David. Just as
we pray in the Our Father: Zukommen uns dein Reich. For the devil and
his members will not leave it untried how they can hinder this kingdom,
and either destroy or counterfeit the word. It is therefore necessary to
pray and wish that God will break the will of the devil and drive it
back.

16. The third is that we should not only pray, but also take off our
clothes and put them on the way of the Lord Christ, so that he may have
a little glorious and honest entrance; This happens when we promote the
preaching ministry according to our ability, that we help with money and
goods, so that we raise up fine, learned, pious people who lead the
church with the word and good conduct; that we keep those who are in the
ministry in such a way that they wait for their ministry, devote
themselves to study, and do not either leave half of the food or have to
deal with other trades. In sum, where money and goods can be used to
ensure that the church offices are well appointed and the people are
well provided with proper leaders, then the clothes are spread under the
Lord Christ, so that he may ride in all the more honestly.

17 Therefore serve this king, and ask nothing of the chief priests and
Pharisees, to whom this entry and poor show is very repugnant and
contrary; indeed, they would gladly resist it. But Christ wants to have
it unresisted. For because he is a king, he must have his court people
and court service. And good to them that serve him; for he is such a
king, who will serve us again, not with money and goods, which is a very
small service, but with righteousness against sin, and salvation against
death and eternal damnation. For this reason we should be ready and
willing for his service, and not be offended at the popes, bishops and
other examples, who, like the apostles, do not lead the donkey to the
Lord Christ and put him on it, but want to ride on the donkey themselves
and rule the people with doctrine and other things as they wish. But
they let Christ go on foot, and cannot suffer him to ride in and be seen
through his gospel.

(18) These false teachers also have their disciples, who pretend to
them, scattering palms and olive branches by the way; but to the poor
Christ they cast stones. For they persecute him, his gospel, and all who
preach it. Such will come to know in that day with the Jews that they
have despised the righteous King and Savior, and for that reason must
bear God's wrath forever; whereas those who have accepted him,
confessed him, and turned their poverty to his honor will receive
through him eternal righteousness and eternal life. May our dear Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ grant this to us all, Amen.

[**10 L. 1, 18.19.** On the second Sunday of Advent. **W. XIII, 42-46.
11**]{.underline}

**On the second Sunday of Advent. *)**

**Luc. 21, 25-36.**

And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars;
and upon the earth men shall be afraid, and shall tremble; and the sea
and the waves shall roar. And men shall faint for fear, and for waiting
of the things that are to come upon the earth: for the powers of heaven
also shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a
cloud with power and great glory. And when these things begin to come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, because your redemption
draweth nigh. And he said unto them a like thing, Behold the fig tree,
and all the trees. When they now shoot forth, ye see it in them, and
know that summer is now at hand. So also ye, when ye see all these
things come to pass, know that the kingdom of God is at hand. Verily I
say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be done.
Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my words shall not pass away. But
take heed lest your hearts be troubled with eating and drinking, and
with cares of food, and let that day come upon you quickly; for as a
snare it shall come upon all them that dwell on the earth. Be ye
therefore always valiant, and pray that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
Son of man.

1 Our Lord God has always kept this way since the beginning of the
world, when he wanted to make something new, he let special great signs
go beforehand. When he wanted to punish Egypt and lead his people out of
it and make a special nation out of it, all kinds of glorious signs went
out, evil and good. For the frogs, locusts, hail, boils and the like did
great harm to the Egyptians, until at last all the first birth was
strangled in one night and the rest of the people were drowned in the
Red Sea. But with the Jews these were good signs, that he led them dry
through the Red Sea, drowned their enemies in it, gave them bread from
heaven, and the like. This was an indication that God wanted to start
something new with this people and establish a new regime and a new
being. The same happened when He wanted to punish the unbelieving,
hardened Jews and establish the new kingdom of grace through the Gospel
in all the world. For when the Lord Jesus was hanging on the cross, the
tombs were opened, the dead came out and went into the city of
Jerusalen. There was a great and unusual darkness, the curtain in the
temple was torn. All this was a beginning of a new being and a downfall
of the al-

*) Held in the house 1533.

It was found in the work that Judaism had fallen and Christ had
established a new kingdom.

The Jews knew this well and learned it from their own experience.
Therefore the apostles come to the Lord Christ and ask him what signs
will come before the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the world,
before the eternal kingdom of Christ begins?

3 Now concerning the destruction of Jerusalem the Lord answers them
here: When they shall see an army encamped about Jerusalem, they shall
know that the end is not far off; therefore give them this counsel, that
they should get out of the land, and flee to the mountains; for there
shall be no mercy, Judaism must be laid waste.

4 He also teaches them about the last day, saying, "When you see signs
in the sun, in the moon, in the stars, in the sea and the waters, in men
and in the sky, when these things come to pass," he says (for one
should not wait so long as to think that all is over or that one has
seen such things before), "then be courageous, and do not joke about
such signs, for they are certain indications that the last day is now at
the door.

12 **L. 1, 19-21. On the second Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 46-^8.** 13

(5) Now here is the question whether all such signs will happen before
the last day. But one must not ask about such things. For the Lord
saith, When these things begin to come to pass, they shall be seen.
Therefore I believe that some and perhaps most of the signs will come to
pass afterwards, just when the last day is about to dawn. Therefore let
us be content with the fact that the Lord teaches us where to see and
wait for such signs; namely, in the heavens, the sun, the moon, and the
stars, and in men and the sea. Now when one sees some of these, one
should look forward to this future, and not wait until they have all
happened. For otherwise we would be overhasty.

(6) Two signs happen to the sun and the moon: first, they lose their
light. Such a thing, although it is not strange and natural (for one can
actually know it from art before it happens), is nevertheless a sign, as
Christ himself clearly interprets it in Matthew. But besides this also
such signs can happen at the sun, which one cannot know before, but
happen suddenly, and fall in against all mathematics, like the darkness
at the time, when Christ hung at the cross. For art holds that the
eclipse of the sun must occur at the beginning of the moon, when it
becomes new. But if it happens in the full moon, as at that time, or on
another day in the moon, it is not natural. That is why such an eclipse
was such a great miracle. Even if we have not seen such a thing, it can
still happen very soon.

And we have seen these years about many other strange things, which are
all unusual and strange. As that a rainbow should go around the sun,
that the sun should divide itself equally and that many suns should be
seen *) 2c. So it is not unbelievable that there is also something like
that behind, which we have not seen before. Therefore we have all ready
warning at the sun

*), item, that recently three comets have been seen within two years,
and that at other places earthquakes have often happened. Röhrer. - The
Erlangen edition 4, 32 remarks in the margin that this had happened in
the years 1531, 1532 and 1533. D. Red.

Enough that we should not be sure, but wait for the blessed future of
our Lord Christ.

(8) The other signs of which Christ speaks are the great roaring of
the waters, as if all were about to perish. For just as a man, when he
is to die naturally, first becomes ill, catches a fever, pestilence, or
some other disease; all these are signs that he is to perish: so also
the world will be ill in a moment, that heaven, sun, moon, stars, men,
waters, and all things will be troubled, writhing, and evil, before they
even go down.

(9) I consider the sign to be entirely in the people, that we have
experienced it. For the sorry pope helped a lot with his sermon, so that
the pious hearts were greatly frightened, because it was preached how
great a mortal sin it was not to confess, pray, fast, hear mass, and the
like. In such terror, no one knew what to do, because the true
consolation, the forgiveness of sins through Christ, had disappeared.
Then the torment began, now with these, now with other works; so that I
believe this was the greatest sorrow on earth. As I have seen many of
them myself, who could not bear such heartache and terror, and fell into
despair from great fear and terror, so that they did not dare to stand
before God's judgment.

(10) For the preaching of the priest drove us with power to fear
Christ, the judge, to death. I was also one of them, and I could not
think of anything good to say to Christ as a strict judge, so I called
upon the Virgin Mary to help me and to be my support against such a
judge. For there was no one else. We had lost Christ and had to confess
that we were bad boys. There was no other way than to fear them and be
afraid of the judge. Therefore, I think that such a sign is over for
most of us. Just as I think that most of the other signs in the sky have
already happened. But even if there are still some more behind, it can
still happen every day that they are also

[14 **L. 1, 21-23. On the second Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 48-52.**
15]{.underline}

come. But we should not therefore refrain from preparing ourselves for
that day, as the Lord will teach below.

11) At the end, the Lord speaks of another fear, saying, "People will
pine away for fear and for waiting for the things that are to come on
earth. Here he speaks of another fear, which is a very great fear, and
arises from the fact that people will be afraid of the signs of the last
day. Such are not godless, unbelieving people, but pious and
God-fearing. Therefore they accept the warning with the signs, which the
godless surely despise, so that they think that many such signs have
happened before, and yet the last day has remained outside. Therefore
they let this sign and warning pass by today and another tomorrow, and
remain today as far away as last year, and today as yesterday, without
any improvement, and do not care at all how it will go with the last
day.

(12) The Lord lets such ungodly, secure people go. For since they can
see signs and despise them, they will not ask anything, especially about
the word and the sermon. But the pious, who perceive such signs, and are
terrified, the Lord will command them, and comfort them most kindly,
saying, Because they confess Christ, and love his word, and would not
willingly fall away from it, nor deny it; they shall not be terrified or
affrighted at such signs, though they be somewhat terrible.

13 Then, says Christ, they will see the Son of Man coming in the cloud
with great power and glory. This will be a different splendor than when
emperors and kings come in. For the whole air will be full of angels and
saints, who will shine brighter than the sun, and the Lord Christ will
hover in the midst of them, and with His saints pronounce judgment on
the damned, who stand below on earth with the devil, trembling and
shaking.

014 When therefore, saith Christ, these things begin to come to pass,
then look up, and lift up your heads, and be joyful and of good cheer;
for it must so come to pass. If the world is to be destroyed

If it is to break, it must first crack, otherwise such a large building
cannot collapse, and everything must move and be shaken. Just like a man
who now wants to die, he writhes and writhes, his eyes are turned back,
his mouth is curved, his face turns pale and he becomes completely
shapeless. The world will do the same.

15 But I say unto you, Be not dismayed at this; lift up your heads, as
they that love to see it from the heart. For know that your redemption
is at hand. Yours, saith he, which believe; the rest, if they believe
not, shall be damned. For this reason they should be afraid, but they
are not. For the Lord Jesus will bring both heaven for those who believe
and have been righteous, and hell and damnation for the others.

16 The Lord speaks these things to the pious. They will also be
terrified when the sun and moon turn their eyes like this and the world
will be full of fire. For the saints are not so strong; even St. Peter
and St. Paul would be terrified if they were alive. But, says the Lord,
be of good cheer; it will look miserable and frightening to you, but
this is not for you; it is for the devil and the unbelievers. But to you
comes blessedness and joyful salvation, since you have groaned and
prayed so long for my kingdom to come to you, for your sin to be
forgiven and for you to be delivered from all evil. What you have now
asked with all your heart for so long, that shall come to you. For it is
called a day of your redemption.

17 Therefore the last day may well be called a day of condemnation and
redemption, a day of sorrow and joy, a day of hell and the kingdom of
heaven. As the Lord says in Matth. 24, 30: "Then all the families of
the earth will howl. Then, whether God wills it, we will not be with
them, but will leave the pope, the rotten spirits, the wicked nobility,
the wicked citizens and peasants, who are now doing all they can,
persecuting the gospel, and causing all misery and misfortune; they will
have to pay. But we, who now have to cuddle up to them, weeping and
grieving, will laugh at that time and see that they have to go down with
the devil into the abyss of hell.

16 **L. 1, 23-25.** On the second Sunday of Advent. W. **XIII, 52-L5.**
17

(18) Therefore, though the creature be disguised, and the sun and the
moon be black and dark, and look upon you sourly, be not dismayed; crawl
not into the corners when these things come to pass, but lift up your
heads, and be not displeased; remember that ye have thus desired me. For
if I am to deliver you, I must first attack those who hold you captive.
As if you were a prisoner in a castle, in a tower, and heard how they
were shooting and storming, you would not be afraid of such shooting and
storming, but would be glad of it, if you knew that it was for your sake
that they had begun to deliver you.

19 So do to him here also; do not let it frighten you that the world
will bend and writhe like this; this rod is not for you, but for those
who have cried out over you. Therefore accept this future as the future
of your salvation. For I do not come to cast you into hell, but to help
you out of this shameful, sick, sickly, hopeless world, and to separate
you from the devil and his servants, and to set you among the angels,
where you shall not suffer, but live in everlasting glory.

20 To such comfort now also serves the beautiful similitude with the
trees. In spring, he says, when winter shall now cease, and the whole
earth shall be new; when the cold shall depart, and the warmth come, and
the dry trees shall bud and green, tell me, how does this begin? Is it
not true that the trees first bud and then bud; so everyone says that
the winter is over and now the beautiful summer is coming.

(21) Let this likeness be your doctor, and the trees of the field your
art book, that ye may learn how ye shall wait for the latter day. For as
the summer follows, when the trees grow lush and put forth leaves; so
when the earth trembles, the heavens shake, and the sun and moon look
sad and sour, be not dismayed, any more than you are dismayed by the
young leaves that come forth from the trees, when it is about to be
summer. For such signs shall be unto you as the sap and the leaves.

The little ones on the trees, so that you may wait for the eternal
summer with joy. For this miserable life on earth here is like the
shameful, unfruitful winter, since it dries up and spoils everything.
Then it shall come to an end, and the beautiful eternal summer shall
come, namely the kingdom of God, through which the devil's kingdom
shall be destroyed, for the sake of which you had to suffer so much on
earth. For you live among godless, evil, false, stingy people 2c. who
blaspheme and desecrate the gospel and desire to cause all kinds of
misfortune. This you must see and hear, and expect daily trouble. From
such I will deliver you through my future, so that you may no longer see
such willfulness.

(22) Therefore such a terrible thing is not for you, but for your
enemies the wicked: let them mourn and be dismayed. But you rejoice that
your salvation is near. As the pious Lot also did in his time, he lived
in the midst of the wicked people of Sodoma, who caused him all sorrow
with their lewd conduct, and tormented his righteous soul from day to
day with their unrighteous works, not to speak of which he had to see
and hear, until they became overripe and God could no longer pause. Then
two angels came and led the righteous Lot out of the city. There must
have been a terrible sight, that the sky became black, flashed and
thundered, and the clouds opened, sulfur and fire rained down, and the
earth also opened and sank everything. It is not possible that Lot
should not have been terrified by this. But he was comforted by the fact
that he knew that such a terrible sight was not meant for him, but for
the sodomites, who had been bad, desperate boys and did not want to mend
their ways. They were not only terrified by such fiery rain, but also
perished in it and went into the abyss of hell. But to the pious Lot it
was like a beautiful tree that sprouts and now begins to green. For he
felt God's help and gracious salvation against the wicked.

(23) So it will happen to us on the last day, if we live to see it. It
will be terrible

**18 L. 1, 2S-27. On the second Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 55-58. 19**

When heaven and earth begin to mourn, and in a moment we die. But a
Christian should not follow the appearance, but hear how Christ
interprets it, namely, that it is a beautiful blossom, a beautifully
juicy twig; so that, although reason is horrified at the horrible, ugly
appearance, the heart nevertheless clings to the word and strengthens
itself against the outward appearance, and says: "Do not be alarmed, it
is neither evil nor harmful; yes, it means, as Christ himself says, not
evil, but that my Redeemer and redemption are near. So now welcome me,
my dear Lord Christ, and come, as I have often asked and desired all my
life, that your kingdom should come to me. Whoever can receive the Lord
Christ in this way will in a moment enter into glory, so that he will
shine like the beautiful sun.

(24) In this way our dear Lord Christ teaches us to know the last day,
so that we may know what we have in Him and for what we should wait and
hope for His future. The pope preaches about Christ, that he is a strict
judge, against whom one must send oneself with works, item, call upon
the saints and enjoy their intercession, if one does not want to be
condemned otherwise. For this is how Christ was painted everywhere in
the papacy, as coming to judgment and holding a sword and a rod in his
mouth, both of which signify wrath. But because Mary and John are at his
side, intercession of them and other saints has been sought and hoped
for. As the good Father Bernard also thinks: if the mother Mary shows
her breasts to her son, then he cannot deny her anything. This is a
certain indication that one did not trust in Christ, but believed that
Christ would come as a judge. But in this gospel he teaches us
differently, namely, that he will come, not to judge and condemn us, but
to save and help, and to fulfill what we have asked of him, and to bring
his kingdom to us. But to those who have not believed in him, and who
have mocked and afflicted his Christians on earth, he will be their
judge and punish them. These things, he says, believe firmly and do not
doubt.

And rejoice in my future; for it shall be for your good, that ye may be
delivered from sins, from the devil, from death, and from the world; and
through me ye shall be eternally saved. That means gloriously and
abundantly comforted.

(25) But there is one more thing, of which the wicked consciences are
sore afraid. For the Lord says that the last day will come unawares,
that it will happen to people like a little bird of the forest, which
flies along in the morning, is hungry and seeks its food, hopes to find
it, as before, finds it, sits down on the hearth, is happy and in good
spirits; but in a snap, before it is aware, the yarn falls over it, is
caught and strangled. Such things are taken to heart by godly people,
and because they know from daily experience how soon it happens that one
falls, they become stupid and despondent about it. For they think: Who
knows how this day will find you. Perhaps it will come at the hour when
you are most clumsy, and least expect it, or lie in this or that sin; so
it is done with you, and this day of joy becomes an eternal day of
mourning.

(26) Neither will the Lord leave us in despair here, and teacheth his
Christians how they ought to relieve themselves of these troubles,
saying, Take heed lest your hearts be troubled with devouring, and with
fretting, and with cares of food, and that day come upon you quickly.
For it will come like a snare upon all who dwell on the earth. Be ye
therefore always valiant, and pray that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
Son of man."

This is a very noble and necessary teaching, which should never leave
our hearts. The Lord does not forbid eating and drinking; neither does
he say, as the pope does, that one should leave everything behind, go
into a monastery and become spiritual. No, eat and drink, God is pleased
with you; also seek your food, for that is why God has commanded the
work. But beware lest your hearts be so burdened with all these things
that you forget my future; rather, beware lest you forget my future.

[20 L. i, 27-Ä. On the third Sunday of Advent. W. xm, p8.59.68-70.
21]{.underline}

But be courageous, that is, wait all the hours and moments, and for that
reason keep yourselves in the fear of God and a good conscience. Let
that be the first thing.

28 Then pray also that you may escape all temptation and sorrow, and be
worthy to stand before the Son of Man. As this is finely understood in
the last two petitions of the Lord's Prayer: "Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. If you do this, there will be no
need; then the last day will find you over the table, or in bed, in
church or in the market, awake or asleep, and it will be all the same.
For he will find you in God's protection.

29. but here one must also notice this, that one cannot call upon God
properly nor pray, where one does not knowingly sin.

Therefore, a righteous repentance belongs to the right prayer, and that
one should beware of wanton sins, and keep oneself in good conscience,
and then pray to God's goodness in the name of Jesus Christ, that He
may preserve us in His fear, keep us from sins by His Holy Spirit, and
keep us in a right faith until the end, so that we may await this
blessed day with joy, and accept our Lord Jesus as our Savior with
heartfelt confidence. Such prayer is heard through Christ, there is no
doubt about it. Therefore we should follow such advice and teaching, and
prepare ourselves for this gracious day of eternal salvation. May our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ grant this to us all, amen.

**On the third Sunday of Advent. *)**

**Matth. 11, 2-10.**

And when John heard the works of Christ in prison, he sent two of his
disciples, saying, Art thou he that should come, or shall we wait for
another? Jesus answered and said unto them: Go and tell John again what
you see and hear; the blind see, and the lame walk; the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear; the dead are raised up, and the poor have
the gospel preached to them. And blessed is he who does not take offense
at me. As they went, Jesus began to speak to the people of John, "What
did you go out into the wilderness to see? Did you want to see a reed
that the wind weaves to and fro? Or what went ye out to see? would ye
see a man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that wear soft garments
are in the houses of kings. Or what went ye out to see? would ye see a
prophet? Yea, I say unto you, he also is more than a prophet. For this
is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my angel before thee, which
shall prepare thy way before thee.

In this gospel are two parts: the first, how John sends his disciples
out of prison to Christ, that they may hear him, and see his miracles,
and receive him as the true Messiah or Christ. And serve us, that we
also may gladly hear the word of our dear Lord Christ, and esteem it to
be the highest treasure, as in

*) The Wittenberg edition of 1556 has: In 1536, in his house; the
Wittenberg and Nuremberg, which Walch also follows: In 1532, in his
house.

D. Red.

to whom all our blessedness is due. The other piece is a sermon, so that
our dear Lord Christ not only praises and extols St. John to the skies,
that he is a paragon above all other preachers, since he so diligently
waits for his office, that at that time, when he was in prison and in
jail and could not preach himself, he nevertheless sends his disciples
to Christ; but he also chides the Jews because of their unbelief, that
they hold such a preacher in such low esteem and ask nothing at all
about his preaching. Such

22L . **r, 29-S1. On the third Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 70-74.** 23

serve us to beware of such naughtiness, not to despise God's word, but
to hear it gladly and therefore to mend our ways.

2 Now the first thing, that we should diligently hear the word of
Christ, is signified by this, that John, while he was already in prison,
as soon as he heard of the miraculous works of Christ, sent his
disciples to him, with such a command that they should ask him: Whether
he was the one who was to come, of whom Moses and all the other prophets
had spoken so much, and who was to be preached so much in the New
Testament? That is, whether he was the promised Christ, of whom it was
written that the kingdom of the Jews and the doctrine of Moses should
endure until his future; after which Moses' doctrine and worship should
cease, and a new doctrine and worship be established, not only among the
Jews, but also among the Gentiles throughout the world.

(3) As these things were foretold plainly and clearly. Therefore,
because soon after John was imprisoned, the Lord Christ began to preach
about eternal life and the kingdom of God and to perform miracles, John
wanted to direct his disciples to him. For this reason he sent them to
Christ, so that they might see the miracles with their eyes and hear the
sermon with their ears, since the prophets had prophesied so long before
that Christ would bring them to earth and thus reveal himself.

(4) Therefore such sending is nothing else, but as if John said thus:
I know that he is the true Christ, but the people do not believe it.
Therefore go ye now unto him, and hear of him yourselves, that ye may
depart from me and from all Judaism, and cleave unto this man, in whom
is all that pertaineth to your salvation, and to the salvation of the
whole world. This is the final opinion of the message to Christ, that
his disciples should see and hear him for themselves, come to know him,
and so believe in him and be saved.

Now what does Christ say to such a message? He says neither yes nor no,
when they asked him if he is, but only answers with the works, saying,
"You see,

hear and know that I am he. For just as Isaiah and other prophets
prophesied that Christ would make straight the lame and give sight to
the blind, 2c. so now you see before your eyes, you must neither give
instruction nor answer, if only you would otherwise make yourselves
right.

(6) This is a beautiful, glorious and comforting sermon, which sums up
very well everything that can be preached about Christ, namely, what
kind of king he is and what kind of kingdom he has, namely, a kingdom
where the blind, the lame, the lepers, the deaf, the dead, and
especially poor sinners and everything that is miserable, meager and
nothing can hear and find comfort and help. We should diligently
remember this sermon about Christ and his kingdom, and always let it
resound among us that Christ has such a kingdom, and is such a king, who
wants to help the wretched, poor people in body and soul, since
otherwise it is impossible that all the world with all its ability could
help. For there never came such an excellent doctor, who could have made
a blind man see, a leper clean 2c. Just as there has never been a
preacher who could have preached the gospel to the poor, that is, who
could have pointed out and comforted the sorrowful, miserable, anxious
consciences, and made the frightened hearts, which were drowned in gloom
and sorrow, cheerful and of good cheer.

Moses is the highest preacher, but he does not know how to comfort poor
sinners; indeed, he does the opposite, for all his sermons are thus: You
must and must keep the law, or be damned. Then there arises a
lamentation: those who feel their sin, and would gladly be rid of it,
become sour, live according to the law, but cannot be satisfied, nor
gain a happy heart and conscience by it. As the saints in the Old
Testament lament, when they are weary of Moses' regiment and have a
hearty longing for the kingdom of grace promised in Christ. Psalm 14:7:
"Ah, that help might come upon Israel out of Zion, and that the Lord
might redeem his captive people." And Psalm 102, 14: "Thou wouldest
make thyself known, and have mercy upon Israel, for it is time that thou
shouldest be gracious unto her. "2c. Again the

24 **L. 1.31-33. On the third Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 74-76.** 25

Hypocrites think that if they keep the law outwardly, they must not
believe in the gospel or in Christ, that there is no need, that God must
take them to heaven because of their fasting, praying and almsgiving.
These are the secure, satisfied spirits who have no need of our Lord God
and His grace.

Now it is true that Moses' sermon must be preached, and people must be
admonished to such outward discipline and good conduct; just as in the
world regiment executioners and beadles must be appointed to punish the
wild, raw mob, which does not keep such outward discipline, but hurts,
steals, is stingy, usurps 2c. But when the hour comes for you to die,
tell me, what good are such teachings of Moses to you, if you have kept
to them immediately? Isn't it true that you must confess and say: Dear
Lord God, even though I have not been an adulterer, thief or murderer, I
still desire that you will be merciful and gracious to me, otherwise I
will despair even with all my good works.

(9) There is a history of this in Vitis Patrum (Life of the Fathers):
One stood three days in a place, always lifting up his eyes to heaven,
sighing and lamenting. And when his disciples asked him what was the
matter with him, he answered, "I am afraid of death. Then his disciples
began to tell him how strictly he had lived and how diligently he had
obeyed God's commandments, thinking that they were comforting him. But
he said: I tell you that I am very afraid; I have, as you say,
diligently kept God's word, yet I cannot be free from such fear; for I
know that God's judgments are different from the judgments of men. This
one has come so far that he has seen, when the moves come that go before
God and His judgment, that God's judgment is so sharp, severe and heavy
that our holiness and good works cannot hold the sting, nor can we stand
with it.

(10) Therefore, whether one should preach the law at once, and
practice good works without ceasing, and judge himself according to the
word of God at all times; but when it comes to the point of dying, one
must say, like this father, "O God, who will help now? This is

of the miserable also one, since here of stands, but he does not know,
to which he is to hold. For this he lacks, since the Lord says here of:
"The poor have the gospel preached to them." He sees and has no more
than the law; and leaves him stuck in an evil conscience, fear and
distress, cannot comfort.

(11) The gospel is such a sermon of Christ, which says to the sinner:
"My son, be of good cheer, do not be dismayed; for you should know that
Christ has commanded grace to the poor, that is, to the miserable,
afflicted hearts, that he would set his purity, which is divine and
eternal, for you, make you content with God, wash away and forgive your
sin. He means to offer you this grace through his word; therefore do not
doubt, as you hear (now believe), so it will be done to you.

(12) So the gospel is called a gracious, blessed doctrine and a
comforting message, as if a rich man promised a thousand florins to a
poor beggar, that would be a gospel to him, a joyful message, which he
would gladly hear and rejoice over with all his heart. But what is money
and goods against this comforting and grace-filled sermon that Christ
takes care of the miserable and is such a king who wants to help the
poor sinners, who are imprisoned under the law, to eternal life and
righteousness!

This, Christ says here, is my kingdom, a far different kingdom than the
world kingdom is. There it is done in such a way that one helps the
strongest, and as the saying goes: He who overpowers the other puts him
in a sack. That rules by the sharpness with the sword, strikes and
knocks everywhere around itself, can and should suffer also no vice and
vice. It must have executioners, rods, swords, water and fire so that it
can punish everywhere.

(14) But here in the kingdom of Christ it is quite different; it does
not have to do with strong, holy people, but with weak, poor sinners, as
Christ says: "The blind see, the dead rise" 2c. Now, to raise the dead
is a great miracle; but this miracle is much greater and more glorious,
and yet it does not have the appearance, namely, that

26 **L. i, 33-35. On the third Sunday of Advent. W. xin, 76-79.** 27

God so loves the world that he gives it his Son, whom he has ordained
from eternity to be a king of sinners, to preach the gospel. Moses and
the law do not preach about such a king and gospel. So it says: Whoever
is a sinner belongs to the kingdom of the devil and of death. This reads
as if our Lord God is a king of the saints and the pious, who have a
much higher piety than the worldly regime demands. And this is also
true. For Moses' kingdom is also our Lord God's kingdom, and the
sermon he preaches is God's word. Just as the temporal government may
also be called God's kingdom. For he wants it to remain and for us to
be obedient in it. But it is only the kingdom of the left hand, since he
sets father, mother, emperor, king, judge, executioner and commands them
the regiment.

15. But his right kingdom, where he himself is and reigns, is this,
where the gospel is preached to the poor, in which thou shalt learn,
when it cometh to pass that thy godliness can never help, that thou
shalt say: Lord, I have done what I could, faithfully served my father,
my lord, desecrated no one, not resented, faithfully taught my house,
child and servants, and, as much as possible, governed well, not lived
to harm my neighbor, not stolen, not broken marriage 2c.But where now?
For such things do not help me before your judgment, nor do they advance
me to your kingdom. But, dear Lord, I will not therefore despair nor
despair; for I have heard once in thy gospel, that thy Son, my dear Lord
Jesus Christ, hath wrought six miraculous signs. Among them is this,
that the gospel should be preached to the poor, that is, that he should
be ordained of thee, O heavenly Father, to comfort the troubled heart. I
will also accept such preaching, for it belongs to me, because I am so
poor and miserable, and can never find help either in myself or in the
whole world.

16 Thus the prophet Isaiah prophesies of Christ in chapter 50, v. 4,
where he, the Lord Christ, himself speaks: "The Lord has given me
linguam discipulam, a learned tongue.

God has put his word on my tongue, that I may know how to speak to the
weary in season," that is, to comfort the troubled conscience. The
evangelist interprets this here and says: Christ preaches the gospel to
the poor. For this reason and for this purpose he was appointed king,
that he should evangelize, that is, comfort and strengthen the poor,
stupid, afflicted hearts; therefore his kingdom is also called and is a
kingdom of comfort and help, in which one should no longer frighten the
stupid or leave them in fear, but comfort them and make them happy. This
is not done by the preaching of the law, but by the gospel alone. This
is the joyful good news that through Christ our sins have been paid for
and through his suffering we have been redeemed from eternal death. This
sermon is for the poor, says the Lord, that is where I want to go; for I
cannot come to the great saints, who do not want to be sinners and do
not need the gospel, even persecute it and call it heresy, saying that
they forbid good works and preach against Moses and the law.

17 Therefore the Lord says again, "Blessed is he who does not take
offense at me. Yes, indeed, blessed. For in this king and his preaching,
in which everyone should rejoice, the whole world is offended. As we see
in the Historia of the Gospel, the Pharisees, scribes, chief priests,
priests, Levites, and all that is high and great, consider Christ a
deceiver, and his preaching a heresy, and condemn him. He can nowhere
preach rightly to them; it seems to them that he always turns it around
and makes it wrong: he wants to cast the pious and righteous (as he
does) into hell and not suffer in his kingdom, but lift sinners up to
heaven. Just as the papists are doing to us today. Does this mean, they
say, to preach rightly, that good works are not to be counted at all,
and that heaven is to be opened to the wicked? Our dear Lord Christ also
had to suffer this slander from the Jews.

18 But here it is: "Blessed is he who does not take offense at me."
Now, if you would hear Christ rightly, accept his word, and enter his
kingdom, you would learn that the

28 L. 1, 35-37. On the third Sunday of Advent. W. xm, 79-82. 29

The Holy Gospel does not forbid good works, as the papists lie to us,
but teaches and exhorts Christians to do good works, so that they take
care of them with earnestness, that they do nothing against God's word
and conscience; lets worldly authority remain, emperor, king, lets the
executioner use sword, rod and other things that belong to discipline.
Why then do you take offense at the holy gospel, and blaspheme it, that
one should do no good? The gospel neither rejects nor forbids good
works. But it forbids this, that if we should die now, and go into
another fief, and there be no counsel nor help against it, that we
should not then rely nor trust on our life and good works; but look for
the Lord Christ, and with firm reliance on his work and merit, that
through him we may find grace and everlasting blessedness in that life.

For this very reason God has given us such a body, with so many useful
limbs, that we should not be idle here on earth, but should walk with
our feet, take hold with our hands, speak with our mouths, see with our
eyes 2c. Above this he has also given his word, the Ten Commandments,
that we should judge all our deeds according to them, and not do
anything against his honor and our neighbor's benefit. The gospel not
only allows this to happen, but also tells us to do it diligently. But
if man is now alone and alone, and is to come out of this world before
God's judgment, then the gospel calls you to look for another
consolation, where you can set your hope and heart.

20. Therefore you have lived well: is right and good, thank God for it;
but do not rely on it when you die, as if God were to give you heaven
for it; but draw near to this King, our Lord Christ Jesus, who, as the
evangelist reports here, is to lead the ministry of making the blind
see, the lame walk, the lepers clean, the deaf hear, the dead rise, and
to preach the gospel to the poor, that is, to comfort the miserable,
anxious, afflicted hearts. For he was not set apart by his Father to
save us from our sins.

He is not to be executed or punished for his own sake, but to counsel
the poor consciences, to raise them up, to comfort them, and to help
them forever.

(21) Those who do not regard him for this, nor have such grace toward
him, but are offended by him and his teaching and despise him, as the
Jews did and the hypocrites are still doing today, he will control them
in his time. And this is one of the things that offends the world, that
it takes offense at the teachings of Christ, that it does not want to
rely on God's grace, but on its own work and merit. Therefore, rebuke
the holy gospel, saying that it is a seductive doctrine that forbids
good works and makes people reprobate and wild.

(22) Secondly, the world also resents Christ because he is so poor and
miserable; item, that just as he bears the cross and lets himself be
hanged on it, so he also exhorts his Christians to take up their cross
and thus follow him through all kinds of trials and tribulations. The
world is especially hostile to such things, shying away from them, and
just as can be seen when we confess the gospel and are to dare or suffer
something for its sake, that many fall with heaps, like the worm-eaten
fruit in summer.

23) Thirdly, this is also called trouble, when we turn more to our
hearts and consciences, as we feel, than to the gospel of Christ; that
is, when we are more troubled by our doings than comforted by the grace
of our dear Lord Jesus Christ proclaimed in the gospel. This trouble is
not so common as the first two, for only the true Christians are
challenged by it. But it is exceedingly grievous; and if it were without
the help and assistance of the Holy Ghost, none of us could stand in
such affliction.

(24) So the dear Lord Christ is an angry preacher everywhere in the
world; as he soon after this gospel reports even more clearly, that
people are offended by this preaching, and will despise and persecute
it. But what judgment the world must endure because of this is shown by
the terrible sermon against the three cities, Capernaum, Chora-

30L . **1, 37-39. On the third Sunday of Advent. W. xiii, 82-8Z.** 31

zin and Bethsaida; item, the serious complaint of Christ against the
Jews, where he says: John was a strict preacher, ate only wild honey and
locusts, drank nothing but water, led a very hard life, but what did it
help? You blamed him all the same, that he had the devil. I," he says,
"eat and drink with everyone, and am most friendly to people; so I must
be to you a glutton and a winebibber, who is a publican and a sinner. So
no one can get along with the poisonous snakes, the hypocrites and the
works saints. If one lives freely and is friendly to people, it is no
good. If another leads a strict and hard life, it is no good. How should
one still do it to the shameful world? It would please it to praise
everything it does when it does nothing right.

(25) Such afflictions must be suffered. For if at that time the Lord
Christ himself preached, and rained and snowed with miraculous signs, so
that the blind received sight, the deaf heard, the lame were made
straight, the lepers were cleansed, and the dead were restored to life,
he did not want to help, but the word was still despised, and he, the
dear Lord Christ, was struck on the cross for it, and the apostles were
driven out of the Jewish country, and nowhere in the whole world could
be safe because of this preaching: what shall we greatly lament? And
what wonder is it that the world so despises the holy gospel and
righteous preachers in our time and runs over them with its feet? It was
no different with Christ our Lord himself and the apostles, who not only
spoke the word, but also performed great miraculous signs, which we do
not do, but only speak the mere, annoying word.

26 For this reason, we must live and let it happen. For the gospel can
never be otherwise. It is and remains a sermon that is not rejected by
few people, but by the holiest, most pious, wisest, and most powerful on
earth, as experience shows. But to those who know and believe that it is
God's word; to those who know and believe that it is God's word.

are recovered, comforted, and strengthened against all such offenses.
But those who do not know it are puffed up because of their good works,
fall from this word to their own righteousness, and consider it an
annoying and rebellious doctrine. This is what it means to be offended
and annoyed. And this is done, as I said, by those who are considered
the greatest saints and the wisest men in the eyes of the world.
Therefore we may well lament with the Lord Christ over the blind world,
saying, "We whistled to you, and you would not dance; we lamented to
you, and you would not weep." If we preach the gospel, it does not
help; if we preach the law, it does not help. The wicked world can
neither be made truly happy nor truly sad, that is, it neither wants to
be made sinners nor to be comforted against sin; it neither wants to be
blind nor to see, as the example of our adversaries, the papists, is
before our eyes.

(27) Now this is the other thing that is to be noted here: that the
gospel is a doctrine and a sermon for the poor, that is, for the
afflicted, anxious consciences, who feel their misery and sorrow, and
are terrified and afraid of God's wrath and judgment; not for the rich,
who direct all their actions and thoughts so that they may have great
honor and good here, and live in joy and pleasure. Therefore it is a
strange and strange sermon to their ears when Christ the Lord says:
"The poor have the gospel preached to them," which they neither desire
to know nor to learn, and even consider it foolishness; they not only
resent it, but persecute and blaspheme it as heresy. As we can see from
the pope and his spiritless cardinals, bishops, and most of the greatest
and most powerful secular rulers and potentates who adhere to him. So
that everything that is pious, holy, great and powerful in the world is
opposed to the gospel.

028 Against such vexation, as I have said, Christ warns his company,
saying, Blessed is he that taketh not offense at me. As if to say, "If
therefore you see and know that the world is offended at my word, and
that you, who confess it, are offended at it

32 L. 1, 39.40. On the fourth Sunday of Advent. W. xiii, 8s. 108.109.
ZZ33

Do not be deceived or disbelieved, but remember that this is what
happened to Christ, the Son of God, our Lord. And even though he
preached so powerfully and performed so many great miraculous signs, it
still did not help him. And that we should be careful not to be moved by
the world's wisdom, glory, power and great multitude, he has faithfully
warned and admonished us to hold fast to him and his word, saying,
"Blessed is he who does not take offense at me.

29 Because it happened to our dear Lord Christ Himself that His own
people, to whom He was promised and sent to be a Savior, were displeased
with Him, and even though they saw His glorious and great miraculous
signs which He performed before their eyes, yet they were not moved to
believe His preaching and accept Him, and even crucified and murdered
Him 2c.So we may be silent and not complain if we are also despised,
laughed at and persecuted for the sake of the gospel. Such a doctrine of
reproach is highly needed, especially in our day, when everyone
blasphemes the dear gospel and is offended by it.

(30) So your love has from today's gospel excellent high teaching, on
which our salvation and eternal life depend, namely, that we may learn
how Christ is a kopeck.

He is the King of graces and of all comfort, who will speak kindly to
the poor afflicted consciences through his gospel, comfort them in their
sins, and help them to eternal life. For although the strict worldly
regime is also God's kingdom, it is only his left kingdom that is to
cease. But this is his right and eternal kingdom, which comes to us
through the word, if we, who are oppressed by sin and death (because it
is preached to such), accept and believe it. This comforts and assures
us, then, that we should certainly go to Christ, and say with certain
confidence, "I believe in my Lord Jesus Christ, who has made the blind
to see, the lame to walk, the lepers to be clean, the deaf to hear, and
the dead to live. I have this word, and for this reason I am certain
that he will not leave me in my greatest need, but will lead me out of
death and the devil's kingdom into eternal life and the kingdom of
heaven. For this reason he became man and came to me on earth, that he
might comfort me, a poor, miserable sinner, through his gospel, and help
me from sin and death for eternity. 2c. All who believe this from the
heart will go from this pit of misery to eternal joy and bliss. May our
dear Lord Christ grant us this, amen.

**On the fourth Sunday of Advent. *)**

**John 1:19-28.**

And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and
Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou? And he confessed, and
denied not; and he confessed: I am not Christ. And they asked him, What
then? art thou Elias? And he said: I am not. Art thou a prophet? And he
answered, No. Then said they unto him, What art thou then? that we may
give answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself? He said:
I am a voice of one preaching in the wilderness, Direct ye the way of
the LORD, as Isaias the prophet said. And they that were sent were of
the Pharisees, and asked him, saying unto him, Why baptizest thou then,
if thou be not Christ, nor Elias, nor a prophet? John answered them,
saying: I baptize with water; but he is come in the midst of you, whom
ye know not. This is he that shall come after me, which was before me,
that I am not worthy to loose his shoe laces. This took place at
Bethabara, on the other side of the Jordan, where John was baptizing.

*) Held in the house 1533.

**34L . 1, 40-42. On the fourth Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, 110-112. 35**

(1) This also of the beautiful and glorious gospels is one of the
highest articles of our faith, teaching not of the ten commandments, or
what we ought to do; but of a higher thing, namely, what Christ is, and
what he hath done. For John praises him so highly that even though he
leads a very holy life, yet he freely confesses and says, "I am not
worthy to untie his shoe laces." Is therefore almost the same opinion
with the gospel of eight days ago, without that here are other words and
persons.

2. for eight days ago your love heard how all power lies in not missing
this person, Christ Jesus, but accepting him, not passing by nor looking
at others. For whoever meets him finds salvation from sins, death and
hell. For thus God has decreed that in Christ all fullness should dwell
and that he should be all. He is the way, the truth and the life.
Through Him alone all the patriarchs, prophets, apostles and saints have
been blessed from the foundation of the world. John knows this and
therefore instructs his disciples not to miss this treasure.

(3) But because we do not follow it, the defect is that we do not keep
to God's word, but leave it out of consideration, and undertake various
ways and means to get to heaven. One runs into a monastery, as can be
seen in the papacy, becomes a monk, another fasts, the third seeks the
intercession of this or that other saint; so that everyone seeks a
special way and his own path to heaven. To prevent such evil and harmful
actions, God has earnestly given His word to His people, saying that He
would help them through the seed of the woman, that is, through His Son
Jesus Christ. He that hath failed of him hath failed of salvation,
though he had fasted himself to death, and prayed a fool. Again, whoever
has accepted him with faith and relied on him has found forgiveness of
sin and eternal salvation, and neither sin nor the devil has been able
to hinder him.

4 All the holy patriarchs have followed this path.

The saints and prophets were followed and found salvation through faith
in Christ. For if someone should have gone to heaven through a holy
life, it should certainly have been the dear holy prophets, who for the
sake of God did and suffered much in the evil, wicked world. But they
all despair of their holiness, and hang on with firm confidence to the
promised seed of the giving, which shall bruise the head of the
serpents.

Most of the Jews in Christ's time did not want to follow this way,
thought: What should this servant be able to do? We must keep the law,
take hold, sacrifice, give alms; this will be the best and next way to
heaven; this beggar cannot help. For Christ was altogether wretched and
miserable, so that whoever did not keep the miraculous signs and his
preaching, found nothing else in him that was worthy of respect.

6th So that the Jews would not let him pass by and not be aware of him,
God, the merciful Father, decreed that John, like a trumpeter before the
prince, should go before the Lord Christ and be the trumpet. When they
heard this, they would open their eyes and look at the one who would
soon follow him, and he would be the right man.

007 Wherefore, when the Jews were here sending a legation unto him, and
asked him, Whether he be Christ, Elias, or a prophet? he answered, "I
am not." But when they ask, "What are you? What do you say about
yourself?" he answers: I will tell you, I am a voice crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord: that is, I am the trumpeter
before the Prince. Therefore listen diligently to my preaching, for he
will soon come after me who was before me, and baptize you with the Holy
Spirit, since I, as a servant, can baptize only with water. He has come
in the midst of you, but you do not know him.

008 Therefore this is my office, whereunto I am sent, to be a voice
crying, or a preacher in the wilderness; that, when ye hear the sound of
my trumpet,

36 **L. 1, 42-44. On the Fourth Sunday of Advent. W. XIII, II2-IIS.** 37

that you may know that he is there. For I am the voice that calleth, and
the preacher, unto whom ye shall hearken. Now the next one who comes
after me is he, as Isaiah also prophesies in chapter 40, v. 3: "There
is a voice of a preacher in the wilderness: Prepare the way for the
Lord, make a level path for our Lord on the field. This, says John, is
I, which shall declare these things unto you. Therefore see, he is
already among you, but you do not know him; but I am to teach you, that
you may know and accept him. For the next preacher who will arise after
me is surely he; I am only the forerunner. I now hold this office and
preach. He does not preach yet, but soon after me he will let himself be
heard; so now see that you do not miss him and have respect for him.

(9) As John preached, so it came to pass. For immediately after his
baptism Christ was seen with miraculous signs in Galilee, he sent out
twelve apostles and seventy-two disciples, and they preached, "The
kingdom of heaven is at hand, that is, Christ is present, and he is the
one of whom he testifies; cling to him and receive him, and you will not
fail. He will come after me, but he was before me. For John was half a
year older than Christ the Lord, yet he says, "He was before me. This
was a blasphemous word in the sight of the Jews, if they had understood
it at that time; as is seen in John 8:58, where he says, "Before
Abraham was, I am." For so much is said, that this man, before he was
born on earth, was for ever the true Son of God. The Jews at that time
did not understand this. But John certainly meant it with these words,
and wanted to touch the divine glory of the person; as he also gives
enough to understand, when he says: "I am not worthy to untie his
laces.

010 Then the Jews should have fallen down, and thought: What kind of a
man is this, what kind of a person, before whom John humbles himself so
deeply, and says: He is not worthy to serve him in the least? Dear John,
shall you not

worth? Yes, I, I, he says, am not worth it; be I otherwise who I want, I
am nothing against this man. So he throws away all his holiness and
says: He would be satisfied with this, if he could only enjoy this man
so far that he should wipe his shoes.

011 Lest therefore the Jews think that he humbleth himself too much,
because he hath baptized, and was a special preacher, he teacheth them
well because of such baptism, saying, I have the same signs with me as
the other prophets. Jeremiah wore a wooden yoke; Isaiah went barefoot
and naked, prophesying to the Egyptians and the Moors how they would be
plundered by enemies and stripped, Isa. 20. So, says John, I also preach
a new sermon and new signs; I preach, You shall prepare the way for the
Lord. I could not preach such things if the way had been prepared first.
Then I wash you and baptize you as a sign that you are unclean and
unclean. I will prepare this bath for you, but he will prepare another
and better bath for you and baptize you with the Holy Spirit.

(12) All things therefore are directed that they should not let this
man pass by, but remember John's preaching. Behold, John has told us of
one who will appear after him; he will certainly be the one who now
makes himself seen so powerfully with preaching and signs.

013 But what happened? They listened to John, but did not believe his
testimony; indeed, they executed both Christ and his forerunner, cut off
John's head, and crucified Christ, of whom John had preached so
faithfully and exhorted everyone to accept him. They have always been
such pious people, who not only despised the preaching of the prophets,
persecuted them and beat them to death, but also crucified Christ the
Lord Himself, whom they preached.

This is the way it is today, because Christ must be crucified, not only
in his own person, but also in his members. We would like to point
everyone to the right path of salvation with John, saying: There is no
salvation outside of Christ.

**38 L. i, 44^7. on the fourth Sunday of Advent. W. xm, ns-H8. 39**

Forgiveness of sin, nor eternal life. But what happens? The more we
point people from their own works, as from a false foundation, to the
right rock of Christ, the more vehemently our counterpart heresies and
condemns us. For this does not agree with their teaching, as everyone
knows. They point to the monasteries, say mass, hold masses and vigils,
establish services, go on pilgrimages, buy indulgences 2c. But this does
not mean pointing to Christ, but seeking other ways besides Christ to
get to heaven. Against this we speak, and exhort the people to hold to
John's testimony, which points to Christ. This is unpleasant to the
pope and his crowd, who condemn us as heretics, and if they could, they
would of course not lack the will to reward and thank us as much as the
Jews did St. John.

(15) But why are they so hostile to us, and why do they dislike us so
much? For no other reason than that we preach with John that they should
humble themselves before Christ, and with all their worship and good
works not esteem themselves worthy to wipe his shoes. For they
themselves must confess that John was much holier than they; yet he
says: I do not want to look at such holiness, if I could only have the
grace to remove or wipe his shoes, that would be enough for me. We would
like to instill such humility in everyone through the gospel; therefore,
according to our ministry, we exhort everyone to beware of sins and to
be pious, but not to take comfort from God in such piety; but rather,
like John, to regard his good works and honorable life as a shoestring
compared to the high, pure, perfect and great righteousness that our
dear Lord Christ has earned for us through his suffering and death.

But the pope and bishops, monks and priests do not want to follow.
Cause, they do not want to and cannot drop the trust in their and the
deceased saints' merit. Therefore they do not desire to be partakers of
our Lord Christ's benefits and merits, not to mention that they should
comfort themselves as godly hearts do,

who feel their sin and are terrified of God's wrath and judgment; yes,
they even cry out, as mad people who have never thought, much less felt,
what sin and death are: Man is not justified by faith alone, works also
do something. So they will not let the righteousness of Christ be their
treasure, like John, who casts away all his holiness, will not let it
count as much as a rag, where one wipes unclean shoes with it; this, as
I said, the pope will not enter into with his bunch, they lift up their
works so high that they consider themselves worthy of eternal life.
Therefore they cannot suffer in any way that their worship and holiness
should be compared to old rags; indeed, they make themselves believe
that Christ must be pleased when they practice it, in honor and service
of him.

(17) Therefore let no one be offended that the papists in our time
despise and persecute the gospel. It happened to John, Christ and the
apostles themselves in their time that their teaching was not only
despised, but they were all persecuted and miserably condemned. Now, the
Jews have received their punishment, our despisers and blasphemers will
not escape their punishment either.

(18) Let us thank God for His grace in restoring us to the pure Word,
and first of all pay attention to John's word, when he says: "Prepare
the way for the Lord"; item: "He has come into the midst of you" 2c.;
and soon after: "Behold, this is the Lamb of God, who bears the sin of
the world. - There he says nothing of our works and merits, 2c., but
points us straight to Christ, in whom we find and have all things.

19. after this we are also to note the example of his humility with
diligence, that the holy man, who, as Christ testifies, has no equal
among all those who are born of women (so, of course, all the monks and
priests who have ever been under the papacy cannot hold a candle to him
with all their holiness), lets himself down and humbles himself so
deeply that he says: he is, with all his holiness and good works, the
most holy of all.

40 **n.i.47-49. On the fourth Sunday of Advent. W. xin, H8- 41.**

He is not worthy to bow down before the Lord Christ and untie his shoe
laces. Let this be an example of the humility in John, that we should
not only take good care of him, but also follow him.

(20) We must do good deeds and make the utmost effort to do them, for
God has commanded and commanded in the Ten Commandments, which he has
not given in vain from heaven. It is his word, therefore he wants it
kept. Therefore, let every man do his best to live by it, and thus show
himself obedient and grateful to God, who gave us His dear Son, who
humbled Himself for our sake, and became obedient to the point of death,
yes, death on the cross, in which He did enough for all the sin of the
world. Rely on this man's obedience and work and build firmly on it,
and throw everything good you have ever done before his feet, and only
confess freely from the heart with Johanne that it is not worth wiping
Christ's shoes with it.

(21) In the sight of men it is a fine, clean, beautiful rag, a jewel
and a virtue, that thou art no adulterer, no thief, no murderer, that
thou givest alms, that thou art diligent in thy office; (2c) this may
and ought to be praised in the sight of men in the world, and to be
counted as rags, and pieces of silk, and of gold. But when it comes
before our Lord GOD and his judgment, say, "In your sight, O LORD, the
best of my garments and the finest of my gold are worse than any rag.
Therefore, do not judge me according to my works; I will gladly let them
be your old rags, and if God only wanted me to be worthy of them, I
would gladly be satisfied with them.

22 St. Paul also does this, Phil. 3, 5-7: "I," he says, "am an
Israelite, a Pharisee according to the law, and blameless according to
the righteousness of the law," so that no man can punish me. Let that
be something special, if someone can boast like that in front of people.
"Nevertheless," he says, "for Christ's sake, I consider all this
holiness to be a waste and a filth," and my highest joy and best
comfort is that I shall be found, not in my righteousness, which is from
the law, but in the

Righteousness that comes through faith in Christ, which is imputed by
God to faith. So that I may enjoy such righteousness of my Lord, I
consider all my righteousness as dirt. Here Paul does it even more
crudely than John; the latter, after all, calls his good works a
shoelace; Paul, however, calls it dung and dirt. That is unkind enough
to speak of our holy life.

(23) But we are to let such examples be especially commanded to us, to
be well aware of them, and to be earnestly diligent that we live before
the world in all modesty and respectability, so that people have nothing
to complain about us. Such things belong to this life, here on earth,
and also end here, as you can see: a pious man is shamed just as much as
a rogue; a pious woman just as much as a whore. But if it is to come to
that and eternal life, then learn to speak: I hold fast to my Lord
Christ and to his holiness, which he promises and gives me in baptism,
word and sacrament; and I will be found a poor little worm 2c. So that a
distinction may be made between our temporal life and holiness, and the
eternal life of holiness, which is before God.

(24) The Gentiles also have kept themselves in fine discipline and
honorableness, and have done and suffered much for the sake of the
fatherland; therefore they are also to be praised. But here, when death
comes, we are separated; all our deeds and sufferings remain behind, for
by them we do not receive forgiveness of sins, righteousness 2c. But
where then shall we take the righteousness and holiness that is valid
before God and in eternal life? So we have to humble ourselves with John
and say: "Lord, here comes a poor little thing, an old, torn, nasty
little thing, or as Paul says, a stinking mud. In the sight of the world
it may be muslin, velvet, and a piece of gold; but in your sight, O
Lord, let me be an old rag, wiping the shoes of your Son with it, and
give me his righteousness, who with his righteousness is my noblest and
most precious treasure. For I know that through him and his
righteousness I shall enter the kingdom of heaven;

42 L. i, 4g-si. On the fourth Sunday of Advent. W. xm, 121-123. 43

since I would have to go to the abyss of hell through my holiness.

(25) From this it follows that we must freely conclude that monks,
priests, monasteries, and what may be called such things, all belong to
the devil and to hell. For they do not see with their good works that
they may render the owed obedience to God, and be annoying to no one,
but that they may think to become blessed there. That is why they sell
their good works to other people. But this is to deny Christ altogether,
even to mock him, and to despise him as the Jews mocked him and despised
him. We should beware of such abominations, and learn here how we may
meet such deceivers, that we may say to them, "Thou poor man, dost thou
dare to make me blessed with thy filthy works and holiness? John, Paul,
Peter and other saints could not have done that, otherwise they would
not have preached so little about their holiness. If one still needed
the monasteries for houses of correction, that one would raise young
boys in them and let them study the Scriptures, then it would be a very
fine, delicious and useful custom. But the pope and his godless crowd
will not let it come to that; instead, they point everyone to heaven
with such a monastic life. But they will certainly find such a heaven
with it, since the flame and the fire go out to the window. Therefore,
it would be much better to destroy such monasteries than to reject
people from Christ and damage their souls and bodies.

(26) Therefore learn in summary from today's Gospel that we are to
live modestly and honorably among and with the people, to be diligent
and industrious in good works, and not to offend anyone. God demands
such obedience through His law and wants it from us; and if we do not
obey, He will strike us with the executioner, with the sword, and
finally also with hellish fire. This, I say, is what we are obligated to
do by God's command against the people. But when you come before God,
say: Lord, because of my holiness and works I am lost. Therefore, ask
that I may be

to be an old rag at the feet of my Lord Christ. For I am not worthy of
my life, except that he cast me into hell. But I desire his holiness,
that he may sanctify me with another, better, and everlasting holiness;
and I shall surely enter into everlasting life.

27 Neither the pope nor the bishops want to hear this, for they see what
would follow, namely, that monasteries and convents, masses and all
their false worship would not stand for long; that is why they are so
stubborn about it: the one more for the sake of his belly, the other and
lesser part because they hope to be saved by it. John does not do this,
neither does Paul, they do not want to keep their righteousness and
holiness. So should all Christians do, saying with Paul, My holiness is
a stinking filth and mire; and with John, My holiness is a rag, if I
will count it against the holiness and works of Christ. But the papists
want to be neither filth nor rags in their masses, vows, fasts, and
prayers; they beat us to death for not keeping up with them and pointing
people to a different and better way. Well, it is a breed of vipers,
where nothing good can ever grow out of it; they will find what they are
looking for. But let us look to the mouth and finger of John, that he
may testify and guide us, that we may not fail to see our Lord and
Savior, Jesus Christ, and that we may not fail to see him, who so
diligently and faithfully guides and directs us to salvation.

28 This is the most important lesson of today's gospel, since John so
diligently points to the Lord Christ, thus humbling himself and exalting
and praising Christ. The other part, that the Pharisees and chief
priests send to John, and forbid him to baptize and preach, because he
himself says that he is neither Christ, nor Elijah, nor a prophet; item,
that he makes a distinction between his baptism, so that he baptizes as
a servant, and the baptism of Christ, who himself is the Lord and can
give the Spirit alone: such two parts are a little too high for the
common man; without that one can

[44 **L. 1, 51.52.** On the holy day of Christ. **W. XIII,
123,134-137.** 45]{.underline}

Nevertheless, they should learn from this and realize how the world, and
especially what is wise and high in the world, is hostile to God's
works, and would gladly curb and suppress them, as the chief priests and
Pharisees do here. But John has a right Elijah spirit and power, that
is, an undaunted heart, and does not allow himself to be forbidden to
preach or baptize until

Herod takes him by the head, throws him into the tower, and finally has
his head cut off. He suffers this gladly and patiently for the sake of
God, in the hope that he will have a merciful God and eternal life
through his Lord and Savior Christ. May our dear Lord God and Father
grant us this through His Son Jesus Christ, Amen.

**On the holy day of Christ. *)**

**From the history of how Christ was born in Bethlehem.**

**Luc. 2, 1-15.**

And it came to pass at that time, that a commandment went forth from the
emperor Augustus, that all the world should be appraised. And this
valuation was the very first, and came to pass at the time that Cyrenius
was governor in Syria. And every man went to be appraised, every man to
his own city. Then Joseph also departed out of Galilee, from the city of
Nazareth, into the land of Judah, unto the city of David, which is
called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David; that
he might be esteemed with Mary his familiar wife, which was with child.
And when they were there, the time came for her to give birth. And she
bare her first son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him
in a manger: for they had no other room in the inn. And there were
shepherds in the same region in the field by the hurdles, tending their
flock by night. And, behold, the angel of the LORD came unto them, and
the glory of the LORD shone round about them, and they were sore afraid.
And the angel said unto them: Fear not; behold, I proclaim unto you
great joy, which shall be to all people: for unto you is born this day a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord, in the city of David. And this is the
sign that you will find the child wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying
in a manger. And immediately there was with the angel the multitude of
the heavenly host praising GOD and saying: Glory to God in the highest,
and on earth peace, and goodwill toward men.

This feast of the Nativity of our dear Lord Jesus Christ was instituted
among Christians primarily for the purpose of preaching and teaching the
story, so that it may be remembered by the young people and the common
man, so that they may form it in their hearts and learn to recognize
their Savior. For even if it is said yearly, it cannot be preached or
learned at all. Therefore we will divide the gospel into two parts.
First, the Historia tell in the most simple way how they

*) Wittenberg edition: In the church in 1533; Walch: Anno 1533, in his
house. D. Red.

After that, listen to what the dear angels preach and sing about it.

The first part of the Historia is this: that Christ was born just at the
time when under the emperor Augustus the Jews and their property were
valued for the first time. Then our dear Lord Christ began to reign,
however secretly, in the world, and the great emperor Augustus must
serve him with his empire, however ignorantly, and give cause by his
commandment for the virgin Mary and her trusted husband Joseph to
journey to Bethlehem, and as the prophets had foretold, to bring the
Savior of the world to light there.

**46** L-1, 52-54. Am heiligen Christlage. W. xm, 137-139. **47**

Otherwise, if this had not been caused by the emperor's command, Joseph
and Mary would have remained at home. But Christ was to be born in
Bethlehem, therefore the emperor must give cause for it, and thus serve
the Lord Christ for his birth; although neither the emperor nor the
world knew anything about it. For otherwise the world is so wicked and
unfaithful that it would rather have hindered it than promoted it. But
God leads his regiment in such a way that it must do ignorantly at
times, where it could never be brought to knowingly.

3 When they came to Bethlehem from Galilee in Judea to obey the emperor,
the evangelist says, the time was right for the virgin Mary to give
birth. All things are unprepared and unskilled. Behold, the two spouses
are in a strange land, in a strange city, where they have neither house
nor farm; and though they have friends there, as was scarcely the case,
yet they have no regard for them. Above all this, the city was so full
at that time that, as the evangelist says, they had no room in the inn,
so they had to go to the cowshed and make do there like poor people.
There will have been neither sponge, linen, cushion, pillow nor feather
*); a bundle of straw must have done the best, that they have made
themselves a little resting place with the dear cattle. There, in the
hard winter at night, the noble fruit, the child Jesus, is born.

This is briefly the history, which the evangelist undoubtedly wanted to
present to us, who are otherwise so cold, although he could warm our
hearts a little, because our Savior was born so miserably into this
world. Bethlehem would have been worthy of sinking into the abyss of
hell if it had not shown so much honor to its Savior by lending him a
cradle or a bench for a pillow. His cradle is first of all the dear
mother's bosom, then the manger or crib. This is how one cradles the
child. The poor cradle, she does not want to get cold,

*Spond - bedstead; Leinlach - linen bed sheet; Federwatt - feather
blanket. D. Red.

She may cover herself with her little coat and other small things she
had with her, for there is no one here who would lend anything to the
child or mother, serve them, or help them with the smallest thing.

Why does the evangelist paint this birth as so poor and miserable?
Because you should remember it and never forget it, and also let it go
to your heart, and especially because you hear here that it happened too
well for you, that you should be happy about it and also grateful to
God. It is a long journey from Nazareth in Galilee to Bethlehem, yes, as
far as from Saxony in Franconia, if not further. It must be remembered
that they did not bring or carry much household goods. So the swaddling
clothes or whatever else belongs to such trade will not have been very
delicious, that she might have wrapped the infant in her apron or shirt
and laid it in the manger. For she could not always have it in her
bosom, had to warm its little cloth, make a little bed for it and do
other things. However, the dear child had to make do in the manger in
the straw and hay. Joseph also had to do the best he could, and it may
well be that some maid in the house served them with fetching water and
other things, as in an emergency, when everyone should be willing to
help. But this is not written. And it can be assumed that even though it
has been said that a young woman was lying in the cowshed, no one took
care of her.

Fie on you, you shameful Bethlehem, who are so hard and merciless
against your Savior that you do not do him the slightest service! You
deserved better the punishment than Sodoma 2c., that brimstone and fire
rained down from heaven and destroyed you. For although the Virgin Mary
was a beggar, or, to speak in terms of breeding, a dishonest woman who
put her honor behind her, one should still have been willing and
inclined to serve her in such distress and time. Yes, nothing will come
of it, this child must be wrapped in cloth and laid in a manger, then it
will stay. This is how this Lord shall be conceived on earth, when the
others

[**48** L-1, 54-66. On the holy day of Christ. W. xm, 139-442.
**49**]{.underline}

splurge, eat, make great splendor with beautiful clothes, splendid
houses 2c.

7) This is the first part of the history, which is therefore prescribed
for us, so that we may learn to grasp the image in our hearts of how our
dear Lord Jesus was born so wretchedly in this world, so that we may
learn to give thanks and praise to God for such a great good deed, so
that we poor, wretched, even condemned people may come to great honor
today, because we have become one flesh and blood with the Son of God.
For the very eternal Son of the eternal Father, through whom heaven and
earth were created from nothing, became, as we have heard, a man and was
born into the world like us, without any sin. Therefore we may boast
that God became our brother, even our flesh and blood. This great honor
did not happen to the angels, but to us men. Therefore, even though the
angels are a more glorious creature than we are, God has honored us more
and higher and has drawn closer to us than to the angels, because He
became not an angel but a man. If we human beings could understand this
and believe it with all our hearts, then such unspeakable grace and good
deeds of our dear Lord God should certainly give us great joy and drive
us to thank God from the bottom of our hearts, to love Him and to gladly
do His will.

In the papacy, a story was told that the devil came to a church for mass
one day, and when the words were sung to him: "Et homo factus est, the
Son of God became man," and the people stood and did not kneel down, he
hit one of them on the mouth and scolded him, saying: "You rude rascal,
are you not ashamed that you stand like a stick and do not fall down
with joy? If God's Son had become our brother like yours, we would not
know where to stay for joy. I do not believe it to be true, for the
devil is too hostile to us and to the Lord Christ.

*) Here the Erl. A. has the note: This he preached in the house, in 34.
D. Red.

It is certainly true that the one who wrote it had a high spirit and
well understood the great honor that has come to us in that the Son of
God has become man: not like Eve or Adam, who was made from the earth;
but he is even closer to us, because he was born of the flesh and blood
of the Virgin Mary, like other men, without her, the Virgin, being
alone, and sanctified by the Holy Spirit, without sin, and received from
the Holy Spirit this fruit that was given. Apart from this, he is like
us and a true natural son of a woman.

9 Adam and Eve were not born, but created. For God made Adam from the
earth, and the woman from his rib. But how much closer is Christ to us
than Eve is to her husband Adam, since he is our flesh and blood? We
should esteem this honor highly and form it in our hearts that the Son
of God became flesh, and that there is no difference between his flesh
and ours, except that his flesh is without sin. For he was conceived by
the Holy Spirit, and God poured into the soul and body of the Virgin
Mary full of the Holy Spirit, so that she was without all sin when she
conceived and carried the Lord Jesus. Apart from this, everything was
natural in him, as in other men: that he ate, drank, hungered, thirsted,
froze, as in other men. Such and such natural infirmities, which are
inherited by us because of sins, he, who was without sin, bore and had,
as we do, as St. Paul says: He was found in all things a man like us,
who ate, drank, was merry, and was sad.

(10) That is, to be deeply humbled and brought low. For he might well
have become a man, as he is now in heaven, having flesh and blood like
us; but he does not do what we do. He could have done this from the
beginning, but he did not want to do it, so that he would show what love
he has for us, so that we could rejoice, comfort and boast that we have
a brother in heaven, of whom we may, indeed, should accept. For one

**50L.** i,s6-s8. On the holy day of Christ. W. xin, 142-145. **51**

unhappy man is the one who does not accept him, nor feels this joy in
his heart.

(11) This is the reason why this history is preached yearly, so that
every young heart may form it in itself and thank God for it, saying,
"There is no need for me, for I have a brother who has become like me.
2c. Why he became like this and what he wanted to accomplish by it, I do
not yet say. For this is why he saved us from sin and eternal death. But
I will now speak only of the glory of the whole human race, of which we
should boast with truth and rejoice that the Son of God has become man.
All people can boast of such honor. The Christians, however, have a
higher one after that, that they should enjoy such honor also in
eternity. This is the first thing we should remember about this story.

(12) On the other hand, this excellent high example also serves us:
Because Christ, the Son of God, has so humbled himself, and turned all
his glory to poor flesh, and the divine majesty, before which the angels
tremble, has so lowered himself, he walks therefore like a poor beggar;
above in heaven the angels worship him, here below on earth he serves us
and lies down in our mud: Because then, I say, the Son of God has done
these things, we also ought to learn to praise and honor him, to be
gladly humble, and to take up our cross according to his word, to suffer
all kinds of tribulations, and so to follow him. For what harm can it do
us, or why should we be ashamed of suffering? because our dear Lord
suffered frost, hunger and sorrow. But it was especially wretched and
miserable, as I said, when he came and was born on earth. There was
neither vessel nor room, neither pillow, nor swaddling clothes, nor
bedclothes; he had to lie in a manger, before the cows and oxen. So then
your dear

Cousin, yes, even your brother, the king of heaven and earth and all
creatures within, lies down so miserably; fie on you, why would you want
to be so glorious and suffer nothing at all? Who are you then? Is it not
true that you are a poor sinner, who is not worthy to lie on a heel? Yet
you lie there on a soft bed, while your Lord lies on hard straw and in a
manger.

(13) But is it not a grievous bargain? We see here in what humility
and poverty our Lord Jesus lies for our sake; and we want to be junk
lords, to go out free and suffer nothing. But this is a bad rhyme, when
the Lord is born in such misery and poverty, too good for us, and dies
for us on the cross 2c.; and we lazy rascals want to sit in good peace
and quiet forever! No, that does nothing: "The disciple is not above
his master, nor the servant above the Lord," says Christ. 2c.

(14) Wherefore let us learn well, and consider earnestly, first of
all, to what honor we are come in that Christ is made man. For it is
such an honor that if one were an angel, he would wish that he were a
man, that he also might boast: My flesh and blood sits above all angels.
Therefore, we humans should consider ourselves blessed. May God grant
that we understand it, take it to heart and be grateful to God for it.
On the other hand, we should diligently consider the example of Christ,
what he, who is Lord above all lords, proved to us poor people in his
first future and suffered for our sake. This would move us and drive us
to gladly help and serve other people from the heart, even if it would
make us sour and we would have to suffer a little over it. May God help
us to do this with His Holy Spirit, through our dear Lord Jesus Christ,
amen.

[52 1, 58-60. On the holy day of Christ. W. xm, 146-150. 53]{.underline}

**On Christmas Day.**

**The other sermon.*)**

**What the angels told the shepherds about this**

Your love has heard the story of this day, how Christ Jesus, the Son of
God, was born into this world, and what we are to learn from it. When
this happened in Bethlehem, the evangelist reports how an angel from
heaven came to some shepherds who were near by in the field by their
hurdles, with a glorious, great light, and preached of this birth to the
shepherds with these words:

**Fear not, for behold, I proclaim to you great joy, which shall be to
all the people. For unto you is born this day a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord, in the city of David. And have this as a sign to yourselves:
You will find the child wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a
manger.**

2. this is the first sermon of this born child, our lord jesus, which
was brought from heaven to us on earth by the angels. For this reason it
is well worth our while to learn it diligently, and indeed to beware
lest we think we can or have learned it. For though it be preached every
year, yea, every day, yet here on earth we shall not be able to learn it
at all.

(3) But this preaching of angels was very necessary: for if Christ had
been born twenty times, it would have been in vain if we had not known
about it. For what is it that a man has a treasure in his house or
cellar, if he knows nothing of it? It will give him little pleasure or
joy. As the saying goes, Ignoti nulla cupido; a hidden treasure is a
useless treasure, because one walks over it, as over the muck in the
street, of which one pays no attention.

*) In the church, in 1534, in the afternoon.

**Preaching and proclaiming history 2c.**

It is the same with this holy, joyful birth. If the dear angels had not
preached about it and had not revealed such treasure to the people, no
one would have been able to desire such treasure, much less enjoy it, no
one would have been happy about it. Cause, what one does not know, that
does not affect him; there is neither pleasure nor displeasure, but is
as if it had never been or as if it should never become anything.

(4) Therefore this is one of the chief things in this gospel, that the
angel with his preaching revealeth this birth, and sheweth us this
treasure; lest we should pass by, having the treasure, and yet know
nothing of it, and neither rejoice nor be comforted in it, saying, I
proclaim unto you great joy."

These words are very well put. The shepherds were greatly alarmed at the
great light and splendor, as at an unusual thing, that in a moment
heaven and earth had become so light and like fire in the dark night.
Seeing this, the angel speaks to them cheerfully, saying, "Do not be
afraid." As if he should speak: You have no cause to be afraid; but
that you are afraid is a sure sign that you do not yet know about the
noble, precious treasure that God has given you; otherwise you would not
be afraid, yes, you would rejoice with all your heart and be of good
cheer. For this is why I have come - to proclaim to you a great joy, a
great work and miraculous sign, which, if you form it rightly in your
heart, you will have to be in good spirits about it and have a great,
exuberant joy.

6. that the angel's main concern is that he would like to have such a

**54 L. i,6o-62. On the holy day of Christ. W. xm, iso-153. 55**

He says, "I will preach a sermon that sticks and is not in vain, but
does what it is supposed to do. That is why he does not speak of a bad
joy, but of a great joy and of necessary things.

(7) For this cause: because the devil by sin hath cast us down very
much, and hath wrought a grievous miseries, that we are not only in
original sin, and have eternal death upon us, but must daily in the
world expect all manner of calamities of him; so that no man is safe for
a moment, neither of the body, nor of the good things which all things
that are in Fahr float and weave. Above such misfortunes there is a
greater one, as it is written in the Gospel, that the devil leads into
people, makes them mad and foolish, so that one can say with truth that
such a person is nothing but a stinking secret chamber of the devil. He
has made us humans so shamefully worthless through sin that we cannot
have a morsel of bread here on earth, but must also bear God's wrath
and eternal death afterwards. Let this be a terrible, miserable and
horrible devil's kingdom.

(8) Nevertheless, if we consider it rightly and weigh both against
each other, such sorrow, which we have from the devil, is by no means to
be compared with the glory and this excellent treasure and joy, since
the angel preaches here about, and says: "Fear not, I proclaim to you
great joy, to you the Savior is born. With such a sermon the angel would
gladly turn our hearts away from all such devilish lamentation for this
little child; and thinks that he would then have accomplished a work of
a delicious preacher, if he could bring us to the point that we could
rightly look upon this Savior and learn to recognize him as our flesh
and blood. And it is certainly true that if it should be or could be
that this happy image would enter into the heart of a man, then this
damage, which we have from the devil, would be very small, although it
would be a great and eternal damage.

(9) He who wants to overcome the devil, to laugh at his poison and his
wrath, and to be safe from him, must do it alone with this sweet sight
and comfort, since the angel is here.

of preaching and says: To you the Savior is born. If this look falls
right into the heart, then the thing is already won. For then man
thinks: The devil has defiled and strangled me and all men, thrown me
into God's wrath and eternal judgment: but this damage is not so great;
the treasure that God has given me is even greater, namely, that God, my
Lord, does not possess the human race, as the devil is wont to possess
men; but he himself becomes a true man, so that God and human nature
become one person. The devil cannot come so close to a human being. For
even if he possesses a human being, the human being still remains a
human being, the devil a devil, and they are two different persons and
natures. On the other hand, the Son of God became man, so that I can say
with truth: This man is God, and God is man.

For this reason, our dear merciful God in heaven has come much closer to
us and has entered much deeper into our flesh than the devil can enter.
He may possess and torture a man, but he cannot become a personal man;
the natures remain always separated, not only in essence, but also in
person. But such is one here, the Son of God is our flesh and blood,
born of Mary the Virgin, naturally, like me and you, except that he was
conceived without male seed by the Holy Spirit, and did not take the
poison of the wicked devil with him, but has an entirely pure innocent
flesh and blood. Except for this one part, because ours is unclean and
sinful, he is a man like me and you, who had to eat, drink, sleep, wake
up, like other men have to do nature half, as St. Paul says: "He was
found like a man"; so that whoever heard or saw him had to say: This is
a true natural man, not a ghost. For he has all the manner of this life
about him.

This is the joy that the angel says about. But I am speaking now only of
the glory we are to rejoice in, and not yet of the fruit of which one
preaches when one speaks of His suffering and resurrection in the first
place.

56 **L. 1,62-64. On the Holy Day of Christ. W. XIII, 153-157.** 57

digt. Now we say of the glory alone that God has become so close to us
that He is our flesh and blood, and a personal man, as I and you are,
except that He is without all sin. With this unspeakable honor he has
adorned the human race. This is what the angel wanted to make the people
believe, saying, "I proclaim to you great joy, which shall be to all
the people."

(12) He is joyful and of good cheer, burning and leaping for joy, not
at all ashamed of the poor shepherds that he should preach to them, but
of good cheer, and would that everyone would take such things to heart
as he did, and that all men would know such great glory, that human
nature has come to glory, that the Son of God, through whom all things
were created, the high Majesty, has become our flesh and blood.

(13) For it would be no wonder, if we had nothing else, that we humans
should become so fond of one another that one should devour the other
for love, as they say. But I am not yet speaking of utility and custom,
but only of honor. If this were to go to our hearts, we should never be
hostile to any man. After all, who would want to be hostile or do evil
to the image that has body and soul, like my God and yours? For the sake
of the honor that God has shown us, should we not love all people and do
all good to them?

The angels are much more glorious creatures than we humans; God did not
consider that. God did not become an angel. In addition, the angels are
innocent and holy spirits who have not fallen, like the other angels and
we poor humans. So it looks as if it would have been cheaper for God to
have become an angel. So he comes to accept the poor, little creature,
which is in sin, in the devil's kingdom and under the power of death,
which the devil torments and defiles to the utmost. That is to say, ever
sunk low. Should we not be softened by this, that we love one another
with fervor, all of us?

friendship and service among themselves, not so among themselves
despised, envied?

15 Some fathers, and especially Bernard, think that the devil, when he
saw in heaven that the Son of God was to become a man, for such a cause
did he draw envy against men and hatred against God, that he did not
want to become an angel rather than a man, and thus fell down out of
hope and envy. This may well be a thought or true. Nevertheless, the
dear fathers wanted to show the great joy and honor that befell us in
that God became man and took the very poor flesh and blood that we poor
people have, who were possessed by the devil and handed over to death
because of sin.

How wretched must these people be who know nothing of such honor? But
they are much more wretched who hear from angels, apostles, or other
preachers that God has so graciously visited human nature, taken it upon
Himself, and made it master over all creatures, and yet have no joy in
it. Yes, they must certainly be wretched people who do not feel this,
who do not take comfort and joy from it.

(17) If, among many brethren, one becomes a great lord, how glad will
the other brethren be? How can they console themselves so highly? As is
seen in Joseph's brothers in the first book of Mosiah, when he makes
himself known to them. And it is true that this is a natural joy. But
how is it that we do not also rejoice in this unspeakable honor and
glory, that it does not go to our hearts, and that we do not praise and
thank God because God has become my flesh and blood, and now sits above
at the right hand of God, a Lord over all creatures?

(18) Whoever could form such things in his heart should love all flesh
and blood here on earth for the sake of the flesh and blood that is
above at the right hand of God, and should no longer be able to be angry
with any man. So that the tender humanity of Christ, our God, should
make all hearts cheaply joyful and friendly with one sight.

**[58L . i,64-66. Am heiligen Chrifttage. W. xm, is--i6i.
59]{.underline}**

and fill them with joy in such a way that no angry thought would ever
come into it. If anyone had grasped this image in his heart, that the
Son of God had become man, he would never be able to think of anything
bad for the Lord Christ, but of everything good. For I know well that I
do not like to be angry with myself, nor to desire to do evil to myself.
But Christ is the very one who I am, is also a man; how then can he mean
evil to himself, that is, to us who are his flesh and blood? So such an
image, if it were right in the heart, would merge in a moment all the
horrible examples of the wrath of God, as there is the Flood, the
punishment with Sodom and Gomorrah. All these things would have to
disappear in one glance, if we thought of this one man, who is God, and
who so honored poor human nature that he became man.

Nineteenth But are not these wicked men, as I have said, who hear these
things, and yet regard them not, but leave such treasure lying, thinking
how they may fill their coffers with money, and build beautiful houses,
and live in great splendor? This is because the wicked devil blinds the
hearts, so that they cannot see a glimpse of such joy as the angel
preaches here.

(20) Now this is a thing that should move us to great joy and blessed
hope, that we are thus honored above all creatures, even above the
angels, that we may now boast with the truth: My flesh, my blood sits at
the right hand of God and reigns over all. No creature has such glory,
no angel either; but my flesh and blood have it. This alone should ever
be an oven that melts us into one heart and creates such a fervor among
us people that we love one another with all our hearts. But there, as I
said, the wretched devil has his ghost, so that we hear it in church,
then do not remember it, but soon forget it. He spoils this joy for us
with other worries, so that we do not include this image in our hearts
as we should. If we now had no more than this honor, we should leap and
dance for joy.

(21) But above this natural honor and joy, there is also this, that
he, the man Jesus, will also be our Savior. This is the first and
greatest cause that we should rejoice. Therefore, they are wretched
people who neither hear nor know about it. But as reported before, much
more wretched are those who hear and know it, and yet do not heed it.
For these words should melt heaven and earth, and make us out of death
like sugar, and out of all misfortune, which is innumerable, like
delicious malvasia. For what man is there who could conceive that a
Savior has been born to us? Such treasure the angel gives not only to
his mother, the Virgin Mary, but to all of us. "To you," he says, "is
born the Savior, who is Christ the Lord."

The angel spoke to the shepherds, who were Jews and knew very well the
word "Christ" in their language, that it meant a king and lord. But
most of the Jews were mistaken in thinking that he would be a lord and
savior in the flesh. This was not the opinion. The angel looks to
something higher when he says: "To you the Savior is born"; as if he
should say: You have been captives of the devil until now, he has
plagued you with water, fire, pestilence, sword, and who can tell all
the misfortunes? There you poor people lie under his tyranny. The soul
he seduces with lies, which is innumerably more harmful than no
pestilence can ever be to the body. Thus the poor, meager, weak body
also has no rest from him. When he has plagued soul and body in this
way, eternal death is still behind him. Now to you, says the angel, to
you who are trapped with soul and body under such a harmful, evil,
poisonous spirit, who is the prince of the world and God, the Savior is
born.

The little word "you" shall ever make us glad. For to whom does he
speak? To wood or stones? No, but to men, and not to one or two alone,
but to all the people. What shall we make of this? Shall we continue to
doubt the grace of God and say: The Savior may well be St. Peter and St.
Paul...

60 **L. 1,66-68. On the holy day of Christ. W. xm, 161-164.** 61

I must not do it, I am a poor sinner, this noble, precious treasure does
not concern me? Dear, if you want to say so: He does not belong to me; I
also want to say: To whom does he belong? Has it come for the sake of
geese, ducks or cows? For you must see here who he is. If he had wanted
to help another creature, he would have become the same creature. But he
alone became the Son of man.

24. Now, who are you? Who am I? Aren't we human beings? Yes. Who shall
take care of the child, but men? The angels are not allowed to be, the
devils do not want to be. But we may be, and for our sake he became man.
Therefore it behooves us men to accept with joy to be like the angel
says here: "To you the Savior is born. And shortly before: "I proclaim
to you great joy, which shall be to all the people." Is it not a great
and glorious thing that an angel from heaven should bring such a message
to men? And after that so many thousands of angels are so joyful about
it, wish and preach that we men should also be joyful and accept such
grace with thanksgiving, as we will hear.

(25) Therefore, it is an excellent and precious word that we hear
here: "The Savior is born to you." As if the angel were to say: This
birth is not mine, I must not accept it, without being gladly pleased
with you from the bottom of my heart. But it is yours, poor, corrupt and
lost people. He is the same Savior. Therefore accept him, you may have
this Savior, so that you may be saved from sins and death. That which
was reported before is in itself a glorious, great thing, that God
became man. But this is far above it, that he should be our spiritual
and eternal Savior. Whoever felt and believed such things would know
what a true joy would be, indeed, he would not be able to live long
before great joy. But, as said in the beginning, we will not be able to
fully grasp this sermon here on earth, nor learn it. This life is too
narrow, so our hearts are too weak for it. Otherwise, if it were
possible for a heart to accept it rightly, it would have to be

it would burst with joy, would never feel a sad thought.

(26) If we believed, this fruit should at least follow from it, that
we would live kindly among ourselves, stop lying and deceiving and all
kinds of naughtiness, for the sake of the image that God Himself became
man. But there you can see how weakly it goes on with us, that this joy
does not really want to enter our hearts, and we forget both the
preaching of the dear angel and of the Savior, and most of the people go
after the old things with avarice and other things. Which is a sure sign
that we do not believe such preaching firmly, or even weakly, otherwise
we would be glad and not grieve if we believed that we had such a
Savior. How should a man rejoice in the agony of death, if he had a
certain remedy against the pestilence! Such joy would be felt from the
heart. But here, since we have certain assurances against sin and
eternal death, no one, or even few, rejoice. Most people seek another
joy, that they may have peace, rest, pleasure here, and yet they are not
sure of it for a moment. That is a sign, that we hear this joyful
sermon, as if in sleep, remain hopeless people, who have the treasure
before their eyes and yet do not respect it.

(27) He who is so skilled that he hears these things and does not feel
joy from them may well consider himself a wretched man. For what will
make a heart joyful if it does not want to rejoice in what the angel
says here: "To you the Savior is born"? Whoever does not want to
improve and become more devout, whoever does not want to taste this
malmsey and this fire does not want to warm his heart, may be made more
devout by the executioner, otherwise he cannot be helped. Therefore,
learn to regard it as an evil sign, where you find yourself so cold and
frozen, and ask God from the bottom of your heart for His grace, that He
may change and help your heart through His Holy Spirit.

28.*) But that the angel continues to report, he

*) Nuremberg edition of 1547: from a sermon preached in public, in
1533; Wittenberg edition of 1558: in 1530. D. Red.

62 **L. 1, "8-70. Am heiligen Christtage. W. XIII, 164-167.** 63

Let this Savior be born in the city of David, and call him Christ the
Lord: with these words he directs us to the Scriptures. For thus it was
foretold by the prophet Micah that he should be born in Bethlehem.

(29) In particular, the angel calls the infant Jesus a Lord. We are
not to understand this as if he were a worldly king who would show
himself to be a tyrant and beat him with a club. No, but as God says to
Adam: "The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head"; that
he then, as our Lord, will stand up for us, and be the devil's enemy,
but our Lord and Redeemer, who will address me and you as his own, and
claim you as his own from the devil, and say to him: Give me this one
whom you are holding captive; he is not yours, but my own creature, whom
I not only created, but also bought with my body and blood; therefore
let him go and give him back to me, for he is mine. So that Christ may
be a comforting Lord, who may take hold of the devil's rule by force,
and take his own to himself; who may come under his eyes and say: You
accursed spirit have led them into sin and death, you deceive and lie to
them, and yet they are not yours; I am the Lord, to whom it is due not
only by nature but also by right, and not to you that I should rule over
men, for they are my earned (deserved) goods.

(30) Yea, saith thou, if the Son of God hath not redeemed the angels,
how then can the little word HErr be so interpreted? Answer: Such a
little word has no other meaning for us, and is rightly interpreted in
this way. But because the angel speaks in general, and gives the child
Jesus such a high title, and calls him Lord, it is a certain indication
that this child, born of Mary of the virgins, is natural, true, eternal
God, otherwise the angel would certainly not call him Lord.

31 He is our Savior, and the angel is not, as the angel here clearly
says: "To you the Savior is born. But he is not only our Savior, but
also the angel Savior; they are now with us, and we with them, this
Savior's household, numbering among these

Lord at the same time with us, that we human beings, who were servants
of the devil before, come to such honors through this child that we are
now accepted in the citizenship of the dear angels. They are now our
best friends, so that we may boast for the sake of this child that we
have one Lord with the angels and they with us, and are one household
with one another.

(32) The dear angels should be reasonably hopeful that they are much
more noble than we humans, first of all because of their nature and
essence, and then also because they are without sin. But there is no
hope; they do not despise us men because of our misery; they are
heartily sorry for our death, sin and misery. That is why they take such
heartfelt joy in the help that comes to us through this infant, granting
us blessedness as well as themselves, that today we receive the infant
for our own, who is their Lord and brings us to the high honors that we
are to be their comrades. They do not say: I do not like the sinner, the
stinking dead man lying in the grave, the fornicator, the knave. No,
they do not say so, but are glad from the heart that they get such
sinners to peace, and praise God that we are so rid of sin, and have
come to them into one house and under one Lord. For such grace they
thank and praise God, whose grace they do not enjoy.

(33) How much more is it fitting that we also give thanks and praise
to God for this, and also love and serve one another, as the Son of God
has shown us, who became our flesh and closest friend. But whoever does
not respect this and does not want to love and help his neighbor in the
same way cannot be helped, as I said above.

This is the first sermon after Christ's birth about this child, which
will continue throughout the whole world until the end of time.
Therefore you should diligently take note, for here you see how the dear
angels became our friends, and came to us with the joyful message,
saying: We should henceforth fear no more, because the little child has
been born to us and wants to be our Savior. This

64 **D. 1,70.71. On the Holy Day of Christ. W. XIII, 167-172.** 65

is the right, highest and best consolation, since one can actually and
certainly test God's grace and mercy, that God, the almighty, eternal
Father, has had mercy on us, and has given us His Son in such a kind
way, through a tender, pure, young virgin, whom He places in her womb,
and has us preach: Let him be the Savior of us all; let us find in him
what we lack; let him be our help and comfort, so that henceforth
between God and us all wrath may be lifted and love and kindness may be
united.

(35) Think, then, whether God does injustice to those who hear these
things and yet do not accept them, as the blind, obstinate papists do,
who are not satisfied with this Savior and seek other saviors on whom
they rely. The angel's sermon reads differently, namely,

that this little child alone is our Savior, in whom alone we shall have
all comfort and joy, as in the highest treasure; where he is, there all
angels and God Himself look.

He does not put this treasure in the womb of the mother alone, but in
the womb of me and you, saying, "It shall be yours, you shall enjoy it,
and everything he has in heaven and on earth shall be yours. Now
whosoever heareth these things, but hath no joy thereof, or forsaketh
this Saviour, and seeketh another, he is worthy to be dashed nine cubits
under the earth by thunder. Therefore we should thank God for His grace
and ask Him to speak and write this angel's sermon in our hearts, so
that we may take comfort in this Savior and overcome death and the devil
through Him. May our dear Lord and Savior Christ help us, amen.

**On Christmas Day.**

**The third sermon.*)**

**Of the angels' song of praise.**

So far we have heard of this feast, first of all the story of how the
Son of God became man and was born of the Virgin Mary into this
miserable world; which is therefore written and preached annually in
Christendom, so that we may take it to heart and learn to thank God from
the bottom of our hearts for such grace and glorious benefits that He
has shown us through such birth of His Son.

After the story we have heard the heavenly sermon of the angel, by which
such a birth was announced to the shepherds, with great clarity in the
field. This is also something new, that God lets the great lords sit at
Jerusalem, and sends such a

*) Held in the house, 1533.

The holy angel, then, descends from heaven to the poor beggars, the
shepherds, in the field. So that the holy angel humbles himself
according to the example of his Lord Christ, and is not at all disdained
to preach such a beautiful sermon to the poor shepherds, which still
remains and must remain among Christians until the end of the world.

(3) From such a story we learn how the dear angels are very fine
spirits, since there is no hope inside. Therefore, all those who
consider themselves learned, holy, and great lords should take note of
such an example and learn from it that they do not exaggerate their art,
wisdom, power, and other gifts, nor do they despise others for it. For
if the gifts were to be used for the preservation of hope, then the

66 **L. 1,71-73. On the Holy Day of Christ. W. XIII, 172-175.** 67

angels would have had cause enough to do this and despise the poor
shepherds. But they do not. Even though the shepherds are lowly and
simple-minded people, the angels do not consider themselves so holy and
high that they should not be heartily willing and happy to proclaim such
a message to them.

4 We should do the same, and in all humility gladly use our gifts for
the comfort and help of others, despising no one. For this is called
following the example of Christ, as we heard in the first sermon. He
despises no one; but just as he came down from heaven poor and miserable
into this world, so he also wants to have poor, miserable people around
him who seek and need help. For this very reason he is called a helper
or a savior.

(5) The great lords of Jerusalem think that they should not be such
saviors. But the poor shepherds may be. Therefore such treasure is first
proclaimed to them by the angel in his short sermon, as you have heard,
in which he instructs us how everything is to be done so that we may
rejoice in this Savior who wants to deliver us from sin, death, the
devil and hell. For so this sermon is called: "Fear not. The Savior is
born to you today, who is Christ the Lord.

(6) These are not words that have grown in the heart of man, for even
the wisest men on earth know nothing of them; but they are angelic
words, sounding from heaven, which we, praise be to God forever, have
also received. For it is just as much, you hear or read this sermon
today, as if you had heard it from heaven itself. For the shepherds did
not see the angels either; they only saw the light and the brightness.
But the words of the angels they have heard. You are still listening to
the sermon, you are still reading the book, if you would only open your
eyes and ears, and learn such a sermon and use it properly.

7.*) But such a sermon sounds far different than Moses' sermon, which
he received from the

*) From a sermon preached in public, in the morning of the day St.
Stephen 1333.

Angels on the mountain Sinai has heard. For here it is the other way
around. There it was done so that the people had to be afraid, were not
safe in life and limb from thunder and lightning and other terrible
creatures. But here they preach, the dear angels, that one should not be
afraid, but be of good cheer, become defiant and hopeful as one always
can, for the sake of the Child, who is our Savior, and who is baptized
by the angels here with a name but "Christ the Lord".

(8) With this name they take hold of the Scriptures, and gather
together in one heap all the prophets. For all that is written is
directed to hope and wait for the man who is called Christ. For the law
could not help against sin and death; neither could our own works and
piety. This alone was spared on Christ, who was to do it. Then the
angels look and preach here: This is the one who is to do it, in whom
everyone will find everything that belongs to the forgiveness of sins
and eternal life.

(9) That is, all doctrine and religion thrown away, by which men are
to be led to eternal life apart from Christ. For if it is to be this
Christ, it will not be his mother Mary, nor St. Peter, nor St. Paul; nor
Augustine, Bernard, Franciscus, Dominic, with their rules: for until now
people have been directed to the intercession of the saints, to
monasticism and other things in the papacy.

But how does this rhyme with this angel's sermon? Yes, how does it
rhyme with the beautiful song: Ein Kindelein so löbelich 2c.? Since we
thus sing in honor of our Lord Christ, and to the clamor over ourselves,
over the pope and all the saints of works: If the little child had not
been born to us, we would all be lost. If we are all lost except for
Christ, then the monk with his rule, the priest with his mass must also
be lost. For he who names all excludes no one. But if they are to be
saved, they must not be saved by monastic orders, fasting, or prayer,
but only by Christ, who has the name here, and is called a Beatificator
or Savior.

68 L. i, 73-76. Am heiligen Christtage. W. xm, 175-177. 69

This angel's sermon was also preached in the papacy, and this beautiful
Christian song, Ein Kindelein so löbelich, was sung everywhere in
Germany every year, and is still sung, but no one understood it. The
reason was that there was a lack of faithful preachers. Now where the
preacher's chair lies and snores, so that he does not awaken and
explain the words, they sing and read it, but without all understanding.
For we must confess that even in the papacy we have had baptism, the
sacrament, the text of the Gospel, the Lord's Prayer, the faith, the
Ten Commandments, and even today the papists are like us, except that
they have changed the Lord's Supper and changed his testament. But all
this sleeps with them, they have and know not what they have. For they
do not comfort themselves as Christians of such treasure should comfort
themselves; but walk freely, securely, not even thinking what baptism,
the gospel, the Lord's Prayer and faith are. Therefore, they do not
know what they sing or say about it.

12 What is lacking? That the preaching chair has fallen, which must open
the ears of the people and awaken the word, so that they understand what
they hear, read or sing. The one who is supposed to wake others up must
not be asleep, but alert and lively, otherwise a sleepy preacher can
make a cheerful listener sleepy with him. How it happened with the pope.
He sat in the rose garden and paradise, that is, in all peace and
abundance; therefore he snored and slept, and let this glorious sermon
fall so completely away that although they sing and read about it as we
do, yet they know or understand nothing about it: So that both things go
together with the papists. In the Gospel they read how the Savior was
born. In the church they sing: If the little child had not been born to
us, we would all be lost, salvation is ours. Nevertheless, they go,
invoke the Virgin Mary, fast, celebrate the feasts of the dead saints,
go on pilgrimages, order and hear mass 2c. That means to make other
saints, and to invert this song or chant, and instead of this saint or
child, the Virgin Mary and other saints, yes, well, the saints of the
world.

also put the poor and miserable human works.

Therefore, it is highly necessary to ask God from the bottom of one's
heart to give us brave preachers who will awaken and explain such words
to us, so that we will not only hear and read them, but also understand
them. But where there are no such preachers, it is like with the
papists, who have the gospel, baptism, sacrament 2c., but understand
nothing of it. Therefore, the word "baptism", "sacrament" is like a
treasure to them, which one has in his house and yet is not improved,
because it is hidden from him.

(14) The angel's sermon is clear enough: The Savior is born to you.
But even if it were clear enough, it would still be incomprehensible to
the pope and his crowd, otherwise they would not call the people saints,
buy human works and merit, and seek other saviors, but they would be
satisfied with this Savior. But where God gives a brave and lively
preacher, who can awaken and explain such words in the hearts of the
listeners, he brings out of this angel's sermon the high art that he
can actually judge and judge all other false doctrines and spirits, and
it is not possible that the devil should twist himself so strangely that
he should not grasp him, know him and see into his heart, no matter how
devious and deceitful he is. Hence Paul boasts 2 Cor. 2:11, saying, "We
are not unaware of what Satan has in mind."

(15) We, too, must do no more about the matter than to hold all kinds
of doctrine, whether Jewish, Turkish, papist or whatever, against the
angel's sermon, whether it rhymes with it or suffers from it. The
papacy has a great deal of ostentation with the services, and also many
great, delicious works. But who does not see that it is all idolatry,
since they hold such services for their Savior? That is, they rely on it
as if God were pleased with it and they could thereby obtain His grace
and enter the kingdom of heaven; yet here the angel preaches of the
child that he, and no one else, is the Savior. For this reason, we can
call pope and bishops with truth.

70 **L. 1.76-78. Am heiligen Christtage. W. xni, 177-181.** 71

accuse them of being in false doctrine and life. For neither their life
nor their teaching rhymes with this angel's sermon. Whoever therefore
keeps and judges himself according to the angel's sermon cannot fail
nor err; let him take before him and judge what he will. Therefore we
may well thank God for such grace, and pray from the bottom of our
hearts that he will preserve us, that we may not let this child and
blessed light out of our eyes and hearts, which shines before us against
all the wiles of the devil and the wickedness of the world, so that we
may walk safely, and all other teachings that are contrary to it may
easily and soon be judged to be wrong; we must do no more than say: The
angel does not preach that my, your, or any creature's work is our
Savior; but he points us to the infant, of whom he says, "To you is
born this day a Savior, who is Christ the Lord," who has done and
accomplished everything concerning our salvation. I will believe the
angelic doctor and adhere to his sermon, otherwise I will not hear
anything that says otherwise.

(16) This is the precious angels' sermon, to which many thousands of
other angels come and raise a beautiful music, so that, just as the
sermon is a master sermon, so also a beautiful master song follows it,
an angelic song, the like of which has never been heard before in the
world, and reads thus:

**Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and goodwill toward
men.**

17.*) This is a song of three songs or laws. The first law we must
understand not only so that it teaches what we should do, but that it
will be so from now on, because this Savior is born, that we will give
God his praise and glory. As if the angels were to say, "Before this
child was born, things were different. There was nothing else in the
world but blasphemy and idolatry. For what is apart from and without
Christ, be it ever so glorious and great, is nothing but blasphemy. But
if God is to be God, that is, before the people for

*) From a sermon preached in public in 1333.

If God is to be kept and honored, it must be through this child alone.
For there alone can we learn and be certain that God is a gracious,
merciful, kind God; for He did not spare His only begotten Son, but made
Him man for our sake. This unspeakable, great good deed urges and drives
hearts to rise up in true love, trust and hope toward God, and to praise
and thank Him for it.

(18) Such fruit, the angels sing, will follow, and now begins that God
may be honored in the highest. Not with outward works, which cannot
ascend to heaven, but with the heart, which rises from the earth to the
heights of such a gracious God and Father, with thanksgiving and
heartfelt confidence.

(19) Where the infant Jesus is not recognized, it is impossible to
honor God properly. For all the world, even his own people, when he
came, were full of idolatry, going one to another, worshipping as much
as they had mountains, even trees in the land, which were beautiful, as
is seen in the prophets. Such was the high idolatry, because they sought
God with earnestness, sacrificed, fasted, and hurt the body with it. But
they served no one but the devil and their own thoughts; they gave them
the honor that belongs to God. This is the greatest dishonor and
blasphemy that comes from not knowing Christ. Let them henceforth, as
the angels sing praise to God, cease, that men may no longer honor the
devil or themselves, but God on high.

20. After this there is another dishonor, which is still greater, that
one honors money, goods and the like. The world is also full of such
idolatry. For kings and princes, citizens, go about with the coarse
clod, the shameful mammon, the miserable helper in need, in whom
everything is dear to them, and meanwhile they sing and say of the true
Savior, the infant JEsu; but they despise it, yes, in part they become
so mad and foolish that they also persecute it and do not want to
suffer. Thus, God is blasphemed and disgraced everywhere, both with
subtle idolatry, that is, with

**72K . 1,78-80. On the holy day of Christ. W. xiii, 181-184. 73**

The first one is the one who is not a righteousness and holiness, and
the second one is the one who is a gross idolatry, despising God and
following the mammon.

But now," the angels sing, "things will be different when this light
shines in the world. For now people will no longer ask about their
holiness or righteousness; they will not look at father or mother, gold
or money; but will accept this one Savior and cling to him alone with
all their heart. Then it will come about that people will honor God
rightly, recognize him, praise him and give thanks.

This honor Adam lost through the sin in paradise. For this cursed way is
naturally attached to all of us, that everyone would like to have honor.
Look at the pope and the bishops; they have enough money and goods. But
that they should give honor to God and promote his word, they do not.
And how can such great lords, who sit in such high honor and power, do
so? There is not a peasant anywhere who can play the bagpipe, he would
like to be praised. If this happens in small things, which are called
dung and dirt, that one wants honor and glory from it, how much more
does it happen with those who deal with great things, as there is
justice and holiness, good works, civil respectability? The devil will
hardly allow such people to give God his glory, for they intend to keep
it themselves.

(23) The human race is poisoned with this cursed ambition, since the
devil made Adam and Eve in paradise want to be like God; it still clings
to us. Therefore, when God gives art, money, goods, power, when He gives
honor to a woman, a beautiful belt or skirt to a maid, they want to be
praised for it.

(24) Now because this light, the infant Jesus, shines in the world,
the angels sing that God has come to his glory. For all who accept it
will say, "My righteousness, my holiness, my wisdom, art, money, and
power are nothing; but the infant Jesus is everything.

(25) So then God comes to His glory, that He alone may be our
strength, our defiance, our joy, our florin and our thaler, and we with
Him may be our strength, our defiance, our joy, our florin and our
thaler.

With all your heart, put all your confidence, comfort, defiance and joy
in him alone. That one may say to Mammon, whom the whole world serves
and honors as a god: "I know nothing else to comfort me, except when I
have you, that I eat of you, clothe myself of you according to need, and
also provide food and clothing for others who do not have you; otherwise
I will wish you to nothing. So to the art: I am learned, God has given
me a fine mind; I will use it in honor of my God and for the good of my
neighbor; then up and there. But my comfort, defiance and joy shall be,
not my money, not my art, but my Lord Jesus, Son of God.

26. this is to honor god rightly, and to bring him to his glory and
majesty, to say: dear lord god, all that we have and need is yours; we
never made it, you gave it to us. But this is especially your own work
and mercy, that we have escaped from the devil and have been freed from
sins and set free. Therefore, the honor of this is due to you alone, and
not to me 2c. With such roses God wants to be adorned by us, that we
give it to him completely, throw all honor away from us, and carry it
home to him with thanksgiving, even from the least gifts as well as the
most.

(27) This is a quiet or law of this song, in which the dear angels sum
up all that we are and have. Especially the spiritual gifts and the
service of God, which are called righteousness, holiness, wisdom, good
works; and they tell us not to keep them here, but to throw them up and
give glory to God alone. This will now be done, they sing, through this
little child.

28 Such a song turns back the race, as you can see. For because men
neither recognize nor respect this child, they rage and rage against
each other and want to raise everything. The peasant wants to be a
citizen, the nobleman an earl, the prince an emperor. This is an
indication that they are apart from Christ and know nothing of him. That
is why they invert this angelic song and sing: Honor and praise on earth
be to the red florins, the thalers, my power, my favor,

74 **L. i,8o-W. On the holy day of Christ. W. xm, i84-i88.** 75

Art 2c. Now sing confidently, dear fellows; but what does it matter, it
shall become a donkey song, which lifts itself high and becomes an Ika
out of it. For such is the glory of men and mammon sung on earth, yes,
the sorrowful devil in hell below, and not God on high. Follow the other
silence or law, and reads thus:

**Peace on earth.**

29 This must be understood like the first, that they wish and prophesy
that it will continue to be so with those who know and have accepted
this child, that happiness and salvation will be on earth. For what is
there where Christ is not? What is the world but a sorrowful hell and
the devil's kingdom, where there is nothing but ignorance and contempt
of God, lying, deceiving, avarice, eating, drinking, whoring, beating,
murdering? For so it goes in the world, where one says black, that one
must understand white, who wants to come otherwise undeceived and unlied
by the people. There is neither love nor loyalty, no one is safe from
the other. One must be just as concerned about friends as about enemies,
and sometimes more. So the devil rules and leads the world.

30. But just as the angels sang that those who know and accept this
child Jesus will give God the glory in everything; so they sing here,
and wish, yes, they also promise and comfort, that such tyranny of the
devil will now come to an end, and the Christians will lead a fine,
peaceful, quiet life among each other, who will gladly help and advise,
quarrels and disagreements will cease, and will dwell with each other in
a friendliness, that among them, for the sake of this child, there will
be a fine peaceful regiment and a lovely being, where each will gladly
do the best for the other.

31 The dear angels say that this will also follow when God has his glory
and is recognized as the Lord, from whom we have everything. Then the
people will be kind to one another, neither hating nor envying the
other, neither passing over the other, but always considering the other
greater than themselves, and saying: Dear brother, please

God for me. Then there will be peace and abundance and all happiness.
For peace in the Hebrew language means all good.

(32) Let there be such a good and peaceable life among Christians,
that every one do that which is pleasing to another, and avoid that
which is displeasing to him. But those who do not, do not hear the
angels singing, but hear the wolf, the devil, howling, singing to them:
Steal here, commit adultery there, strangle there 2c. This is the
devil's song from hell.

But it shall not be so among the Christians, as the dear angels sing
here. They understand our Lord's divine service very well: first, that
we should leave the glory in heaven and praise and glorify God alone;
second, that we should live on earth in a fine brotherly manner among
ourselves and not follow the devil's harmful suggestions and tyrannical
nature. This is what the dear angels would like to see happen everywhere
in the world. But they see that most parts of the world do not want to
follow the little child Jesus, and therefore there is a disturbance in
the world. Therefore they set the third law thus:

**And a pleasure to the people.**

34 As if to say, we would like it to happen that all the world would
honor God on high and be content with one another. But there will be
many who do not respect the gospel and will not accept this son, even
persecute him. May God therefore grant to other godly people a joyful
and glad heart, so that they may say, "I have a Savior, the kingdom of
heaven is mine, and Christ, the Son of God, is mine. Therefore, even if
I am grieved and persecuted, and all misfortunes are inflicted on me
because of this faith and confession, I will not be impatient or angry
about it, but I will take pleasure in it, and no sorrow, suffering, or
persecution, no matter how hard and great it may be, shall hinder or
spoil my joy and delight in the newborn child. Such a heart do the dear
angels wish for all believers, that they may have pleasure in
unpleasure, and sing when the devil is angry, that they may have peace
in Christ.

[76 **L. i,s2.83. On the Holy Day of Christ. W. xm. i88-isi.**
77]{.underline}

They will defy all adversity and mock the devil when he harms them,
saying, "Devil, if you can do nothing but harm my body, my life, my
goods, you may well let it go, for you cannot harm me; I have an eternal
Savior who will delight me in all bodily harm for eternity.

(35) This is the third silence, to have a cheerful, joyful, defiant
heart against all suffering that may befall us, to say to the devil,
"You shall not make it so evil as to spoil my joy, which I have through
this child. This is called eudokia, a merry, calm, cheerful, courageous
heart, which does not ask much about it, it goes as it pleases, and says
to the devil and the world: I cannot leave my joy for your sake, nor
will I be troubled for your wrath; always go, Christ gives me more joy
than their sorrow. Such a heart the dear angels grant and wish us with
their song.

The world does not sing this song to the dear angels, but to its god,
the devil, who turns it around so that it reads: Glory to the devil in
hell, peace on earth, and a displeasure and pure discontent to men. For
that is where he drives his bride, the world, to curse and blaspheme
God, to persecute and condemn his word, to cause unrest, discord,
disunity, war, murder, and so on, so that she will keep house in such a
way that no man may have a happy moment, may enjoy no happy morsel
because of sorrow and fear. The wretched spirits of the mob help, they
are the devil's mouth, defile and blaspheme God in heaven through false
teachings.

After that, the dance is lifted up so that the devil continues with his
shameful owl song, inciting princes and lords against each other,
causing all disloyalty and discord, so that one says the best to the
other under his eyes and proves the worst. That's how I like it, sings
the devil. That is to give the devil honor in hell, to cause strife on
earth, and to make people's hearts stupid and despondent. That's why
you find many to whom God gives everything enough, but they don't have
a happy hour; although cellars and closets are full, they still go, hang
their heads, all they have is sadness, they can't have any pleasure in
any thing. There it goes according to the devil's wish, he does not
grant us humans any pleasure, which we should have in God and his gifts.
On the other hand, the dear angels sing and wish us a courageous heart
that can defy and throb, even when things go badly; in all kinds of
misfortune and temptation.

So your love of the holy angels has a song that is found in no other
books, in which they teach us about the right worship of God, that we
should recognize God's grace in this little child, His Son, our Lord
and Savior, give Him thanks and praise for it, then also live kindly
with one another, and ultimately overcome all adversity with patience,
and be happy and of good cheer for the sake of this little child. Thus
this joyful, comforting song is finely summarized by the dear angels,
whereby one can well sense that it did not grow on earth nor was it
made, but came down from heaven. May our Lord God help us with His Holy
Spirit, that we may keep it and live by it, through Jesus Christ, His
Son, our dear Lord, amen.

[78 L. i, 84.85. On the second day of Christ. W. xm, isi-194.
79]{.underline}

**On the second day of Christ. *)**

**From the example of the Virgin Mary and shepherds.**

So far, your love has heard how God has made His angels, the dear
princes, preachers, and has made them shepherds, poor beggars, or
otherwise unsightly people.

sent to sing to them a beautiful song about the Child Jesus. The same
song is now followed in the Historia:

**Luc. 2, 15-20.**

And when the angels were departed from them into heaven, the shepherds
said one to another, Let us go now to Bethlehem, and see the thing that
is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us. And they came
in haste, and found both Mariam and Joseph, and the child lying in the
manger. And when they had seen him, they spread abroad the word which
was spoken unto them concerning this child. And all before whom it came
marveled at the speech which the shepherds had told them. But Mary kept
all these words and moved them in her heart. And the shepherds returned,
praising and glorifying God for all that they had heard and seen, as had
been said to them.

1 Here we see that the angels' preaching and singing was not in vain.
For the shepherds do not let their flocks be so dear to them; they rise
up and want to see the child, whom the angels themselves call a Lord.
This is the fruit that follows from the angels' preaching.

2 The other fruit is that the shepherds also become preachers, telling
everyone what they have heard about this little child.

3 For this reason the evangelist says, "All who heard it were amazed at
the words the shepherds had told them. But it must have been such a
miracle for most of the people, which did not last long. For experience
shows that the majority of people are such wretched, depraved people
that if God does us good or bad, if he prods us or gives us good words,
it is soon forgotten. It is such a shameful thing about a man's heart
that it is so forgotten and careless. Because of this, our dear Lord God
is caused to always perform new miraculous signs and punishments, if we
are to be different and not forget His good deeds. So it is without
doubt here also

*) Nuremberg edition of 1547: Gehalten im Hause, 1533; Wittenberg
editions: 1534. D. Red.

that, as the evangelist says, all who heard it were amazed, and for a
time there was great talk about the birth of a child in Bethlehem, when
the angels preached about it in the air and the wise men from the east
came and worshipped it. But before two, three or four years had passed,
everyone had forgotten about it, and after that, for more than thirty
years, when the Lord appeared, preached and performed miraculous signs,
it was completely silent, so that no one knew anything about it.

4 We still find this kind of naughtiness among us today. For there is
hardly anyone among a hundred, yes, I would say a thousand people, who
still remembers the misery and miserable existence that existed in the
papacy for the sake of both doctrine and life or worship; that the poor
consciences, crowded in all places, can find no thorough consolation
anywhere. All the toil, labor, expense and burden of conscience is
forgotten. Otherwise the holy gospel, which helped us from such misery,
would be more valuable and better kept with us; we would also thank God
more diligently for it and be more pious.

5 It was the same with the Jews. When they were in Egypt, there was
lamentation and crying,

**80 L. i,85-87. On the second day of Christ. W. xm, 194-186. 81**

There was no end to the weeping. What happened after that? They had
hardly been three days in the wilderness when they wished to be back in
Egypt. Such an unholy thing is the heart of man, which so soon grows
weary and tired of a thing, and so easily forgets the great plague and
torment. I let alone that it should remember the benefit, which happens
even less; as the saying goes: Nihil citius senescit, quam gratia.
(Although God is very angry, punishes with pestilence and all kinds of
sickness, now lets this, now another plague go over us, it is just as if
someone wrote with a pen in the water or in the air. Because it hurts
and is obvious, it hurts; but as soon as it is over, it is forgotten, as
if it had never hit us. This is our way of remaining. So the evangelist
also says here: The people are astonished; but it lasts, as said, a
dance to the high mass. But here we find some pious disciples and
children who are not so forgetful and careless as the world; for the
evangelist says:

**But Mary kept all these words and moved them in her heart.**

6 We are to remember these words and learn from them how to hear God's
word correctly. "Mary," says the evangelist, "kept all these words
and moved them in her heart. That is, she diligently pursues it, just as
those who firmly hold God's word, seek and pursue it, find greater
understanding and comfort in it the longer they do, and become more
certain of their faith day by day. But in the case of the nefarious
spirits, who hear it with one ear and let it out again with the other,
preach to them as long and as much as they want, it is as if one were to
strike into water. Mary does not do this; she was interested in it,
therefore she keeps it, writes it in her heart, moves it, that is,
pursues it, remembers it by herself: These are wonderful tidings, that I
should be the mother of the child, of whom the angels preach that he is
the Savior of the world, and is called Christ the Lord, and so on. With
such thoughts it is so deep for her

into her heart that she would have had to keep it; and even if the whole
world had been against it, no one would have been able to take it away
from her or talk her out of it, she would have remained firm that her
son was the Son of God and the Savior of the whole world 2c.

(7) We should follow the example of the holy dear mother of the Lord
(for that is why it is prescribed for us) and form the word in our heart
with such diligence and earnestness that it becomes a nature. As it is
written in the 8th chapter of the Song of Solomon, v. 6: "Set me as a
sigil upon thy heart, and as a sigil upon thine arm." There he wants
his word not only to float on our tongue, like a foam on the water, or
drool in the mouth, which one spits out; but that it is pressed into the
heart, and remains such a mark, which no one can wash off, just as if it
had grown in it, and a natural thing, which cannot be scratched out.
Such was the heart of the Virgin Mary, in which these words remained as
if they had been engraved. All those who grasp the word in this way have
the right character of Christ, the right sigil, and do not let the word
be taken away from them; they are like the spirits of a mob or the devil
himself. Once they have heard and believed it, they stick to it. With
the others, even if they hear it and are astonished by it, it does not
remain long, but is soon forgotten.

(8) Here we must remember that if God's word is to take root in our
hearts in such a way, it is necessary for us to be more diligent in
dealing with it. We see it in the young boys, how often one has to chew
the cud and blow the trumpet until they grasp it, and we let ourselves
think that such great things can be grasped easily and without any
effort. We are far off the mark. Most people, as soon as they leave the
sermon, have other things to do, that very few remember what they have
heard and learned from the sermon. But it is not right for us to
emphasize what is behind.

9) We should seek the kingdom of God first, that is, we should take
care of it the most; then we will take care of it the least, and we will
be more interested in our dealings, near and far.

82 **L. i, 87-89. On the second day of Christ. W. xm, isg-M.** 83

We are more interested in the word than in pleasure and pleasure.
Otherwise, we would at least think of God's word so often and
diligently and deal with it as seriously as we do with our dealings. But
that is not the end. It is therefore no wonder that it clings so quietly
and that we forget it so soon, as can be seen in the temptation. But it
should not be so with Christians. Their greatest treasure is God's
word, therefore the same is also their heart. And even if they have to
deal with worldly affairs, their heart is always on that side where it
is most concerned. This is said of the example of the virgins Mary,
which the evangelist did not want to leave behind, because it is also
necessary. Now follows further:

**The shepherds turned back, praising and glorifying God for all that
they had heard and seen, as had been said to them.**

(10) After the shepherds have seen the infant Jesus and have shouted
about him everywhere, so that the whole city of Bethlehem knows how to
speak of him, they go back to their flocks, praising and glorifying God,
as they had heard and learned from the angels, who sang, "Glory to God
in the highest.

(11) This is also a good and fine teaching, that the shepherds, after
they have been enlightened and have come to the right knowledge of
Christ, do not run away into the wilderness, as the mad monks and nuns
did into the monasteries; but stick to their profession and thus serve
their neighbor. For right faith urges no one to abandon his profession
and take up a new life, as the mad monks did, who thought they could not
be saved, because outwardly they were different from other people; if
they dressed, ate and drank, watched and slept like other people, it
would be a common thing and would have no special standing. But they
praised and had to keep their order and rule, and called it a perfect
state; yes, as St. Paul speaks of it, Col. 2, 18, an angelic, that is
devilish spirituality; because the devil is also an angel and spirit.

12 But Christ does not come in such a way as to

Change outward things, or disturb his creature and make it different.
Therefore, one should clothe, feed or nourish the body according to
need, and as is customary, and use it for work. This is God's creature
and order, and He lets it remain so. He did not come to change anything
about it. We may well do this for ourselves, if it is necessary, using
other clothing and food, which is a bad, small change, since we are not
allowed to the Lord Christ; let alone that one would want to praise such
a change for a service of God and spirituality.

(13) This is the true change for which Christ came, that a man may be
changed inwardly in his heart. Before the dear gospel came to light, I
thought that God would not take care of me; if I were to go to heaven
and be saved, most of it would be up to me; I did not know any other
way; if I were to get rid of sin and death, I would have to do it by my
works; for this reason I became a monk and let my blood sour. But caps,
gray skirts, not eating meat, fasting and the like do nothing for it.
Sin cannot be put away and purged with it, death cannot be strangled
with it; but both sin and death are just as much under a gray or black
cap as under a red skirt. But it is because of this that the heart
receives a new light and, as reported above, a new sigil, so that it can
say: I know that God takes care of me and means me with faithfulness.
For he sent his Son and made him man, that through him I might overcome
death and have eternal life.

This is the right change. For my heart did not know or believe this
before. But now it knows and believes, and because of this it has a
completely different mind than before. This is what our dear Lord Christ
does, that the heart and soul get a new and different mind, will, desire
and love, so that where before a man stood on money and goods, now that
he has come to the knowledge of Christ, he not only puts on money and
goods, but also body and life, before he has known Christ.

[84 **x. i,89-9i. On the second day of Christ. W. xm, 199-202.**
85]{.underline}

and his word. Before, his heart would not have lost a penny for the sake
of faith; now he would not let himself be deprived of Christ, even if it
would cost a thousand worlds. Many before that time thought: If I want
to be saved, I must put on a monk's or nun's cap. Now, if one wanted
to put it on you, you would lie sooner at the end of the world. If you
had eaten a morsel of meat on a Friday before, you would have thought
that the earth would swallow you up. But now you say to the pope, to the
bishop, even to the devil himself: Kiss me on the hand; why should I not
eat it, or be afraid of sinning for it? God has not forbidden it;
indeed, he created it for me to use and enjoy it. This means an inward
change and a change of heart, since the heart gains a different mind and
will from God's word than before, and yet remains in its profession and
outward nature as before, as we also see in the shepherds.

(15) It did not occur to the shepherds that Christ the Savior was
born. But when they heard it from the angels, they ran into the city and
sought the infant. When they found him and preached about him, and
thanked God for such grace and revelation, they returned to their flock,
wearing the same robe and staff as before, remained shepherds, and did
not change their outward ways. This is called Christian teaching and
living. For Christ has not come to change the creature until that day
when the soul is first changed completely and anew (which only begins
here through the gospel); then also the body will be changed, so that we
will no longer need a warm room, clothing or anything else, but will
float in the air like the angels, and shine like the beautiful stars.
The outward appearance will also be different. Before that day, all
outward creatures shall remain as God has ordered them, and no change
shall take place.

(16) Let every man in his profession and occupation be guided by these
things, living chastely, righteously, and godly, knowing that such
outward conduct does not hinder the Christian faith. Neither does Christ
ask whether you are outwardly

Whether you are a man or a woman, an emperor or a stableman, a mayor or
a henchman, he leaves all these things, saying, "You shall be obedient
to God in this state and in this life, and you shall not depart from it.
Therefore the shepherds did no more than praise and glorify God. They
did not say, "I will henceforth serve God in such a way that I will run
into a desert and do nothing in the world among people, but serve God
only in a contemplative life. Cause, such is not serving God, but
stepping out of obedience and serving yourself. But to serve God means
to remain in the state in which God has placed you, so that a man
remains a man, a woman a woman, an emperor an emperor, a citizen a
citizen, and everyone in his state learns to recognize God and praise
him: then he serves him rightly. For he shall not suffer thee to be in
thy haircloth, nor in thy fasting, nor in thy cap; but that thou shalt
be obedient in thy state and in thy profession, and shalt praise his
Son: so shalt thou serve him aright.

(17) So also we see in the prophets that our Lord God is angry where
the heart remains unchanged, and yet people think they are pious because
of their outward works and services. Why do you afflict me with your
sacrifice? says he, Isa. 1, 11. and Psalm 50: "Go, eat your own flesh,
and have an evil year for it; if I may, I will have it all before you
offer it to me: yet have I not commanded you. But this have I commanded
you, and commanded that ye should obey my voice, and praise me, and give
me thanks. I have given you sheep, cows and oxen to eat, so that you may
court me with them, as if I had to beg them from you. So the prophet is
also concerned that the heart be changed and that we, above all, be
right-minded toward God. God is willing to put up with this, and does
not desire any change; we do what every profession requires. This is
that the shepherds go cheerfully, with joy and thankfulness, and do
their work as they did before, without also praising and glorifying God.

18 Thus, in Vitis Patrum, one reads about a man who considered himself a
great saint,

86 . L. i.gi-g3. On the Sunday before the new year's day. W. xiii,
202,203,230-232. 87

and when he wanted to know how high he should sit in heaven, a piper was
indicated to him, whom he should be like. He soon went and asked him:
"Dear, what good do you do? The piper answers: I do nothing but whistle
for the peasants to dance, and once I was present when my companions
wanted to ravish a maiden, and I defended and saved her. Another time he
asked again: To whom he was like. He was answered: Two wives. He also
asked them, like the piper, "What are their good deeds? Then they
answer: We know of none but holy living; we have our house and children,
and we wait on them as much as we can, and so keep ourselves that we
have never reproached one another, neither have we denied one another.
Then the old man went and said, "Now I see that no class should be
despised, however small it may be. One can serve God and be pious
anywhere, and God will be pleased with anyone who fears Him and does
right, no matter what his status.

19. such from the old father, whistler and

Two wives, as I respect it, did not happen that way, but was written as
a good example, so that the world would be warned against monasticism.
For that thou mayest be a Christian and please God is not in the outward
life, but under the left teat and in the heart, that thou mayest know
that Jesus is the right Savior, and comfort thyself, thanking and
praising God for it. Then God will put up with the other outward life or
state. Therefore we should learn and diligently observe that we do not
tear the Christian faith away from the Word and place it, as the Pope
has placed and bound it, in special clothing, food, place, etc., which
is contrary to the Christian faith, by which alone, and not by anything
outward, be it what it may, God makes the heart pure. By heart, however,
each one shall live as God has required of him and as is customary. This
shall remain until the life to come, when the outward life will be
changed and the body will become more beautiful and brighter than the
sun. May Christ our Savior help us, amen.

**On the Sunday before the new year's day. *)**

**Luc. 2, 33-40.**

And his father and mother marveled at the things spoken of him. And
Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this man is
set for a fall and a rising of many in Israel, and for a sign to be
contradicted. (And a sword shall pierce through your soul) that the
thoughts of many hearts may be made manifest. And there was a
prophetess, Hannah, the daughter of Phanuel, of the family of Asher, who
was well bedded, and would have lived seven years with her husband,
after her virginity, and was now a widow of eighty-four years, who never
came out of the temple, serving God with fasting and prayer day and
night. She also came at that hour and praised the Lord and spoke of Him
to all who were waiting for redemption in Jerusalem. And when they had
finished all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into
Galilee to their city Nazareth. But the child grew and became strong in
spirit, full of wisdom, and God's grace was with him.

The most important thing in this gospel is that Simeon prophesies about
Christ and his kingdom, how it first existed among the Jews and the
people.

*) Held publicly, 1531.

and then among the Gentiles, so that, as we heard on the third Sunday of
Advent, most of them will be offended and angry. But yet many shall also
be corrected by it.

88 L. 1,93-95. on the sunday before the new year's day. W. XIII,
232-238. 89

And be erected. Besides this/ which is the most distinguished, there are
also other points that we want to run over after the brevity.

This history took place when the infant Jesus was six weeks old and was
carried in the temple, according to the custom of the Jews, to be
presented to the Lord, and a sacrifice was made for him, Deut. 12, Luc.
2; as your love will hear at the feast of the sacrifice of the infant in
the temple. Then old Simeon, prompted by the Holy Spirit, takes the
infant Jesus in his arms and preaches about him that he is to be the
Savior and light, which not only shines in Judaism as in a lantern, but
is also to be a public light for all the Gentiles.

(3) The evangelist in today's Gospel says that Simeon's preaching to
the child amazed his father and mother.

(4) And because he is called Joseph the father of the Lord Christ, he
speaks of him as other men spoke of him. But he has made a strong enough
statement above, saying that he was conceived by the Holy Spirit and
born of the Virgin Mary. This should be noted so that no one is offended
by the fact that Lucas here and the Scriptures in other places sometimes
speak of a thing in the same way as other people. For it was a secret
work of God that the Virgin Mary was with child, which Joseph himself
had to believe after the angel had revealed it to him in a dream.

(5) When the old man Simeon, who could hardly see because of his age,
came along and praised the child so highly, many who heard it would have
despised it as a fool's speech and thought that Simeon was talking like
a mad old man.

006 But it was such a sermon, saith the evangelist, that his mother and
father marvelled at it. For this thing, that he should be the light of
the Gentiles, they had not heard from the angel himself as loudly as
Simeon speaks it.

7 Therefore, this should not be interpreted because it says here: "His
father and mother were amazed", as if they had not heard such a thing.

It is a sign and indication of great faith and high understanding. For
this is the true nature of faith: the more firmly a man believes a
thing, the more he marvels at it and is glad. But where he does not
believe, he does not accept it and has neither joy nor pleasure in it.
So we have heard these days about the birth of Christ, that this infant
is our flesh and blood, and also our Savior, who is to save us from
eternal death, sins and the devil's kingdom. If you believe this from
the bottom of your heart, don't you think you would be so astonished
that you could not see this child enough for yourself, nor think enough
about him?

(8) With these words Lucas praises both the mother's and the
father's faith, that the mother was happy and of good cheer, and that
she could not have wondered enough that this child should be a light to
enlighten the Gentiles; whereas all other kings and princes are a noisy
dark night, even in sin and death, not to mention that they should help
others out of it.

(9) We should also have such wonder at the gospel that we would be
hopeful and joyful about it, and boast: I am a Christian and have been
baptized; I have no doubt that through the Lord Jesus I shall be and
remain ruler over sin and death, that heaven and all creatures shall
serve me for my good. If a prince would give me a tunic or a village,
that would make me happy. But what is it against this? Yes, even if I
had the crown of the Turkish emperor, it is nothing against this, that I
have a share in the inheritance of Christ and should live with him for
eternity.

(10) But where can you find one who truly believes and takes it to
heart? All of us, at least, can believe it and know it: but that we do
not believe it, we are soon to be convicted, for we are not surprised.
If such knowledge of history is called faith, it is truly a cold and
half-dead faith; otherwise we would not only be happy, but also hopeful.
For a Christian is a hopeful, happy man.

**[90 L. i,95-97. on the sunday before the new year's day. W. xm,
238-244. 91]{.underline}**

A man who does not ask about the devil or about all misfortune, because
he knows that through Christ he is master over all these things.

(11) Therefore, in this amazement, the Virgin Mary will undoubtedly
have had a special good and holy pride and hope, which was not based on
her, but on God's grace and mercy and on the infant Jesus; as Lucas
finely indicates with these words: "They were amazed, not because she
was a mother of the child, but "because of what was said of him". As
all Christians do: they do not look at what they are, but at what has
been given to them; therefore they do not boast about themselves, but
about Him who has given and given them everything by grace.

(12) We do not lack the fact that God gives us, but we lack the fact
that we do not want to see or recognize it properly. Otherwise faith
would bring the fruit, so that we would also marvel and rejoice at the
great grace and blessing that has come to us through this little child.
For the fact that we poor sinners have been placed in eternal life and
righteousness should at least be felt with a little spark, and give us
courage, so that we would not be so despondent in temptation and
persecution, but would defy both the devil and the world, and say,
"What if you take away my life right away? Because only this child
remains to me, take away the shells and husks; I have little loss
compared to this core and treasure, that through Christ I am freed from
sins and have escaped eternal death and the wrath of God.

So we should also be surprised. But, as I said, it happens to few. Yet
there must be some among whom it happens, who marvel at all that they
hear of Christ. To them this preaching is an eternal food, which they
can never be satisfied with; as Peter says, that even the angels desire
to see it.

14 Now let us also consider the prophecy of Simeoni, which, as reported
before, is primarily about Judaism, that among the people of Israel, as
he reports, many are offended and angry with the Lord Jesus Christ,
again.

Some will also be corrected in him. Now this is the title of the Child,
our dear Lord Christ, so that he may be held in the world, so that many
may run and fall against him, and so that many may hold on to him and
rise up against him.

15 Therefore, whoever wants to be a Christian must act accordingly. For
no one is to be forced here. God has commanded the princes, mayors, and
executioners to compel and force all those who do not want to refrain
from stealing, murdering, lying, deceiving, and other misfortunes. But
here in the kingdom of Christ there is nothing like this; if you do not
want to believe, you can leave it; we do not want to drag you or force
you with your hair. But another will force you in his time, when you
will no longer be able to defend yourself.

(16) Yes, they say, if I have so long a time, there is no need. Well,
that is decided, if you want to be saved, you must accept this king, who
(as Simeon says here) is an angry king in the world. But let no one
doubt him, for there will always be those who will mend their ways and
not be angry.

(17) This is a very necessary lesson, that we should not look only at
the great heap that is falling: we must let this happen. In the world it
will never be otherwise; where this King is with his word and kingdom,
most of the people will be angry and fall. You must be accustomed to
this and let it go, if you want to remain a Christian in any other way;
and besides this, look at the little group and keep to it, which does
not fall, but holds fast to this king and looks like him. If then it
happens that people often tumble and fall, let it go; for this is how it
goes, as Simeon says here.

18. the papists blaspheme our doctrine atrociously, and oppose it
vehemently; not that they are offended by it, for most of them know very
well that it is the truth; but do it out of sheer wickedness and
courage, to maintain their position and splendor, not inquiring much
about Christ and his

[92 **L. i,97-s9. On the Sunday before the new year's day. W. xm,
211-217.** 93]{.underline}

Word. For the belly is their god. Therefore, let us not count them here
among the heap that is angry.

(19) But those who are angry, who are not public enemies and
persecutors of the doctrine, but hearers, also confess and believe that
this little child is the Savior of the world. But they will not accept
that our work and everything we do to praise and honor God should be
nothing. Should all those be damned who have lived according to the old
doctrine and faith for so many hundred years? I do not believe that
anymore 2c.

20. when thou seest it go thus, say, It goeth aright, as it ought: for
the young child which the virgin Mary bare is set to fall, not unto them
that know not of God; but unto "many in Israel," that is, they that
are God's people, having His word 2c. It is to them that this little
child is set for a stumblingblock, over which the worldly wise and the
saints run, and fall and break their necks. Therefore, if they do not
want to accept the child, we must let it go, close our eyes and ears,
and pretend that we do not see this case.

21) It was the same with the disciples*) who were exceedingly angry
when Christ disputed with them, saying, John 8:21, "You will die in
your sins." Then they thought: What says the fool? We have the prophets
and Moses. We know what is right and what God wants from us. Shall all
this be nothing, nor help us? Shall we let this servant teach us how to
be saved? They went there, crushed their heads against Christ, and fell.

22) So now even the pope's clergy (I am talking about the best,
because the majority of them, as I said, are belly servants), call our
doctrine devil's lies and heresy; say: We pray, fast so much, let it
get so sour; shall all this be nothing? Shall it not please God? Well
then, let us eat, drink and fornicate, and thus please God, and

*) Wittenberg editions and Nuremberg edition of 1544: "Juden. Cf. Erl.
A. 1, 97. ed.

will enter the kingdom of heaven, because Christ alone saves sinners,
not the righteous (as the Lutherans preach). The latter are also
offended by the infant Jesus and fall down so that they never get up
again.

23 If then thou wilt be a Christian, send thyself into it, and only be
sure that thy Lord Christ, thou, thy doctrine, and all that thou doest
will not please men. For here you hear that your Lord Christ himself is
a stumbling block and a rock of trouble to those who are God's people,
and that all who want to be great, wise and holy resent it, push against
it and run over it. If you want to be considered a fool, a heretic and a
deceiver by them and their followers (for nothing else will come of it),
then accept this Lord and King; if not, then you may walk idly. So that
all those who want to be Christians and be saved must be an offence to
their Lord Christ and a cause of trouble to others, and be considered
heretics and seducers. That is one part of this prophecy.

(24) But besides this, the gospel, which is well to be remembered,
saith, that he is not only set for the fall, but also for the
resurrection of many in Israel. They are the ones who accept this king,
endure him, and lay down their lives and limb for his sake, if need be.
They know that they cannot help themselves. But if they are to be
helped, it must be done by him alone, whom the angels call a Savior, and
Simeon here prophesies of him: "Many will rise up against him.
Therefore they recognize and consider themselves poor and miserable
sinners who have fallen hard and low; for this reason they stretch out
their hands and hold on to this noble foundation and cornerstone with
joy, straighten themselves up on it, believe in it and will never again
be put to shame, 1 Petr. 2, 6.

025 But the other fools, who think that they stand firm, and have no
need of grace or help, run headlong against him, blaspheming and cursing
him confidently. If it goes like this, do not let it challenge you, act
as if you do not see it; it will not go out with this child in any other
way than Simeon prophesies here. Meanwhile, look at the other, albeit
small, crowd that is coming up to him.

94 **L. 1.99-101.** On the Sunday before the new year's day. **W. XIII,
247-251.** 95

This little child makes them holy and righteous; it makes wise those who
recognize that they have lived in error and ignorance; it helps and
makes blessed those who are lost and corrupt. Learn to take comfort in
this, and do not let this child turn you away.

(26) For many years I have diligently considered the matter, how I
might preach of the Lord Christ in such a way that it would please
everyone, and no one would offend or be offended by it; but it will not
be. Therefore we may be accustomed to it, and learn here how we should
answer those who speak: In the papacy everything had been quiet, there
had been no heresy or disagreement; but after this teaching had come to
an end, everything had turned out badly, so that little or nothing good
had come of it. You may answer such clever ones from this gospel and St.
Simeon's prophecy, that wherever the pure doctrine of Christ goes, it
will certainly follow that some will fall and cause all misfortune. But
nevertheless the teaching shall also produce the fruit again, that some
will hold on to Christ and rise up in him. These are, as I said, the
poor afflicted consciences who find comfort and joy in this teaching.

27 Our adversaries will not consider such things, but look only to the
fall and the trouble, which cannot be avoided: not because of the
doctrine, which is pure, right, and good; but because of men, who are
not right, and will not follow. But consider the matter rightly, and
freely confess it: Would it not have been better in the papacy if the
trouble and fall had continued as it is now, because everything was
going on so quietly and peacefully as it seemed, and yet the devil ruled
in all places with idolatry and false doctrine, and drove everything to
hell with heaps? Who would not rather suffer a temporal damage than an
eternal one? For it was an unfortunate, even eternal pity that no true
preaching, knowledge of God, nor worship was to be found in the papacy.

28 For many years now we have often experienced that this was discussed
at many kingdom meetings, and would have liked to have it preached in
such a way that it would be pleasing to everyone and annoying to no one.
But it is certain: if you take away the trouble and the fall, Christ is
already lost. For where the man comes and lets himself be seen, there
soon arises a tumult and a fall. He came to us, the dear Lord Christ,
through his gospel, before we were aware of him, just as he came to the
Jews. We should have accepted this with great gratitude and thanked God
heartily for this unspeakable grace. But what has happened? The pope and
the bishops are indignant about it, think that he should have asked them
about it beforehand, and that if they had given their will to it, he
should then have started with this teaching and made a change in the
church. There the trouble goes with power. For Christ will not cease his
preaching; so the pope and bishops will not suffer the same. So the
dance is lifted up, and this prophecy of Simeonis remains for and for,
that this child is set for the fall of many in Israel.

29 For this reason there must be perplexities, as Paul also says in
another place, "There must be mobs and heresies; the word must be
persecuted. But nevertheless Christ shall remain, and some shall rise up
in him, and be saved. But the others must fail, who would gladly make
Christ different from what God the Father has ordained and set him,
namely, that he, like a stone in the way, should stand in the way, that
one should lean on it and stand up. But because most of them are so mad
and foolish, they do not want to hold on to such a stone, but run
against it with their heads and bump into it: this is not the fault of
the stone, but of such foolish, blind people, who fall on it, and also
break it to pieces, even though it was placed there by God, as it is
written in Isaiah 28, that they should believe in it, stand up on it and
be saved through it.

(30) Therefore, do not consider the gospel to be such a doctrine that
causes nothing but strife and dissension in the world;

96 L. i, ivi-in3. On the Sunday before the new year's day. W. xm, ssi.
97

as the pope and bishops reproach them, as if they were pure, had never
made any water turbid, nor given cause for all kinds of punishment and
misfortune through their sin and idolatry. If they would let this
doctrine go and be made free, such disunity and other plagues would also
remain behind. But now, because they resist the teaching and do not want
to let it go their own way, what wonder is it that God does not do with
them as they would like?

31) The Jews were also angry with Christ, but he gave them no cause.
Yes, he would have liked to see it well, had come also therefore, that
they should believe in him and become blessed. But because they would
not, the fault was not his. For they should have judged themselves
according to him, as according to their Lord, who had promised them and
had now come, and not have been offended at his small stature. So we
should not allow ourselves to be led astray by the great distresses at
this time, but should judge ourselves according to the gospel. But he
that will not do it, though he be offended, let him thank his troubled
head and unbelieving heart, and lay not the blame on the gospel. This is
the first part of this prophecy of Simeoni.

32.**) But that Simeon speaks further and especially to the mother:
"And a sword shall pierce through your soul, that the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed"; this rhymes very badly with that which the
evangelist says, that Simeon blessed her. For it reads harshly, and
sounds very unkindly, that he says, "A sword shall pierce through thy
soul." But it is not written for the sake of the Virgin Mary alone, or
for the sake of the Lord Christ, who have no need of it; but it is
written for our learning, that we also should be guided by it.

(33) For not only I, but also no apostle, could have thought or
believed that such great wickedness would be in the world if the gospel
had not come and revealed it and brought it to light. For before this
time there were many excellent and pious people.

*) From § 31 until the end of the sermon is not found in Walch at this
place. D. Red.

**) Held publicly, 1535.

in the papacy, who have kept themselves finely respectable and chaste.
There have been many wiser, more reasonable people, since one could have
sworn that they meant heartily well. So that the world, as long as the
gospel is not there, shines most beautifully because of its art, wisdom,
discipline and respectability.

34 After that, it can be seen even more beautifully in the spiritual
appearance, that it has devised and made a lot of worship; as we have
also experienced in the papacy, that whoever saw it, had to say that it
was a holy, godly being. For all reason is caught up in such
appearances, both with worldly virtues and spiritual nature, so that if
it should remain like this, and the gospel does not expose the
unrighteousness, hypocrisy and idolatry that is underneath, they would
all go to the devil, and still keep the appearance that they were pious,
wise, holy and humble.

35. But when the gospel comes, and the preaching of this little child
begins, who, as Simeon prophesies, is set for the fall and rising of
many, and for a sign to be contradicted; Then it is found that those
whom all the world before thought to be living saints are the greatest
sinners, the wisest the greatest fools, the quiet and gentle hearts the
most bloodthirsty murderers, and certainly the gospel has no worse
enemies than what high, sensible, wise, virtuous, holy people are in the
sight of the world. The more highly they are adorned with such virtues,
the more bitterly they rage against the gospel. As you can see, the more
a monk is devoted to his rule and order, the more he has prayed, the
more strictly he has fasted; the more he rages against the gospel when
it comes up. This is a great plague and an exceedingly horrible thing.

This is what Simeon says here. O, he says, the world goes about in both
spiritual and worldly regimes in the most beautiful honors; it leads a
virtuous life, and lets itself become angry that everyone thinks that
they are pure angels and children of God, before great holiness and
wisdom. No one can and will believe that under such a pretense there is
such great vice and harmful poison; all people become fools about it.

98 L. i,iv3. io4. On the Sunday before the new year's day. L.i,
104,105. 99

ren. There is no art in the wide world that could see or judge such
things, except this preaching of Christ and the holy gospel, which stirs
up such poisonous swarms that everyone sees what filth and harmful
poison is behind it. For as soon as such preaching is heard in the
world, it enrages its people; then the beautiful saints glitter in such
a way that they burst out, and let themselves be seen before all the
world, that it is basically vain glitter and evil with them.

37. There is many a fine prince who is highly graced with wisdom and
understanding, and heartily desires to preside rightly over his people;
is not stingy, not a glutton nor a banqueter; wants to know all dealings
himself, so that no one may be wronged; is a chaste, chaste husband; In
sum, if one should choose a man to govern, one should choose such a
lord, since one can boast with truth that he is a reasonable, pious,
holy prince, especially if one wants to reckon it according to the old
nature and appearance in the papacy, with prayer, fasting, devotion, to
endow altars, chapels, churches and new services, which are diligently
directed to shut people's mouths with it.

38 But let the gospel come, and you will find that there is nothing but
hypocrisy with such pious gentlemen, proving also by deed that an
abominable murderer, who sheds much innocent blood, deals in evil
practices, and falls from one sin into another over the gospel, like
Ahaz, tries everything that he can hinder or curb. That one must say:
Who would have always thought that so great sin should be under such a
beautiful holy life? No one stabs nor breaks open such filth and
unwillingness, but the holy gospel, that such poison comes to light.

I would have thought that if anyone would accept the gospel, it would be
the pope and his cardinals, bishops and clergy, who are considered the
highest and most pious people in the world. But now it turns out that
the gospel has no fiercer or more ferocious enemies than the pope with
his clergy, high schools, doctors, monks, and priests, who have

should be promoted with all diligence. This is what Simeon means here
when he says to Mary: "The child whose mother you are will make such a
noise in the world, will disgrace the people who think that everyone and
themselves are living saints.

40 Then the thoughts of the hearts will be revealed, so that it can be
said: In this man, who seems so holy in the eyes of the world, who
should be commanded to rule the world and given the keys to heaven
because of his intellect, virtue, holiness and piety, there is such an
unrighteousness, such great blasphemy, idolatry, envy, hatred, murder,
ignorance 2c. that it is not possible to tell everything. For he cannot
hear God's word and the truth, nor tolerate it, defends idolatry,
strangles the people over it, yes, if he could drown country and people
in blood, he would do it, just so that he would dampen the gospel. This
must be a bitter, poisonous heart, which should not be found in any man,
let alone in such a man, whom the world considers pious, honorable,
gentle, wise and virtuous. Thus, says Simeon, this child will reveal the
heart.

(41) I would not have thought, when the good gospel came, that the
world should be so wicked; indeed, I thought that everyone should have
leaped for joy when they heard that they should be free from the
abominations of the pope and the miserable pressures and compulsions of
poor consciences, and through Christ by grace have the goods for which
they had striven in vain and in vain with so innumerable costs, toil,
and labor. And especially I thought, as reported before, that the
bishops and high schools should accept it with heart.

But what happens? It is precisely because of such preaching that they
trample us underfoot, and no one is more hostile to us than the clergy.
We must learn this and get used to it, and for the sake of such
naughtiness of the world not celebrate with the gospel, but continue
confidently. For it is such a doctrine that teaches and knows the devil
and his members rightly, that he is an enemy of God, and the world also,
where it is best, most pious and most holy. For I would not have been
able to deny that.

**100** L. 1, 105.106. On the Sunday before the new year's day. 2.1,
106.107. **101**

I would never have believed that such a great contempt for God and His
word should be in the hearts of people who outwardly pretend to be so
pious. But the Gospel teaches us that we can see before our eyes that
popes, bishops, princes, noblemen, citizens and peasants are full of
devils, because they not only do not accept this blessed doctrine, but
wantonly despise and persecute it. I did not see this devilish
wickedness in people before the Gospel, but thought they were full of
the Holy Spirit. But Christ reveals through his word that they are
possessed with the devil.

But why does he reveal it? To teach us; then also to comfort us. For
instruction, that we should not be frightened when we see that such holy
people are such devils, that we should wonder and say: This is such a
fine prince, such a fine citizen, such a fine husband, how does he come
more and more into blindness and wickedness, that he cannot stand God's
word and is so hostile to him? Now this gospel teaches, tells the cause,
and says: "Before, the thoughts of the heart were hidden; but now comes
he who is called the Revealer of hearts: who, by his word, has kindled
such a light in our hearts that we see what thoughts people have, which
neither they nor others saw before; they must come to light and be
revealed.

(44) The devil was a liar and a murderer before, just as he is now;
but he was too beautifully adorned that he could not be known, but was
thought to be an angel of light. But now, because the gospel shines
under his eyes, you see what was in him, that it was all lies, deceit
and murder ever with him. You can see this in his members, from the
highest lord down to the lowest servant; the more pious and holy the
people seem, the greater they are, full of poison and blasphemy. So they
have been all ways: but they have kept and kept under the left teat. Our
Lord God has closed a window through his gospel, as Simeon says here, so
that it can be seen, and they can no longer hide it.

45 Secondly, such a revelation of the heart also serves to comfort us:
because the world does not want to tolerate nor suffer God's word, and
yet it leads such a holy appearance that we are not frightened by it,
but rather conclude straight away: Let it appear as pious and holy as it
wants, because this unrighteousness is attached to it, that it does not
like God's word, but rather persecutes it, that it is the wretched
devil, as it stands and walks, and that all virtue and holy life in it
is nothing but a cover of shame.

(46) It is not evil in itself to be reasonable, wise and virtuous. But
this is the devil, that one should use such beautiful virtue as a cover
of shame, and thereby cover the abominable sin, which is called
blaspheming God and persecuting his word.

(47) Virginity is highly praised, as it is a peculiar and strange
gift. But what would you think of a virgin who had murdered her father
and mother? Wouldn't you say, if she were still a virgin, she would be
a murderer of her father and mother, and Master Hans would reward her
according to her merit, and her virginity would be of no use at all?

(48) It is the same here, and goes as Simeon says. O Mary," he says,
"your Son will make many pious people into great scoundrels and
murderers, who now go in to be worshipped for holiness, but who in time
will prove themselves to be God's worst enemies. Yes, says reason, they
are nevertheless honest pious people, not scoundrels and murderers, as
you pretend. Now lick yourself, dear kitten, with your smooth bellows
and sharp claws; but it shall not last long, praise God. It must not
last longer than for Christ to come with his gospel, then you will find
that the majority of respectable, pious 2c. People in the world are the
worst of the boys, murderers and enemies of God, who cannot stand God's
word, engage in all kinds of practices and tyranny, if they would muffle
it.

They do not like to be called evil. But they cannot excuse themselves
before God. For even though a man may be pious in outward appearance

102 **1, IV7-109.** On the new year's day. **W. XIII, 274,275.** 103

But he has the bad habit of being so mischievous in his heart that he
cannot tolerate God's word: how long will he remain pious against
people? For it soon happens, when the heart is full of murder, that the
tongue, yes, hand also becomes a murderer, if there is time, space and
reason. Such naughtiness the gospel exposes; otherwise no one would know
it, indeed, no one would be able to believe it.

50. Simeon says to Mary further: "And a sword," he says, "will
pierce your soul." For such wickedness of the world she has had to see
and experience. And not only she, but the whole Christian church at any
time when the light of the Gospel shines. But it is impossible for
Christians to see it without pain and especially heartache. As Peter
also says of St. Lot, 2 Peter 2:8, that he had to see and hear the vices
of the sodomites, who tormented his soul from day to day with their
unrighteous works.

(51) This is the sword that pierces the heart of Christians, that is,
their heart is wounded by the fact that the world is such a shameful
weed that can adorn itself in such a way, and yet practices all kinds of
arrogance and tyranny against Christ, blasphemes and condemns his word,
persecutes and murders his saints. This is the suffering of Christians,
the suffering of the heart, which goes beyond all suffering, and also
arouses the heartfelt groaning of sorrowful hearts. When this comes, the
punishment will be

not stay back there for long. That was enough of Simeoni's prophecy for
this time.

Now, in addition to this prophecy and teaching of Simeoni, there is also
a history of the widow Hannah, who also testifies and preaches about
Christ from the Holy Spirit. The evangelist reports how she served God
by praying and fasting day and night. This is what our adversaries, the
papists, say against us, even though we have never denied that one
serves God with proper fasting and prayer. For what God has commanded,
if one does it, it is called serving God. Since fasting, that is,
moderation in eating and drinking, item praying is commanded by God, we
let it remain a service of God; for it is a commanded obedience.

(53) But the papists are not satisfied with this, they want to
interpret it as that such obedience helps to the forgiveness of sins and
eternal life. Then we say no to this, and say with the angel, "Only the
infant Jesus, who has the name Jesus or Savior, executes this, that he
may absolve his people from their sins.

54 Let us now leave it at that, and ask God for His grace, that He may
graciously protect us from all trouble, and help us to stand up in
Christ, and never again be offended or offended by Him and His teaching.
May our dear Lord Christ grant us this, amen.

**On the new year's day. *)**

**Of the circumcision of Christ and the Jews.**

**Luc. 2, 21.**

And when eight days were expired for circumcising the child, his name
was called Jesus, which was called of the angel before he was conceived
in the womb.

(1) On today's feast, two things in particular are to be preached.
The first is about circumcision. The other, about the name

*) Held in the parish church, morning, 1531.

JEsu, of whom the evangelist especially reports how he was appointed by
the angel before the child was conceived in the womb. Therefore, such a
name must be very important.

**104 L-1. go-m. On the new year's day. W. xm, 276-279. 105**

(2) First of all, we will speak of circumcision, and make a
distinction, not of the work, but of the person, which is preached
today, as being circumcised. Now there is so great a difference between
the circumcision of Christ and that of other Jews, as far as heaven and
earth are from each other. For the persons are altogether unequal and
distinct, as ye shall hear hereafter.

3) Now the circumcision of the Jews has its origin in the Scriptures,
which are read in the first book of Moses, Cap. 17, 10. ff. It also has
its definite time, how long it should last, namely until Christ. It
first began with Abraham. God commanded him and all his household to be
circumcised. And all babies born from then on were to be circumcised on
the eighth day after birth. Those who had such signs of circumcision on
their bodies, he wanted to be their God and take care of them like his
people.

4 Now it was not without God's special counsel that not only Abraham,
but all his household members who were male, had to be circumcised, so
that the Jews would not boast that they were God's people alone. For
here God soon accepts Abraham's servants, who were Gentiles, as His
people and children in the inheritance, since Abraham's blood children
and heirs belonged to it; indeed, they come to it sooner than Isaac,
since the promise is made to him; even though they were poor purchased
servants of the Gentiles. Therefore the Jews must not boast so highly.
For if they make the circumcision equally great, they cannot deny that
God also called Gentiles at the same time, who were not Abraham's
children, but his purchased servants.

(5) Of this circumcision we have no more today than the mere
interpretation and image of faith. Just as other histories, which have
passed and been accomplished, serve only to teach us the examples of
faith and good works. We must not do works, but we must have the same
obedience and faith that those who lived at that time had. So we preach
from

of circumcision to this day also, not that we should be circumcised, for
such is finished; but that in circumcision we may learn to be obedient
to God, as Abraham was obedient. But if Christ had not come, we would
still have to be circumcised today, if we wanted to boast otherwise for
God's people. For there the command is clear: "Whosoever is not
circumcised, 'his soul shall be cut off from among my people.'" This
command Christ has abrogated. Now command us further, who are his
people, not to be circumcised, but to be baptized, and to believe, if we
want to become God's children and be saved.

The example we take from the old circumcision is this: God lets us see
here how foolish He is in raising His things, when one wants to judge
according to reason. For among the proud pagans it was the most
ridiculous and foolish thing that was ever seen on earth, that God, the
eternal wisdom, should impose such a ridiculous commandment on man
(since we do not like to speak of it), but especially on the elderly.
For Abraham was already nine and ninety years old when he received this
commandment. Hence the mocking, derisive names that the Gentiles give to
the Jews, they are called recutitos, apellas, and the like, only that
they mocked them with them.

But this is how it shall be, as your love has also heard in the next
Gospel. All that God pretends, no one shall like; everyone shall laugh
at it and consider it the greatest foolishness. Again, what he does not
pretend to do, and we do for ourselves without his command, that shall
please him; so we would like to have it. But God will not do it. So it
is that reason is offended and angry, as Paul says in 1 Corinthians
1:21: "Because the world through its wisdom did not know God in His
wisdom, it pleased God through foolish preaching to save those who
believe in it.

8) What is more foolish, if reason is to judge, which is also less
rhyming with it, than that in the Lord's Supper under the bread the
body of Christ, and under the wine the blood of Christ is to be used for
the forgiveness of sins?

106 **D. 1, 111-113. Am neuen' Jahrstag. W. Llii, 279-282.** 107

What should be eaten and drunk? What should a drink of wine or a bite of
bread help? thinks reason; cannot think otherwise. But God does not want
to change it because of that. If reason does not want to believe or
accept it, it may leave it alone.

9 It is the same with holy baptism. That a child who is immersed or
watered in water according to Christ's command should be washed of sins
and moved from the devil's kingdom into God's kingdom; how does that
rhyme? How can you believe it, if you want to put the word aside, and
measure and understand the matter with reason? Then it would be
believable if sin were a black or red stain; but because sin is in the
heart, marrow and legs, it seems that the water will slowly come in and
wash it away. So Abraham, too, could have thought when he received the
command to be circumcised: "Dear man, what good will it do me to be
circumcised if I am an old man? What good is a child? Or what is better
after circumcision than before? If God had wanted the body to be
different, he would have made it so that nothing of it could have been
cut. Reason would have said so; can also not say otherwise nor think, if
it wants to be smartest.

But when one comes to the question: Why God commanded this or that, the
devil has already won; as one can see from Eve in Paradise. She was
ordered not to eat from the forbidden tree. But when she let such a
command out of her sight, and listened to the devil, why God should have
forbidden such things, she went away and fell into the horrible
disobedience, which we all still have to bear.

(11) Therefore we are to learn diligently from such a command of
circumcision, and we are to live diligently by it: If God says or does
anything, you shall shut your mouth and fall on your knees, ask nothing
else and say nothing else, but do what He tells you, listen to what He
tells you, and let yourself be pleased with what He does. For God wants
to be unmastered by us, who are by nature children of wrath, sinners and
liars.

For this reason, his counsel, word and work are far too high for us to
understand. We are still blind, presumptuous fools who think that they
not only understand, but could also do better. That is why Jeremiah
says: "Man's heart is so hopeless and treacherous that no one can
reason with it. Since we are of such a nature, we should put our wisdom
aside and think of God's things and commandments as follows: "If I
look foolishly at you, there is no other cause in truth than that I am a
great fool who cannot understand or grasp divine wisdom, for my
foolishness and blindness hinder me.

(12) So the old circumcision is an example of a fine faith, that
Abraham and his servants were not horrified by such a command, but
followed it straightforwardly. They did not think: "It is a foolish
thing, if we old people let ourselves be circumcised, God will not mean
it that way, it must have another mind (just as the sacrament abusers
disputing baptism and the Lord's Supper). What did God want to command
about the foolish thing of circumcising the body? What was it for? They
did not think of such a thing, but immediately obeyed the command and
decided: Because God commanded it and so willed it, be it ever so
foolish, I will not be saved, but I will follow His command as He
commanded. That therefore circumcision is a fine example of a firm,
righteous faith, which Abraham and his servants had; from which we are
to learn that we also do such things, not letting our wisdom and reason
deceive us from the word of God.

013 This is said of the circumcision of the Jews of old, which should
stand no longer than the law, that is, until Christ, who put an end to
the law. As this is clearly shown in the fact that the infants were
first circumcised on the eighth day. For the Scriptures keep the order
that after six days is the Sabbath, and the day that follows the Sabbath
is the eighth day, when a new week begins. For our dear Lord Christ has
with the circumcision

[108 **D.1,H3-IIS. On the new year's day. W.** xili, **282-285.**
109]{.underline}

He began to fulfill the preaching that was said about him, that he
should be a Savior and a light for the Gentiles, who should not rule in
the small corner of Judaism alone, but should reign in all the world
through his gospel, and should absolve us from all sin, since he was
circumcised, and with his circumcision put an end to the previous one.

(14) Now I said at the beginning that if one wished to speak correctly
of the circumcision of Christ, there must be as great a difference
between the circumcision of Christ and that of the Jews as between
heaven and earth. For here the persons are unequal, although the work is
the same. Circumcision, like the law, was given to those who were
sinners and guilty of eternal death. But now Christ is without all sin,
and is the Lord of the law, with whom the law has nothing to do; for it
has to do only with sinners. But he is not a sinner. Because he is
circumcised according to the law, just as another sinful child is
circumcised, the law takes offense at him and must therefore suffer its
punishment and cease. If Christ had wanted to do it, he could have
abolished the law by force, for he is the Lord of the law, with whom the
law has nothing to do, because he is without all sin. But he did not
want to do it by force, but with love and humility. Now this happens to
us too well, that we should accept it and be comforted.

(15) For our dear Lord Christ did not need it for his own person, nor
did he need it for his own person to become man or to be crucified. He
did it for our sake, because we needed such a man, who would be without
sin, and would fulfill the law for us and thus appease the wrath of God.
For this cause he put himself under the law, giving such victory, which
he obtained in the law, to us, that we should need and enjoy it, and
henceforth have all the right to the law through him, which he has for a
law, that it should no longer condemn nor ensnare us. For whosoever
believeth in Christ with a true faith shall be saved from such damnation
through him.

016 Therefore mark well this difference; for there is all in it. Abraham
had to go under the law and be circumcised, because he was a sinner, and
therefore the law had a promise for him. But Christ is not a sinner, and
therefore must not be under the law: nevertheless he put himself under
the law, that whosoever believeth in him might be saved and delivered
from the curse of the law by him.

Therefore the feast of the circumcision of Christ is a very comforting
feast, because we should praise and thank God that even though we have
fallen under the law through our sin, this does not harm us in our
salvation, but through Christ we shall be free and delivered from the
curse of the law, who for our sake bore the curse of the law and
submitted to the law.

18) But that it was necessary for us to get rid of the law and become
free is taught by St. Paul, when he says in 1 Cor. 7:19: "Circumcision
is nothing, but keeping God's commandments. These are very proud words,
offensive to the Jews; for so much is said: no one who is circumcised
fulfills God's commandment or keeps the law. But what is this but, that
they which are circumcised are not circumcised; or, that I may say it
more plainly, By circumcision no man fulfilleth the law; neither is any
man thereby absolved from sins. For although the Jews have allowed
themselves to be circumcised, God's commandment and commandment still
stands: "You shall love God with all your heart, with all your soul and
with all your mind. Give me a man who can boast that he has done or can
do something. The law says, "Thou shalt not be lusted after." Give me
a man who can boast that he has done or can do. In sum, if you take a
commandment before you that you want, you must confess that there is no
one who has kept it perfectly.

(19) But what judgment belongs to such people who do not keep God's
commandment, even though they are circumcised? St. Paul shows this from
the fifth book of Moses, where it says: "Cursed be every man that
continueth not in all things which are written in this book.

**[110 L. 1, 113-117. On the new year's day. W. XIII, 288-289.
111]{.underline}**

Book of the Law, that he may do it." Concludes, therefore, that all
those who deal with the works of the law are under the curse. Cause,
they cannot keep it. For if one could keep the law, there would be no
need. But because it cannot be kept, it follows that the law accuses us,
chokes us, gives us to the devil, and casts us into hell.

(20) Therefore there must be a higher and better preaching, which
gives us more than the law, which cannot do more than command: We are to
love God with all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves, even if he
harms us and we would like to avenge ourselves. But nothing comes of it.
Nature stirs itself up with anger, ill-will, impatience, hatred, envy,
hopefulness 2c. Therefore there is no one who can follow such preaching.
And even if we do as much as is possible, we cannot stand before God
with it.

This is the reason that a higher and greater one comes, namely Christ,
the Son of God, who is without all sin, yet allows himself to be
circumcised like other sinners, and thus in all humility submits to the
law, so that it may even abolish it and make us free from it, who could
not bear such a burden and therefore had to remain under the curse and
wrath of God. As not only our experience but also the testimony of the
holy prophets shows. For what else would have concerned the holy prophet
David Noth, since he says in the 19th Psalm v. 13: Delicta quis
intelligit? "Who can tell how often he is mistaken? Forgive me the
hidden faults," since I know nothing of them; item, Ps. 143, 2: "Enter
not into judgment with thy servant; for before thee no living man is
righteous"; item, Ps. 130, 3: "If thou wilt, O Lord, impute sin, O
Lord, who shall stand?"

(22) Such sayings and others testify sufficiently that it is
impossible for a man to say that he has done enough for the law and has
escaped the wrath of God because of his works. Since the law holds us
captive and does not allow us to stand before God, but rather hinders
the confidence we should have in God, it follows that if we want to
stand before God, we must have something higher than the preaching of
the law, namely, the preaching of the holy gospel, in which

Our dear Lord Christ proclaims to the Jews and to us that we are
condemned because of our sins. And it does not help the Jews that they
are circumcised, for such circumcision does not absolve them from sins;
as the prophets say, though they are circumcised in the body, yet the
heart is uncircumcised and unclean. But this settles it for us, that the
gospel preaches further, how our dear Lord Christ, who was not guilty of
the law, but without sin, nevertheless gave himself up under the law,
and was circumcised, that he might gain a cause for the law, and say
unto him, Hear, O law, thou makest me a servant, when I am thy lord:
therefore must thou serve me again, and be my servant and prisoner
again.

(23) Now the right which our dear Lord Christ has to the law for his
own person, he gives to me and to you, and takes away the right of the
law which it has against us, as poor sinners, and makes us free and
absolved from it. But not that we should do nothing and live as we
please, but that where we have not done what we ought, it should be
forgiven us and not imputed to us, and should not harm our salvation.

(24) Therefore those who believe in Christ do not need to be
circumcised at all. For they are not only exempt from these and other
burdens of the law, but have forgiveness of all sins and the promise of
eternal life through Christ. Therefore they can boast and say, "The law
does not help me, neither does circumcision; but this helps me, that I
believe that Christ is circumcised; for this was done for my sake, that
I might have a guarantor to stand in debt for me, to which debt the law,
because of my sins, can commit me. Therefore I will take comfort in his
innocence and say: The law was for a time like a lord in heaven; for it
accused us men before God, and so we had to suffer it. We were not
wronged because we could not deny our sins. But now it is the other way
around, because through the circumcision of Christ we are redeemed from
the circumcision and the curse of the law.

112 **L. 1, 118-120. On the new year's day. W. XIII, 289-291.** 113

(25) My circumcision, my love for God and for man, my obedience, are
not in order; I do not want to rest on them, nor do I want to rely on
them. But all my confidence, comfort and defiance shall be that Christ
is obedient, innocent and holy. Such confidence and hope I shall not
lack; for it is a certain comfort and firm shield. Before I had it, I
thought it was my turn to fulfill the law or be damned. But now I know
that it is an impossible thing for me and for all men who cannot bear
such a burden. But Christ took it upon Himself, threw Himself under the
law, and there began circumcision, that He might fulfill it everywhere,
leaving nothing behind that God has laid on us poor sinners to obey;
such is my heart and comfort.

026 I ought to tame my old Adam, and to keep him to do what he ought:
for otherwise I should be a disobedient child. But there is much
disobedience in the measure of it. We do many things that we ought not
to do; we leave many things undone that we ought to do; sometimes we
even fall into gross, horrible sin. Here is no other consolation, but
that we may flee under this shelter, which is called, "Christ hath put
himself under the law"; and we shall take comfort in what our obedience
lacks, that Christ hath fulfilled it. For we shall never come to do all
that we ought, as St. Paul says: "I delight in the law of God after the
inward man: but I see another law in my members, which is contrary to
the law in my mind, and taketh me captive into the law of sins, which is
in my members. This is said: I must do what the flesh wants, but I do
not do it by faith, but I am sorry, I do not like to be caught like
that.

(27) So now Christian righteousness is complete, that I know myself to
be a poor sinner, who can never do enough for the law. But I do not
despair because of this. For here I see that my Lord Christ took care of
me, and gave himself up for me under the law, and was sufficient for the
law.

has done. Then it follows that such a heart must say: Did my God do this
for my sake? Should I not also love such a gracious God? Should I not do
his will with all my heart, and in turn do what is dear to him? Thus one
becomes cheerful and friendly toward God, and follows the right
fulfillment of the law, which is not forced, but willing. Even though
such fulfillment is not yet complete and imperfect because of the flesh,
God is pleased with it for the sake of faith in Christ. For what is
still unclean and imperfect belongs under the cover and umbrella of the
forgiveness of sins.

So your love has heard of two kinds of circumcision. God commanded the
first, and until Christ the Jews had to submit to such circumcision with
obedience, just as they did to the law. But with this they have not yet
been saved. For no one has ever been able to do enough for the law.
Therefore, even though circumcision existed, the law still condemned all
Jews and condemned them before God. But by this we are saved and
sanctified, because we have Christ, who gave himself under the law and
took away the curse from us. Now the Jews who believed this and placed
their salvation in the promised Seed, the outward circumcision was a
seal to them that they were righteous before God, not because of
circumcision, but because of faith in Christ.

29 Therefore the feast of the circumcision of Christ is a comforting
feast, by which we learn, when we come before God, to say, "O Lord, you
commanded the Jews to be circumcised; you commanded the Jews and all of
us to love you with all our hearts, and to love our neighbor as
ourselves; but, dear Lord, I have not done it, and cannot do it, for
that reason, according to my merit, I should be lost and eternally
damned. But this is my only consolation and shield, behind which I flee
and hide myself: Your dear Son Christ Jesus, my Lord, has given Himself
under the law, and has given Himself up to the law.

**114 2.1, 120.121. On the new year's day. W. XIII, 291-294. 115**

He allowed himself to be circumcised like another sinner, and thus did
your will completely; otherwise he would not have allowed himself to be
circumcised on the eighth day like another child. This was done for my
sake and for the sake of all sinners, and was given to us as a gift and
as our own. For on account of his person he would not have needed it.
Therefore I accept it, and

I beg you, dear heavenly Father, to be merciful to me for his sake and
to let me enjoy his piety and holiness. So that everyone may learn to
trust in the holiness and innocence of our dear Lord Christ; then we may
be sure, and neither sin nor death may prevail against us. May our dear
Lord Christ grant us this, amen.

**On the new year's day. *)**

**The second sermon.**

**From the name JEsu.**

Your love has heard of one part of today's gospel, namely, of
circumcision, by which Christ wanted to show us that he had put himself
under the law for our sake, so that we might be freed and set free from
the curse of the law. Therefore we also let this feast be kept and
celebrated, so that we do not forget such a good deed.

2 Now follows the other part, about the name Jesus, which the evangelist
remembers here with diligence, as if there was a special need that such
a name be well known, since it was not invented by men, but brought down
from heaven and announced by the angel before the child was conceived in
the womb. But this is so that everyone may know that it is such a name
that pleases God, since God Himself baptized His Son in this way.

Now the name Jesus is called in German, as we actually speak and say, as
much as a Savior. Some German it, ein Seligmacher. But it is not good
German; Heiland is better. But why Christ bears this name, is indicated
by the angel Gabriel, when he says to Joseph, Matth. 1, 21: "You shall
call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.

*) Held in 1831 in the church, afternoon.

(4) Let us diligently learn and remember this name, that this little
child is called Jesus, and is a Savior, who healeth from the greatest
and most grievous affliction, that is, from sins; and not from the small
trouble and insignificant affliction, which this life bringeth, that one
may have this, and another another hurt in body, goods, or otherwise.
God has commanded the world to do this: it has kings and emperors to
protect their subjects against their enemies; it has fathers and mothers
to feed and educate their children; it has physicians to advise and help
with bodily illnesses. But they are all poor saviors compared to him who
is a savior who saves his people from sins.

(5) Therefore, whoever takes this infant and lets him be his Jesus or
Savior, let him be regarded as a Savior, not especially for this life,
which he has commanded others, as has now been said, but for eternal
life, that he may save from sins and death. For where sin is gone, death
must also be gone. Therefore, consider for yourself whether you have
more to hope for from God than from the emperor and other worldly lords.
If you do not want to believe that there is another life after this
life, then you have enough salvation in the emperor, in father and
mother, in the doctors.

[116 **L.1, 1A-123. On the new year's day. W. XIII, 2S4-299.**
117]{.underline}

For these are founded on this life and physical need 2c. But if you
believe that after this life there is another, you need this Savior for
it; otherwise neither emperor, father, mother, doctor, nor anyone else,
nor even an angel can help. It is true that if the emperor, father and
mother, and other people do not want to or cannot help in physical need,
the Lord Jesus will be there and help His own. But this is not his
special and primary office, therefore we preachers do not point it out
to the people.

Now this is his special office, and he will make his name known to all
sinners, that his name is Jesus, that he will save from sins, eternal
death and the devil's kingdom; for this they may also be. For if there
were no hell, no kingdom of the devil, no eternal punishment and
torment, why would they want or need the Lord Jesus? Otherwise it would
be the same when a man dies, as when a tree falls, or as a cow when it
dies, so it is all over. That is why you can see how a wild, reprobate
people are, who do not believe in God and eternal life.

(7) But whoever believes that there is a God, must soon conclude that
this life here on earth is not completely finished, but that there is
another and eternal life ahead. For we have experienced that God does
not take care of this temporal life in the first place; otherwise He
would not let the wicked do their will so long and have all the fullness
here on earth. But God promises us an eternal life after this one; in
this life the infant Jesus is to be our Savior and helper. And if he
helps us to this end, he has helped us enough. And it does not matter if
he already lets us wade around in this temporal life, as if we had no
God who wanted to or could help us. For his help shall be an eternal
help; we shall be content with that, let it be with the temporal, as it
may.

8 One sees how the pope, cardinals, bishops and all persecutors of the
Word live so securely, and drive all courage against the Word and the
Christians. God looks on, lets it happen, and pretends as if he did not
see that

It seems that God has held more firmly and strongly over the Gentiles
than over His people. But if you are a Christian, do not be mistaken.
For the very reason that God has promised us certain help to eternal
life through His Son, that is why He leaves us here in this temporal
life, as if He had nothing to do with us; so that we may learn and
believe that we have such a Savior in the infant Jesus, who wants to
help at the time and hour when no one else can help, namely when sin
comes and wants to accuse us and hand us over to eternal death.

(9) Outside of this hour, unfortunately, we see that we do not have
much desire for this Savior, nor do we ask for him. For he who is in
good health and has a chest full of florins may not ask the Lord Jesus
to buy anything; he can do it with money. It is the same with other
temporal gifts: reason, wisdom, power, can all help in the things for
which they are ordered. A mother can take care of her children with
food, drink and other things, a doctor of a sick person, a lawyer of a
lost cause. But when this temporal life is over, and the conscience
cannot deny its sins before God's judgment, and therefore must stand in
the sorrow and peril of eternal damnation, then is the right time for
this Savior Jesus to come. For neither emperor, nor father, nor mother,
nor physician, nor lawyer, nor angel, nor any creature can help. Where
then will you seek help or counsel? Nowhere, but with this child. For it
is for this very need that Jesus says he will be there to help all who
recognize such need and seek help from him.

(10) Furthermore, it is up to you to take good care that this name is
not reversed and that the infant Jesus is made into Franciscus, Dominic,
the Carthusian order, mass, vigils, indulgences, alms, fasting, and
other things, as was done in the papacy; then everything would be wrong.
There is no other Savior against sin, neither in heaven nor on earth,
except this only child of the Virgin Mary, who is called Jesus.
Therefore, whoever seeks another Savior,

[118 **D. 1, 123-126. On the new year's day. W. xm, 299-303.**
119]{.underline}

be it the Carthusian order or whatever, he is lost. So whoever could
call the child by its right name and call it Jesus would be fine,
because the name is the real thing. Therefore, one should seek help here
alone and nowhere else.

011 But the devil hath his business for ever, and will baptize the child
otherwise, that he may be accounted a judge, and seek other saviors and
helpers. But it is decided: Jesus is not called Jesus because he gives
you enough money and makes you Lord on earth. This has already been
granted and given, Genesis 1:28, where God says: "You shall rule over
the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, and the beasts of the
earth." For this reason he is called Jesus, that he may be a Savior,
and then help us, when otherwise all things are lacking, and we must
leave everything we had on earth and go to another life.

(12) Therefore, this name casts away and rejects everything that
people undertake outside of Christ, that it should serve and help for
the forgiveness of sins and eternal life. For the fact that a monk
thinks: Through my order I will reconcile God, so that he will be
gracious to me 2c., is so much said: My order shall be called Jesus, and
shall accomplish that which is due to Jesus. That the pope and his
preachers teach that faith alone does not do it; if you want to be
saved, you must do good works and enjoy them; this is what is said: Good
works are and are called Jesus.

But it is not true. What I think and imagine shall not be called Jesus:
this little child alone shall be so called. The pope and his clergy do
not do this; neither do we, when we are more afraid of our sins than of
this child Jesus, and think: If I had not done this or that, I would
have stood up to God.

14 The Holy Spirit cannot suffer such things, but wants this child to
have his name entirely and only, so that, if we want to be helped
against sin and eternal death, we may despair of all our works and the
help of the saints, and with steadfast faith we may be saved.

He is to be given the name of Jesus, and he is to be given that name
alone. But whoever wants to take this name from him, as the pope and the
Turk dare to do, let them know how they are advised.

(15) Again, whoever can hold on to this name shall remain safe from
the devil, let alone be harmed by the world. For it is a name which the
angel brought from heaven and gave to this child by God's command
before it was conceived in the womb. If the persecutors of this name,
who point to other saviors and helpers, want to prove the angel Gabriel
wrong, he will call upon our Lord God and say: "Lord, you told me to
baptize your child and call it that. Then you will see what the
persecutors will do against this name and gain from it, namely, that
they will have neither Jesus nor God, and will have to die in sins and
perish; whereas all those who hold fast to it will stand and remain
before God and His Son.

16 Therefore, let us remember this name and hold fast to it, that this
child is the only Savior against sin, death and the devil. This little
child is the only Savior against sin, death and the devil. If the world
wants to be hostile to us, let it do so, not in God's name. If it does
not want to consider this child as its savior, let it do so, and see who
will help it when death comes, obs its and other human works, fasting,
praying, almsgiving, mass, calling on saints 2c. will do. But we want to
have all our comfort and defiance in the fact that we know that God
Himself gave this name to the child and called him Jesus or a Savior.
For this reason, we gladly confess and consider him our Savior, that is,
we want to take comfort from him when sin and eternal death afflict us,
that he will help us against them. In such hope and faith we know that
God is well pleased and takes it for the highest honor. On the other
hand, He is most displeased with those who either do not want to accept
this Savior or seek other helpers.

17 So we are to learn both, that we may

[120 **n. 1, 126. i27. On the new year's day. W. xm, 303-30s.**
121]{.underline}

At the same time the name and the work of today's feast finely rhyme.
The child Jesus lets himself be circumcised like another child. Why?
Because he is without sin, and is not allowed to be circumcised, so that
he becomes a child of God, because he is a child before. But it is
because he is to be called Jesus, and to be a Savior, who is to help
against sin and evil conscience, against death and all misfortune that
follows from sin. For this reason he allows himself to be circumcised
and submits himself to the law, so that he will not leave anything
behind that God has ever commanded men to do, so that when we see our
uncircumcised hearts and the abominable disobedience within us, we will
not therefore despair, but hold fast to Christ, saying, "I am
unfortunately a great sinner, and have not done the will of my God; but
for this reason I will not despair of God and his grace. For what I have
not done, Christ has done for me, and the law cannot accuse him of not
having done the least thing. Therefore let the law leave me alone,
neither condemn me nor accuse me. For I am not alone; Christ is with me;
to him I cleave, who paid the price of my sin, and gave me his innocence
and righteousness. In spite of the law and the devil, that they should
harm me. So let the circumcision of Christ and his name be used.

If anyone has time, let him draw from the prophets the beautiful sermons
of comfort about Christ and his kingdom, who forgives sins, makes
righteous, and gives us eternal life. For all these sermons are gathered
together by the angel in one word, that Christ shall be the Savior of
all the world, and shall be called Jesus. And especially the beautiful
prophecy, Isa. 9, 6. belongs here, where the prophet says to the Lord
Christ

six names, he is called: "Wonderful, Counsel, Power, Hero, Eternal
Father and Prince of Peace. For such names all serve the work that
through the little child we may be helped from sin, death and the devil
to righteousness and eternal life.

19 Where then is the shameful Antichrist, the pope with his
devil-mouths, who takes such a name from Christ and presents him to the
people as a serious, wrathful judge, where one cannot occur nor find
mercy in him, unless he has the intercession of other saints and many
good works? There is a twofold sin. The first, that one takes Christ's
name, and will not let him be a Savior and Jesus. The other is to give
such a name to the saints, and even to our works, as if Christ were to
be a savior for himself and had pleasure in our destruction.

20 So, where is the shameful devil, who shoots thoughts into our hearts
for and for, as if God is ungracious, and wants to let us fall in the
challenge and not help us? But how do such thoughts rhyme with this
name, that the angel by command of God calls the little child Jesus? If
such a name is to be right and true, then God's will must not be that
he should delight in our destruction; but his will is that we should be
helped and saved.

(21) Therefore let this name be dear to us, and let us keep it in all
our temptations, that the Son of God and our Lord Christ is called
Jesus, and that he is a Savior. As soon as it was said of him in
paradise, "He shall bruise the head of the serpent," that is, help us
against the devil and his kingdom. May God, the Father of all comfort
and mercy, increase such faith and confidence in us daily and preserve
us forever through His Son Jesus Christ, our Savior, amen,

[**122'** L. 1, 12". 129. on the colonel's day or feast of the
apparition. W. XIII, 304-309. **123**]{.underline}

**On Colonel's Day above Feast of the Apparition. *)**

**Matth. 2, 1-12.**

When Jesus was born in Bethlehem, in the land of Judaea, in the days of
Herod the king, behold, the wise men came from the east to Jerusalem,
saying: Where is the newborn King of the Jews? We have seen his star in
the east and have come to worship him. When Herod the king heard this,
he was afraid, and all Jerusalem with him; and he gathered together all
the chief priests and scribes of the people, and inquired of them where
Christ should be born. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem, in the land
of Judaea. For thus it is written by the prophet: And Bethlehem in the
land of Judah is by no means the least of the princes of Judah: for out
of thee shall come to me the duke that shall be ruler over my people
Israel. Then Herod called the wise men secretly, and learned diligently
of them when the star appeared, and directed them to Bethlehem, saying,
Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye find him, tell
me again, that I also may come and worship him. When they had heard the
king, they went. And, behold, the star, which they had seen in the east,
went before them, until it came and stood over where the young child
was. When they saw the star, they were greatly rejoiced, and went into
the house, and found the young child with Mary his mother, and fell
down, and worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and gave him gold,
and frankincense, and myrrh. And God commanded them in a dream that they
should not turn again to Herod. And they went again by another way into
their own land.

**The first part, from the history.**

1 Today's feast is called the feast of the revelation of Christ. For
these three revelations are said to have taken place in one day, though
not in one year: that the Lord Christ revealed himself to the wise men
in the east by the star; at the Jordan, when he was baptized by John;
and at the wedding of Cana in Galilee, when he performed the first
miraculous sign. Be it as it may, that such revelations happened in one
day or not, they are nevertheless very marvelous stories, and especially
the one of today with the wise men. For the Lord made himself known, not
only among the Jews, but also among the Gentiles, so that the Jews might
not say that he had kept himself secret, that no one had known about
him.

002 For it was determined that he should come from the Jews, not as a
great king, but so miserable that he could hardly find room to be born:
this makes his future very troublesome, and

*) Two sermons, publicly delivered in 1532, merged into one.

still reproaches the Jews today. For this reason, it was of great need
that God should reveal and make him known among the Gentiles, so that,
even though he was poor and miserable, he might be preached and
proclaimed gloriously everywhere. For it was no small thing that the
wise men from the east came such a long way, and made a cry of this
child in Jerusalem: as Simeon and Hannah in the temple, the angels in
the air, the shepherds in Bethlehem. They all had to do with this child,
singing and saying of him; so that this child was most gloriously
proclaimed, that the Jews should become aware of him and accept him.

3 As far as today's history is concerned, the evangelist reports with
special diligence how the wise men first came to Jerusalem and searched
for Christ there. For since Jerusalem was the capital and this child of
the Jews was to be king, they could not think otherwise than that they
would find him at Jerusalem. But in that they think so, they miss, find
the Kjnd not in the glorious city Jerusalem, but in the poor little town
Bethlehem.

**124 1> I2g-I3i. On the colonel's day or feast of the apparition. W.
XIII, 309-316. 125**

Let us remember this. If we want to come to this child and find him, we
must not follow our thoughts or reason, but stay with the word alone and
not turn away from it. For if we let the word go, the trouble is already
there. The child has a glorious, great name, but besides that he is poor
and miserable, and because of that he does not want to be found in
Jerusalem with those who are glorious and great. Therefore, as the wise
men do here, we must keep the word and not be deceived by the splendor
of the world. But he that forsaketh the word, and will not hear what the
scripture saith of this little child, but judgeth according to the
outward appearance, shall not come unto Christ, neither shall he find
him.

(5) As we see in the papists, who leave the word and fall into the
thought of painting Christ as they please. They do not like that about
him, that he alone should be the Savior. That is why they add their own
works and devotion, which they think of enjoying beside the Savior
Christ. They call upon the Virgin Mary to reconcile their son to them;
they think that such invocation and intercession should also be a savior
for them. But it is nothing but lies. For where one drops the word and
gropes for Christ apart from the word, one seizes the devil, who then
imagines such thoughts in people's minds, that Christ is a judge and
cane-master, whoever now wants to stand before him must enjoy the
intercession of the saints. That is why in the papacy everyone put more
trust in the Virgin Mary and the intercession of the saints than in the
Lord Christ Himself. This is what happens when one does not stick to the
Word. That is why the devil is particularly interested in tearing us
away from the Word and leading us to his own thoughts apart from the
Word. For then he knows that he has won and we have lost.

Therefore the highest and best art is to hold fast to the word, and not
to think of divine things otherwise than as the word tells us. But it
takes a lot of effort to bring people to this point. Many people cannot
yet be raised to think in the

If they stay with the word about the sacrament, they want to judge
badly, like a cow, after they see that there is nothing but wine and
bread, and that the body and blood of Christ are not there. Fasting,
then, the work without the word in the eyes. But this means to take only
the husks, and to leave the core, the words of our Lord Christ, behind.

(7) So at first these wise men also had thoughts of Christ. Since they
have this from divine revelation, that the king of the Jews is born,
they go straight to Jerusalem, and think they will find him there in a
glorious castle and a golden chamber. For how could reason think
otherwise of a king? But such thoughts, because they are without word,
they must perish. For they are missing and do not find the child in
Jerusalem, since the holy city was where God himself dwelt. But if they
are to find it, they must follow the word. This is the true star and the
beautiful sun that points to Christ.

(8) Therefore, the wise men are a good example of a beautiful and
mighty faith, in that they put out of their eyes and hearts all other
thoughts that they and the whole world had, and badly follow the word
that is held out to them from the prophet Micah. They are not angry at
all that from Jerusalem, where the true worship was and God Himself
dwelt, they are turned away from our Lord God and His temple to a
cowshed in Bethlehem, when they were not looking for a beggar but for
the king of the Jews. Badly as they hear, so they follow, and let
nothing trouble their thoughts; looking only to that which Micah saith,
there they abide. This faith can be praised as a special example. For I
myself, if I had been there, would have kept to the temple, and thought:
Here dwells God; therefore, if the Child is to be found in any place in
the whole world, he will be found here, where the whole priesthood and
service is.

(9) But God has another purpose in mind and does not want His Son to
be found among the great spiritual prelates and in Jerusalem, just as he
is found today with the pope.

126 **2.1, 131-133.** On Colonel's Day or Feast of the Apparition. **W.
XIII, 316-321.** 127

But he thought that he wanted to abolish the priesthood and rule of the
Jews all together, because they built so much on it and assumed so
highly that they were priests, Levites and God's people, and that they
had the temple. God could not and would not tolerate such pride; and the
temple, the worship and the priesthood, since they were so high, had to
be taken away one by one. But the poor little Bethlehem had to come
forth and be the first hostel of the Son of God.

(10) This is the first part of this history, a special, necessary and
useful lesson, that the wise men, when they seek Christ the newborn
King, do not find him at Jerusalem, as they thought. But if they should
find him, they must have and hear the prophet Micham. Now that they have
the word, and have let go of their thoughts, they go willingly from the
holy capital Jerusalem to Bethlehem, to the little town, and do not
mind. Then God gives them the comfort that the star will come again as
soon as they leave Jerusalem and shine before them to Bethlehem, to the
door where the child was. They need such comfort, for there they find
nothing but poverty and beggary: Joseph and Mary are not at home in that
place; the child lies there in a manger; there is scarcely a drink of
water.

How does this rhyme with the king? If one wanted to mock the people, one
would cite them thus. But the pious people are not mistaken, they hold
fast to what they have heard from the prophet Micah and have seen in the
star. Therefore, regardless of the poor, miserable being, they fall down
before the child, worship him and open their treasures, and worship him.
This is the Historia.

(12) Here we should especially not forget the great, excellent comfort
that God also calls the Gentiles to the kingdom of Christ and accepts
them as a people, even though they were not circumcised, nor were they
subject to the law like the Jews. For here we Gentiles have a certain
testimony that we should not despair, as if we did not belong to Christ;
but that we should accept ourselves, as well as the

Jews, even though we are not his people, like the Jews.

For these wise men were pagans, who had their priests and worship
according to the pagan way, but without God's command and word, and
were uncircumcised. Nevertheless, regardless of all this, they come as
strangers and undeserving people to the light, the Lord Christ, and
accept him. He also accepts them and is pleased with their worship and
gift. This is written for our comfort, that we should thank God for
having established such a kingdom on earth through Christ, in which we,
who are not His people, are dealt with not according to merit, but
according to grace.

14 Secondly, we are to learn from history how we are to conduct
ourselves righteously toward our dear Lord Christ, that is, that we are
to reject all adversity and, with these wise men, confess before the
world the Lord Christ, seeking and worshipping him from the heart as our
Savior.

15 Also, because he leads his reign on earth in such a miserable and
poor form, we should gladly help with our money, goods and all our
wealth to promote and increase his kingdom, which is hindered and
suppressed in so many ways by the devil and the world. For we can open
our treasures to Christ this day and give them to him, just as the wise
men did. Cause, there is his word, Matth. 25, 40: "Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto the least of these that are mine, ye have done it unto me.

16 Therefore, whoever helps poor, impossible, abandoned people with
money and goods, whoever gives his tax and handouts to keep young people
in school, to educate them in God's Word and other arts, so that in
time they can also help others in the church ministry and lead them, he
sacrifices and gives to the poor little child Jesus, who, as soon as he
was born, was not only poor and destitute, but also had to leave the
country and flee to Egypt because of the tyrant Herodis.

17. on such a flight and long journey God creates through these wise
men for the infant, his nurse Joseph and the virgin Mary a

128 **L. 1, 133-135. On Colonel's Day or Feast of the Apparition. W.
xm, 321-324.** 129

Provision. And it will not have been a small gift, for so the evangelist
says: "They have opened their treasures. But because we cannot doubt in
their hearts about the infant Jesus, because they have recognized him as
the Son of God and the eternal King and Savior, we must believe that
they have given him abundantly.

18 Therefore, this also serves so that the poor Christians who suffer
persecution and are in misery should not despair. God, before he would
let a poor Christian suffer misery and die of hunger, would rather
create a person for him over a hundred miles away, who would be
comforting and helpful to him. As the example of His only begotten Son
sufficiently comforts us.

**The other part, from the saying of Micah.**

(19) In addition to the history, the prophecy of the prophet Micah is
especially noteworthy, in which he portrays the Lord Christ in an
exceedingly fine way. The words are thus:

**And you, Bethlehem Judah, are by no means the least of the princes of
Judah; for out of you shall come to me the duke who shall be lord over
my people Israel.**

(20) In this saying, as the Jews themselves testify, God revealed that
the Lord Christ was to be waited for in Bethlehem to be born there. This
is a special honor that makes the poor little Bethlehem a thousand times
more glorious than Jerusalem was. Therefore, although the prophet says
that Bethlehem is small and of little account in the eyes of the world,
the evangelist changes the prophet's words and says that it is not
small or little. God honors this poor Bethlehem so highly that His Son
is born there. Let this be an honor above all the honor that any city in
the whole world has ever had.

21 Therefore the words of the evangelist, praising Bethlehem, are
excellent, saying, "Out of thee shall come to me the Duke, who is Lord
over my people. This is the joyful text that teaches us what we should
look upon and hold the Lord Christ for, that although he is a beggar
before the world, a wretched and despised man, who is in a

He is born in a small, poor spot, yet he is a lord and duke over Israel,
that is, over the people of God.

(22) But what kind of rule this is, we reported in the angel's sermon
on the day of Christ, who also calls Christ a Lord, not because he wants
to be a tyrant and plague and force the people. For for this cause the
prophet called him by name, saying, "Bethlehem, thou that art little."
As if to say: If this Lord wanted to be great and splendid in the sight
of the world, and to be seen in such a way that he should be feared, he
would probably find another place where he would be born. But there is
no splendor, no power, no goods, no money, neither sword nor gun.
Therefore he leaves great, mighty cities, Jerusalem, the holiest, Rome,
the mightiest, and others, and is content with poor, little Bethlehem.
So that the city in which he is born will soon show what kind of Lord he
is, poor and miserable in the sight of the world, but rich in spirit and
in all spiritual goods.

023 For this is his title, that he should be a lord and a prince. But by
his birth, by the city in which he is born, by all that he has on earth,
he is poor and miserable, and has neither royal nor princely splendor.
Therefore, if he be a lord and prince, and yet not glorious in the sight
of the world, but wretched and poor, what can his glory be but that, as
he is poor and wretched in the sight of the world, so he be rich and
mighty in the sight of the world, which is poor and meager? This is that
he is righteous, since the world is full of sin; that he is eternal,
since the world is mortal. He is the master of the devil, since the
world must let the devil rule and drive it. He is pious, since the world
is evil. He has a gracious God, since the world is under God's wrath.
He is a Lord of eternal life, since the world belongs down to hell.

(24) This is the dominion of this child, and in such a case his people
shall enjoy it. He will not help you physically without as much need as
your salvation and his honor require, for he himself is miserable.

**130 L. 1, 135-137. on the colonel's day or feast of the apparition.
W. XIII, 324-32L 131**

and poor. For this reason, no one should think that he will receive
money and goods. This may be expected from the pope and his like, who
makes his creatures lords over great goods and divides the lands to
them, as Daniel prophesied. But you should feel and enjoy the dominion
of this child only in the fact that he wants to forgive your sin, make
you righteous and holy, give you the Holy Spirit, and bring you out of
the devil's kingdom and death into eternal life.

(25) This is where faith comes in, and that you diligently keep God's
word, as reported in the beginning. For he who forsakes the word and
follows his own thoughts will lose Christ altogether, and will have to
think of him not as a Savior but as a judge, and flee from him as from
the devil, whom we fear even when we have been wicked and done wrong,
lest he come and lead us away.

(26) Our dear Lord Christ does not want to be such a lord, that he
would deal cruelly with his own; but he wants to be lord and ruler over
his people Israel, that he would help them from their sins and place
them in God's grace. For "his people" means nothing else but poor
miserable sinners who are frightened and despondent because of their
sins, and would like to be well with God. So Micheas sums it up very
well, first of all, that he is not to be a worldly lord, nor is he to be
a lord who is spiritually evil, but is to help all who believe in him
against sin, the devil, death and hell. For of such a Lord one can
rejoice.

27 Thus far do the scribes carry the saying of Micah, and no further.
Perhaps they fear that this is too much, for they see that Herod's
heart was troubled as to how he might cut off this king of the Jews;
therefore they omit the rest of what Micah says about this king. As if
they should say, We know of no king of the Jews now, but of Herod; and
yet it is thus written in Micah, There shall be born a prince of the
Jews in Bethlehem. So they let it hang, and must not show themselves any
further. But the prophet, though he is dead, yet he speaketh

Nevertheless, he goes on and says what kind of a duke or king this child
will be because of his person, namely: "Which origin has been from the
beginning and from eternity.

28 The scribes did not tell Herod the king, nor did they themselves
understand. For it is somewhat more obscure than the foregoing, that he
should be born in Bethlehem, and be a duke over the people of Israel.
This is to be understood well, and is a strong indication that he must
be a man.

29) But that the prophet adds: "His origin is from the beginning and
before the days": this is so much said that he is also eternal God, who
did not first begin to be something at Bethlehem. At Bethlehem he was
born, that is one beginning; but besides this beginning he has another
beginning, which is called: "from the beginning and from everlasting".

(30) For let the prophet keep his words. First he says: Ex te
egredietur, out of you shall come forth. Here the chief priests and
scribes themselves testify that "to go forth" means as much as, to be
born. As we also say in German: Der ist da, dort her, das ist. da, dort
geboren. Therefore the little word "go forth" must also mean so much
afterwards, since he says: cujus egressus ab antiquis diebus, his going
forth is from eternity, before time, day and hour have been.

If you want to know where this child came from, listen to the prophet
Micah, who says that he came from Bethlehem. Where else did he come
from? Only from Bethlehem? No, but he was born before the world, before
heaven and earth, before sun and moon. This cannot be accepted in words,
and is as much as, in eternity, before time or days were. Herod and the
Jews should not have understood this, nor were they worthy of it.

32 This is the King and Lord who was born in Bethlehem, a true, real
man, and who shall also be called: Egressus ab antiquis dierum, who came
forth and was born before the world, that is, he is eternal, true God
and true, right, natural man.

132 **L. i, 137-139. On Colonel's Day or Feast of the Apparition. W.
xin, 329-332.** 133

The world wants to become mad and foolish over this, because it cannot
rhyme these two births together, that this child also had its beginning
or birth before the sun and moon were created. For this reason the Jews
did not like this, and after that many heresies arose which challenged
this article. But think thou upon him, who hast God's word before his
eyes. From whom then may he have been born, if he was born before the
world? From no one but God. This is also what reason must conclude if it
believes otherwise that God created heaven and earth. For what can one
think that is before heaven and earth but God? If then this child came
forth or was born before heaven and earth were created, it must have
been born of God and be God itself; for apart from God and the creature
there is nothing.

34 This is the text that does it all. For if Christ alone were a mere
man, death would have choked him as well as all other men. Nor would it
have helped him that he was born of a virgin. For it is far more
wonderful that God should make Eve from a rib than that a virgin should
give birth. For a virgin is a woman's image, created without that she
should bear children. Therefore neither devil nor death would have asked
to be born of the virgin Mary. But this is because the Virgin Mary does
not bear a son alone, but such a son who was born before the world.
Therefore the devil and death, and the whole kingdom of the devil, are
overcome, because they have attached themselves to such a man, who,
before the world was, had his beginning or birth.

(35) For if it were not so, and he had come forth from Bethlehem
alone, death would have devoured him as well as me and you, as the
Virgin Mary, John the Baptist, and other great saints. But his exit is
called: from eternity. Therefore, death, which until now has strangled
all men, must exist with shame in this child, the Lord Jesus, because he
was God, he could not atone.

He could not be accused by the law, strangled by death, or condemned by
the devil. But because he had his origin in the time of Bethlehem, and
was born into the world like another child, he had to die. So the devil
and death sang to each other, looking no further than the exit from
Bethlehem. This infant is killed by the same exit. But now that he lies
in the grave, he says: I was born before the world; and with power he
tears through the grave, sin, death and devils, so that they cannot hold
him.

36. The prophet wants to bring us such a message about this prince,
that he has two exits, or as we speak in German, two births; therefore
he is such a person, who is at the same time true God and true man with
each other, so that he is only one person and not two; that one must
say: Christ is the Son of the virgin Mary, who sucked at her breasts and
gained weight in her womb like another man; but besides this he was also
born of his Father, the living, eternal God, before the world in
eternity. That therefore these two natures, divine and human, in One
Person, inseparably united, are One Christ, who is true God and true man
2c.

37 The chief priests did not tell Herod this, nor was he worthy, as I
said, the tyrant, to know or understand. They themselves did not
understand it 2c.

Now this is an exceedingly marvelous birth, which, if we would learn it
rightly, we must begin first of all by grasping the beginning at
Bethlehem. Just as the prophet also keeps this order, he writes first of
the bodily birth; there he also makes more words of it than of the other
birth, which is from eternity. For whoever wants to know how our Lord
God is disposed toward us, let him begin below and first learn what he
has done here on earth and how he has revealed himself to men. After
that, he will learn from this child, as the text gives it in itself,
that it is from eternity. Such

134 **2.1, 139-141. On Colonel's Day or Feast of the Apparition. W.
XIII, 332-338.** 135

will then not be terrible, but most lovely and comforting.

39 But there is a special misfortune, that everyone, out of shameful and
harmful presumption, wants to start first with the provision of this and
that. Because God knew all things, why he did not ruin man's case? Why
does he still watch the world and let it promote its own damnation, when
he could well be in favor of it and convert it so that it would have to
be pious? 2c. Whoever wants to begin to recognize God with such
questions will actually break his neck. For this is Lucifer's case, he
also wanted to go above, and nowhere above. But it does not.

(40) If you want to travel with certainty and learn to know God in His
essence, you must begin here, as the prophet does here, that you first
come to Bethlehem, and then ascend to heaven and eternity. As Christ
also teaches, saying, "I am the way, the truth, and the life. He who
sees me, Philip, sees the Father," John 14:6, 9. He who does not lift
himself up, but immediately wants to go up and speculate on how God
rules, how he punishes and chokes, it serves him right when he is in
trouble. As the wise man says, Prov. 25, 27: "He who investigates
difficult things finds them too difficult.

Therefore, this is the right art for anyone who wants to learn about
this child, to go to Bethlehem first, that is, to see what kind of
office this child is to lead and carry out in the world, namely, that he
is to be a duke, as Micah says, who is to redeem his people from sins
and eternal death. When, then, these things have been well learned, and
this infant in the manger has been found, seen, and well apprehended, it
will be found that he is not only Mary's Son, but also God's Son, born
of God before any creature was created; and not only will no harm
follow, but all joy and security; for through this child we come to God
and His grace, whom otherwise we would never be able to believe to be a
gracious God. This is the text of the infant Jesus in Bethlehem.

42. but here also see how shameful He

rodes and the scribes deal with it. Herod persecuted the child, and the
scribes despised him. Now this is the art of our Lord God, who can put
such an excellent text before the people that they talk, sing and say
about it, and yet they shall not understand a word of it. For is it no
wonder that the scribes preach this text here, Herod sends the wise men
to Bethlehem according to this text, and that is even more, the
prankster says: "Search diligently for the little child, and if you
find it, tell me again, that I also may come and worship it? yet they do
not understand a word of it, they have the shells; but of the kernel
they must guess.

God still deals with ungrateful, evil Christians today: not only with
the papists, who have, read and know the Bible just as well as we do;
but also with the people of our part, that they know how to speak of the
Gospel, but do not understand a word of it. For otherwise they would
prove otherwise with their lives. Just as the scribes and Herod have the
prophet in their mouths; but if they understood him, do you not think
they would also make themselves out, and seek and worship the little
child? But the fact that they do not do so, but go away and throw
themselves to the winds, is an indication that they do not know or
understand what they are teaching other people.

44 But believers have an advantage over unbelievers in that they not
only hear the words, but also understand them, and have great joy and
comfort from them. Therefore, although the world, the pope, and our
proud citizens and peasants are superior to us in money, goods, power,
and honor, we know that in this respect they are far, far inferior to
us, and so afflicted, even though they can hear the words, speak and
teach them themselves, that they should not understand the least of
them. As their lives sufficiently show, they have ears like the stubborn
Jews, and yet they do not hear, and are blind with their seeing eyes.

May God, with the wise, through the star of His holy Word, graciously
lead us to His Son Christ Jesus, and keep us from all offenses forever,
amen.

[136 L. i,i42.143. On the colonel's day or feast of the apparition. W.
xin, 338-342. 137]{.underline}

**On the Colonel's Day or Feast of the Apparition.**

**Second sermon.*)**

**Matth. 3, 13-17.**

At that time Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be
baptized by him. But John rebuked him, saying: I have need that I should
be baptized of thee, and thou comest unto me? And Jesus answered and
said unto him, Let it be so now: so it behoveth us to fulfill all
righteousness. And he suffered him. And when JEsus was baptized, he came
up straightway out of the water: and, behold, the heaven was opened upon
him. And John saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming
upon him. And behold, a voice from heaven said, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased.

**From the baptism of Christ.**

About the feast of Epiphany (which is usually called the feast of the
three kings) your dear people have heard how it takes its name from the
fact that Christ revealed himself, not only through the star, but also
at the Jordan, where he was baptized. Since such a revelation is the
highest, most distinguished and most comforting, it would not be wrong
to call this day the feast when the Lord Christ was baptized and
revealed at the Jordan when he was thirty years old.

The evangelist tells us in detail how this happened: that Christ, who
until then had kept quiet and had not yet entered his ministry, rose
from Galilee and came to John at the Jordan to be baptized, like other
sinners who confessed their sin and sought forgiveness for it. John is
appalled by this and considers himself unworthy to baptize him. But
Jesus says: "Be content, it must be so, if all righteousness is to be
fulfilled; that is, if this is to be accomplished, that poor sinners may
come to righteousness and be saved, then you must baptize me. For I
became a sinner for the sake of all sinners; therefore I must do what
God has commanded sinners to do, so that they may be justified through
me.

*) In the house, 1534.

This happened for our comfort and as an example, that the Son of God was
baptized, who had no sin, and did what he was not obligated to do. Since
we, on the other hand, are such poor, wretched, depraved people that we
do not do what we are obliged to do, we are still bad boys. Let alone
that we should come so far and do something else that we do not owe.
Therefore, this is to be especially noted here, that Christ, the Son of
God, who is the founder of holy baptism himself, nevertheless allows
himself to be baptized, and further commands that such baptisms remain
in the church from now on, and that all who want to be saved should also
be baptized.

4 From this it follows that they must be accursed people whom the devil
has defiled and blinded, who neither want to see nor hear what is
happening here, but either despise baptism or mock it. Why would you not
let yourself or your children be baptized, since the Son of God lets
himself be baptized? How can you be so hopeful, even so blind and
foolish, that you can despise this holy and beneficial work? Shouldn't
you give baptism all the credit, if it is of no other use, just because
you hear that the Son of God himself was baptized, that you were
baptized in his honor, even though baptism is of no other use to you?

138 **L. 1, 143-145. on the colonel's day or feast of the apparition.
W. xm, 342-345.** 139

5 In addition, this is also written here, what we can expect from such a
baptism and how it should benefit us. For there it is seen that God in
heaven pours Himself out over such a baptism of His Son with all grace,
since, as the evangelist says, heaven opens up, which before was closed,
and now becomes over the baptism of Christ a gate and window, so that
one can see into it, and henceforth there is no difference between God
and us; for God the Father Himself is present, and says: "This is my
dear Son" 2c. Now is this not a great revelation and certainly a great
sign that God is not hostile to baptism, which His dear Son has
sanctified with His own body, but has a desire and love for it, and
cannot stay away from it?

Therefore, since one celebrates a feast of the revelation of Christ, why
does one not let this revelation be, since God the Father, the Son and
the Holy Spirit reveal themselves so powerfully? For God, the Holy
Spirit, also comes in a friendly form, like an innocent bird, which is
the friendliest of all other birds, and has neither wrath nor gall with
it; as a sign that He will not be angry with us, but will help us
through Christ to become pious and blessed.

(7) Now this is a twofold revelation: one of God, the eternal Father
Almighty, and the other of the Holy Spirit, which is in the baptism of
our dear Lord Christ, who was baptized at the Jordan, not only as an
example to us, but also as a grace for us to enjoy such baptism, and to
believe that we have a gracious God through it, if we follow such an
example and are also baptized according to Christ's command.

(8) Not only does the Father reveal Himself by opening heaven and
making heaven and the world one thing, but He also lets Himself be heard
with a new voice, the like of which no one has ever heard from heaven
before, saying: "This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
This is a different voice than the one at Mount Sina, where God also
speaks from heaven, but in such a way that the earth trembles before it,
and the mountains smear, and the people are afraid to die.

(9) God does not let Himself be heard here with such a terrible voice;
indeed, nothing is heard there, but only kindness, grace and mercy. As
if God should say: You people, turn your eyes here and see what kind of
trade is going on. You see that John is baptizing a man at the Jordan,
as he usually baptizes more people; but if you really want to know who
this man is, listen to me: He is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. You must not be afraid of him, for there he stands naked, like
another man, without sword and worldly power. Neither should you be
afraid of me, for I am not coming with thunder and lightning, with guns
and trumpets, as at Mount Sina, but with a friendly image and a blessed
countenance.

10 So go out in the most friendly way. The Son of God, who is without
sin and innocent, stands in the Jordan and is baptized; the Holy Spirit
comes upon him like a dove, so that John sees him with his eyes; and God
the Father speaks to us in the most friendly way, proclaiming to us how
he is sending us not an apostle, a prophet, or an angel, but his only
begotten Son, in whom he is well pleased. This means, I think, that we
are commanded to look to the Son, because God Himself was not displeased
to proclaim to all of us, when He was baptized, that He was His beloved
Son. As if he should say: If you now want to have a gracious father, you
can easily do so; only hold on to my son, to whom I cannot be hostile,
then you will, if you obey his voice, also be dear to me for his sake;
therefore hear him and do what he tells you. For he hath no more need of
baptism for his person, than he hath need of circumcision. Cause, he is
without all sin.

Now the baptism of John is ordained of me for the sinner's sake, that
all who confess their sin, being sorry for it, and desiring to be
delivered from it, should come to this baptism, and certainly believe
that I will be gracious to them. But why does my son, who is not a
sinner, allow himself to be baptized? Not because of him, but because of
you, who are sinners; for he took your sin upon himself.

1402-1> 145-147. on the colonel's day or feast of the apparition. W.
xni, 345-343. 141

He will get rid of them and put them away, so that you will be saved and
your sins will no longer be found.

12 The evangelist reports this very well when he says: Christ, when John
rebuked him, said: "Let it be so now; for so it behooves us to fulfill
all righteousness. This much is said, In this baptism is the
righteousness of the whole world. For since I have the sin of all the
world upon me and bear it, if the world is to be saved, I must do what
God has commanded sinners to do, namely, to be baptized by you. Do not
hinder this blessed work, but as I gladly let myself be baptized for the
sake of the poor sinners, so you also gladly help and baptize me, so
that God's wrath may be quenched and sin put away. The eternal Father
is pleased with this, speaks to us from heaven, and directs us to his
dear Son, saying: "He is my dear Son, in whom I am well pleased": for
our comfort, that we should accept such baptism and certainly believe
that God's wrath is appeased, and our sin is put away through such
baptism of Christ, so that God will be pleased with us further, for the
sake of his Son.

(13) This voice should be followed, if possible, on the points of
needles, and this glorious revelation should never be let out of the
eyes and heart, that our Lord God tears the heavens apart, sends down
the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove, and lets himself be heard with a
sweet voice, saying: Here you have my Son, my heart and highest
treasure, and all that I am. But what does the Son do? He presents
himself as a poor, meager sinner, and is baptized by John at the Jordan;
so that the whole Godhead reveals itself here in the most gracious and
friendly way, according to the distinction of the persons, in three
different forms; so that everyone may know who holds to the Lord Christ,
and accepts his word and is comforted by his works, that God cannot nor
will be hostile to such a man. For here it says: Whatever the Son says,
says or does, it is all pleasing to the Father.

14 O, how blessed we would be if we could see Christ.

They heard the voice and held fast to it with all their heart. Again,
wicked and accursed people are these who let such a voice resound, and
yet pass by as if they did not hear it. But the cursed papacy still
blasphemes and persecutes this voice, saying: Christ is not the only one
whom the Father loves; he also loves monks, priests, mass, pilgrimages
and other things. Whoever would think that the kindness of God and the
fatherly heart should not be honored more highly than this, should
rather be dead ten times over than live with such blasphemous, unholy
people.

(15) Therefore learn, little children, because you hear this voice
resounding. A few years ago we knew nothing about it; heaven was closed,
and we had to listen to what the monks preached about purgatory,
poltergeists and other lies in the name of the devil. Now, praise God,
the pure doctrine is on the way again, and the only thing missing is
that one hears and learns it. Since nothing helps in the world, let us
thank our Lord God for this blessing, that he has revealed his heart and
his treasure to us today: the Holy Spirit in the form of a dove, his Son
at the Jordan in baptism, and himself in a glorious, sweet voice.

Who then would not condemn him who would not give thanks and rejoice
here, and accept the Son with his heart, standing here in the Jordan,
being baptized as a sinner, on whom the Holy Spirit sits in the form of
a dove? Since the voice of the Father is as close as can be to the wall?
There will undoubtedly also have been countless holy angels. For where
the Father, Son and Holy Spirit can be seen, there must be the whole
heavenly host.

(17) Therefore let this feast be held in high esteem. It is also a
revelation that Christ revealed himself to the wise men through a star,
but this is much higher. These are the right three kings, God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, all three of whom are
found together when Christ is baptized. If he had wanted, such a
revelation would have happened in the desert or in the temple in
Jerusalem. But at the baptism it has

142 **L-1, 147-14S. On the colonel's day or feast of the apparition. W.
xm, 348-350.** 143

We are to be taught, as I have often said, that we should hold baptism
in high esteem, and because we have been baptized, neither look at
ourselves nor judge ourselves in any other way than as made, even newly
created saints.

The blasphemous Anabaptists say today that baptism is only bad water.
The devil take such blasphemers. A dog, a sow, or a cow should thus
judge, which has nothing but the taste of water. A Christian, however,
should not judge according to taste, but according to the word; for
there is not only water, but also God's word and power. As can be seen
in the baptism of Christ, God is Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Therefore
it is not bad water, but such water as the Son of God bathes in, the
Holy Spirit hovers over, and God the Father preaches over; so that
baptism is not bad water, but water rich in grace and a bath of the new
birth, consecrated and sanctified by God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit. For this very reason, Christ sets forth the manner of
baptizing, that one should baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit.

19 Therefore, even today, when a child is baptized, the Son of God, who
sanctifies with His body, the Holy Spirit, who sanctifies with His
presence, and God the Father, who sanctifies with His voice, are present
at such baptism. Therefore, it cannot be said that the water alone is
bad, since the whole Godhead is present; therefore, we should not regard
baptism as a work of man. For although a man baptizes, he does not
baptize in his own name, but in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, who are also in this work; otherwise baptism would slowly
accomplish what it is supposed to accomplish.

20 Who then will despise the fact that God is Father, Son and Holy
Spirit? Who will call such water bad water? Do we not see what kind of
spice God throws into this water? If you throw sugar into the water, it
is no longer water, but a delicious clearing, or something else: why do
we want to separate the word from the water here, and say that it is bad
water; as if God's word were, yes,

God Himself, not with and in such water? Not so; for God the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are in and by such water, as there at the Jordan,
when Christ stood in the water, the Holy Spirit hovered over it, and God
the Father preached by it.

Therefore, baptism is such a water that takes away sin, death and all
misfortune, helps us to heaven and eternal life. Such a delicious sugar
water, aromaticum and apothecary has become of it, since God has mixed
Himself into it. But God is a God of life; because He is in this water,
this must be the right aqua vitae, which drives away death and hell and
makes us eternally alive.

(22) So we should learn to recognize and appreciate baptism. For one
does not baptize in the name of an angel or man, but in the name of God
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit; or as it is written in the
stories of the apostles, in the name of Jesus, which is just as much.
For whoever confesses Jesus Christ must also confess God the Father and
the Holy Spirit, since Christ clearly says that he comes from the Father
and wants to send the Holy Spirit. He who confesses Christ with all his
heart will not be false to his word, but will believe that the Son is
not alone, but that the Father and the Holy Spirit are with him, even
though the Father and the Holy Spirit are not mentioned by name.

23. Therefore we should learn these things well, and not confess the
word of holy baptism about the water used to baptize, but confess and
say that it was ordained by God to make us clean from sins and save us
from eternal death for the sake of our Lord Christ through the Holy
Spirit. For what did God the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit want
to do with it? Therefore, if you confess that the child now born is in
sins, put it into holy baptism and let God do His work with it, as His
word says and promises, that one must be born again through water and
the Spirit, and that whoever believes and is baptized shall be saved.
Therefore, if thou confess that it is in death: put it, in the
commandment of Christ, into this bath or baptism, and death shall be
swallowed up. And thou that art already baptized,

[144 i> 149-iöi. On the first Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 350-353.
145]{.underline}

Remember also that your baptism is a seal and pledge to you that God has
forgiven your sin and promised you eternal life through Christ. For
baptism has a divine power to blot out death and wash away sin. For this
is why we were baptized, just as we are baptized into the death of
Christ in this hope.

24. But whether we have fallen into sin and done wrong, let baptism and
what is promised to us therein remain firm and sure. But return, and
persevere not in sins. For it is not fitting, if you desire forgiveness
of sins, that you should persist in sins and not refrain from them; but
repent, and say in right faith: My Lord God has promised me all grace,
having put me in His Son's baptism; to such grace I return, trusting
that my sins are taken away from me: not for my sake, or for the sake of
any man or creature; but for the sake of my Lord Christ, who commanded
it, and appointed it, and was baptized Himself a sinner.

(25) So this revelation far surpasses the one when the star appeared
to the wise men; for all Christians enjoy this revelation, since only
some pagans enjoyed that revelation there. Therefore, this feast should
be called the feast of Christ's baptism, and the day when Christ was
baptized.

Then we would have cause to preach about baptism against the evil
spirits and against the devil, who likes to let us see all other things,
but without our right treasure, he would like to take it out of our eyes
and hands, as he did in the papacy, where little or nothing was preached
about such revelation at the Jordan.

Therefore learn and diligently observe how this day God has revealed
Himself with a beautiful sermon of His Son, that what He speaks and does
with us, and we with Him, all these things shall be pleasing to Him. For
he that followeth the Son, and keepeth his word, the same shall be the
dear child, and shall have the Holy Ghost, which also was seen here at
baptism in a beautiful, friendly, and peaceable form. Just as the Father
also lets himself be heard in the most friendly way, and says: Here you
have not an angel, prophet, apostle, but my Son and myself. How could he
reveal himself in a higher way? And how can we serve him better than to
listen to his Son, our Savior, and to follow what he preaches and tells
us? But he that will not hear him, nor follow him to his blessedness,
may hear the apostles of the devil to his everlasting destruction.
Therefore we may thank God for such grace and pray that He will preserve
us and make us blessed, amen.

**On the first Sunday after Epiphany. *)**

**Luc. 2, 41-52.**

And his parents went up to Jerusalem every year for the feast of Easter.
And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem according to
the custom of the feast. And when the days were fulfilled, and they were
gathered together again, the child Jesus abode at Jerusalem, and his
parents knew it not. But they thought he was among the companions, and
came a day's journey, seeking him among their friends and
acquaintances. And when they found him not, they went again to
Jerusalem, seeking him. And it came to pass after three days, that they
found him sitting in the temple in the midst of the teachers, listening
unto them, and asking them questions. And all who listened to him were
amazed at his understanding and his answer. And when they saw him, they
were amazed. And his mother said unto him, My son,

*) In the house, 1534.

146 **L. 1, 151-153.** On the first Sunday after Epiphany. **W. XIII,
383-356.** 147

why have you done this to us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee
with sorrows. And he said unto them: What is it that ye have sought me?
know ye not that I must be in my Father's? And they understood not the
word which he spake unto them. And he went down with them, and came to
Nazareth, and was subject unto them. And his mother kept all these words
in her heart. And JEsus increased in wisdom, age and grace with GOD and
men.

(1) This is a high gospel, if one wants to interpret it sharply, and
say how it is when one loses this little child Jesus from his heart. But
we will save such high interpretation for another time, and now take
before us that which is lightest and easiest, and most useful for the
common man.

(2) Your love heard at the feast of the wise men that it was called
the feast of the revelation of Christ, which took place so that the
newborn babe would not remain secret, but would be revealed. Otherwise
it would have been of no use to us if we had not known about it. For
this reason other gospels have been preached about these days, in which
it is seen how Christ revealed himself. When John baptized him at the
Jordan, and after that he showed himself with the first miraculous sign
at the wedding in Cana, that he was such a Lord, who had all things in
his power. So that the Lord Jesus would not only be known among the
people, but also experienced and famous, as being more than another man,
namely a Lord, born to such dominion, who is able and capable of
everything, and we would recognize him as our Savior and in all distress
and need would turn to him and learn to seek help from him.

3 Today's gospel also serves this purpose. For it is also a revelation,
by which the Lord Jesus shows himself to be not a common but a special
child, because he secretly withdraws from his parents, and steps out of
the obedience, which otherwise all children owe to their parents, by
God's command. The evangelist says that this happened: His parents had
to appear every year at the Easter feast, like other Jews, in the temple
in Jerusalem. When they took the child Jesus, he stayed behind them in
Jerusalem. That provided the parents, may perhaps be accustomed that he
went before more with their relatives.

For Christ did not live like a fiend in his youth, he did not lead a
special life; but kept himself like other children, played at times also
with his companions, without (only) that he, as the text reports,
increased in grace and wisdom before other children. This makes his
mother Mary and Joseph think that he is among the companions, and so
they leave him behind. But in the evening, when they came to the first
inn in Jerusalem, they looked around to see where the child was. When
they did not find him among the friends and acquaintances, they were
very frightened. For the child was specially commanded to the mother. So
Jofeph also had a strong command that he should take care of him. But
Mary alone was the mother; therefore it was a great sorrow to her heart
and a great fright that she should not find it. There will not have been
much sleeping, eating, resting from crying, but they walked back the
four miles at night. But the child was lost.

004 Now therefore reckon what their heart hath said unto them in the
meanwhile? For the first day it is lost; the second day they seek it,
and find it only on the third day. Because of this, they will not have
slept much during the three nights, and they will have thought many
things. And especially she, the mother, will have thought: God has taken
your son away from you, he does not want you to be his mother anymore,
that you have waited for him so diligently. So Joseph also thought,
"God will no longer have you as a caretaker, because you have been so
industrious and have not waited for the only child.

(5) Now this is a special thing, that the child Jesus, our dear Lord
God, wanted to show himself in such a way that he would not have to be
subject to his mother out of necessity and by right; but what he did, he
did only as an example, out of good will, and nothing out of duty. For
he was not only his mother's son, but also her son.

148 **L. 1, 153-ISS. On the first Sunday after Epiphany. W. XIII,
356-359.** 149

God and Lord. Therefore he does not present himself as a son to his
mother, as we will also hear today for more than eight days, when he
says: "Woman, what have I to do with you? He does the same here,
showing that he is not only a man who must obey his father and mother
out of necessity; but he lets himself be heard to say that he has
another father, who is greater, and on whom he has more favorable regard
than on Mary and Joseph. What is it, saith he, that ye have sought me?
Do you not know that I must be in that which is my father's? As if he
should say, I am your Son; but so that I am more the Son of that which
is in heaven.

For our sake, then, he reveals himself, so that we may know him well and
come to believe that he is not only a true man, but also a true God.
Therefore, as the mother addresses him, "My son, why have you done this
to us?" he answers for himself and says, "I have not disobeyed you,
nor have I despised you, as you would have us believe. So he wants to be
right and unpunished by his mother. Mary and Joseph, however, must have
been wrong about the pain and sorrow they had. For they should have
remembered what the angels, the shepherds, the arch-father Simeon and
others preached about this child, and should have known that even if he
had stayed behind, he would not have been disobedient, but would have
owed more obedience to God, his Father in heaven, than to his mother on
earth.

(7) And this example of the child of Jesus, our dear Lord, is intended
to remind us of our ignorance and great blindness, which always tends to
serve men rather than God. Therefore, when it comes to the point that we
must disobey either God or our parents and overlords, we should learn to
say with Christ: "I must be in that which is my Father's in heaven";
outside of this case, I will gladly and wholeheartedly be obedient to
father and mother, emperor, king, lords and wives in the house. But here
in this case it means: Dear father, dear mother, I have another father,
I should look to him more than to you. Mary and Joseph had forgotten
this.

Therefore, he had to remind them of it and teach them.

(8) Now this is written for our sake. For the naughtiness, as I have
said, we have by nature, when we are to serve God and render his
obedience to him, that we excuse ourselves to the world and say: I must
not; for GOD has commanded me to be obedient to my authorities. As the
persecutors of the Gospel do now: "We have learned from us that we are
guilty of obedience to the authorities; they praise this same obedience
highly, and say: We know well that according to the Scriptures it is not
wrong to receive the Sacrament under both forms; but we must be obedient
to the authorities. There is my father and mother, there is my prince,
who does not want it; therefore I may not do it. Thank you, dear
Junkers.

But who is the authority? My sovereign? My father and mother? Yes, this
is true; but have you no other authority besides these? What do you take
this man for, who says in the first commandment: I am the LORD your God?
Should it not be so here, when he says: This pleases me, this I will
have; that you, regardless of your princes, yes, king and emperor,
father and mother, say with Christ: Oportet me esse in his, quae sunt
Patris mei: **"I** must be in that which is my father's"? For God's
word and command shall ever proceed cheaply. If it is directed, then one
should also do afterwards what father and mother, emperor and king want,
so that one does not harness the chariot before the horses.

(10) Just as Christ was revealed to us through the star and at the
Jordan to comfort us that he is our Savior, as we heard abundantly from
his baptism above and from the angels' song and sermon on the day of
Christ, so he reveals himself to us in today's gospel as an example
that in matters concerning God we should not look to anyone, be it
father, mother, prince, or whatever you want to call it. For there is
another lord and higher authority, who is called God; to him you must
obey, and do what he tells you to do, and serve him above all things.
When this obedience has been established, then do according to what your
father and mother, your ruler and authorities, have commanded you.

150 L. 1, 155-157. on the first Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 359-362.
151

But that they do not hinder you in this higher obedience, which, as I
said, must be directed above all things.

(11) I do not want to touch here on the great temptation that few
people feel when one loses Christ in the heart; but I want to remain
simple with the little child, who thus reveals himself that he is
something more than other men, because he takes himself off without
permission from the obedience of his mother, and does not go after her,
but she must go after him; to confirm that she had heard from the angel:
"He will be called a son of the Most High. She had to be reminded of
this here, so that she would not forget it.

(12) Thus this revelation is closely related to the other. For here it
is seen that Christ is a peculiar man, as the shepherds and Simeon had
testified of him. Therefore he did not want to be like other children,
even though he sometimes ran around and played with other children.

(13) Now what he did in the temple, the evangelist shows in detail,
that he did not ask what the grain was worth, how one should eat and
drink; but he talked with the scribes about the word of God, listened to
them at first how they interpreted the Scriptures, and then punished
them for it; but in this way, as is fitting for a young boy. As an
example, as we see in Matthew, when they, the scribes, preached about
the fifth commandment, and interpreted it only as meaning that one
should not kill with one's hand, he came out and said, "Truly,
according to this commandment, it is not acceptable to speak evil of
people, to curse them, or to be angry with them. For this commandment
requires a kind heart toward one's neighbor.

14 In this way he also let himself be known and revealed that he, like a
young child, asked about such things and how they should be understood,
so that they, the scribes themselves, wondered and thought such things:
Where does the boy come to such thoughts and understanding? For no doubt
he will not have suffered or allowed to go unanswered what was wrong.

15 He will not have failed to ask the teachers what they think of the
Messiah, where he comes from and what his ministry will be. But he will
have spoken about all this with special humility, discipline and shame,
and he will have acted as if he had heard it from his mother. That
everyone thought that the boy has the Holy Spirit, he will become a
special man. For it is customary at this time of the year for young
people to show that they can sense what will become of them and how they
will turn out.

(16) This is a brief history of how the infant Jesus revealed himself
to his mother and Joseph, as if he were more than another child, because
he was out of their obedience and still wanted to be unpunished.

Now St. Lucas concludes the gospel and says: He went down with them to
Nazareth and was their subject. So that this child, who had withdrawn
from his mother for the sake of his father in heaven, now becomes
obedient to his mother again, and to Joseph, even though he was not
guilty. As Lucas finely reports in that he says: "He was subject to
them. As if he should say, He did it of his own free will, not out of
necessity; for he was God, and a lord of Mary and Joseph. But that he
was obedient to them, he did it not for the sake of his father and
mother, but for the sake of the example. For this is to be respected,
that the child Jesus did everything in the house, what he was told to
do, to pick up shavings, to fetch food and drink, and not to let
anything bother him.

(18) Young people should diligently remember this example, that the
Lord, who is the God of us all, did these things in his childhood, and
did not let anything he was commanded to do go to waste, even if they
were small, minor, and unsightly works, so that they might also do such
things and learn obedience and humility. For such things are well
pleasing to God; and as the fourth commandment teaches, He will have all
children to be obedient and willing to their parents.

19. before times was a question in monasteries

152 2.1, 187-159.- On the first Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 362-365.
153

Among the young monks, what Christ would have done in his childhood? How
then the monks have written their own book, De infantia Christi, since
there are many clumsy fools inside. There is a fable about a bishop who
should also have desired to know such things. He dreamt that he saw a
carpenter hewing wood, and a little child with him, carrying shavings,
until finally a maiden in a blue skirt came, with a pan, and called both
the man and the little boy to eat. Then in a dream he thought he would
secretly go and stand behind the door so that he could see what they
were eating. As the mother was preparing a little dish for the child,
the child said, "Yes, mother, what should the man behind the door eat?
The bishop is said to have been frightened and awakened by such a word.
Such a petty thing they have fantasized.

20 But if you really want to know what Christ did in his youth, listen
to the evangelist here, where he says: "He was subject to them," that
is, he did what his father and mother told him to do, and did not let
anything stand in his way. Every child and servant should be ashamed in
his heart who hears such stories about the infant Jesus, and yet does
not obey his parents or their rule in such a way, and even lives in
shameful disobedience. It does not do to ask, to remember, or to speak
of it, as everyone commonly does: If I knew what the infant Jesus had
done in the tabernacle, I would do it too. As the monks say: Franciscus
did this, dressed like this, watched like this; I will do the same. But
no one knows what Christ has done. I say no to that. For here it is
written, "He was subject unto them." With such words the evangelist
sums up the whole youth of our dear Lord Christ.

Twenty-one: But what does it mean, "He was subject to them"? Nothing
else, but that he went in the works of the fourth commandment. These are
the works of which the father and mother of the house have need, that he
fetched water, drink, bread, meat, kept the house, and such like things,
which he did.

He was called like another child; this is what dear Jesus did.

(22) Then all children who are godly and pious should say: Oh, I am
not worthy to come to glory, and to be like the child Jesus, in that I
do what he, my Lord Christ, has done. If he picked up shavings, and did
other things which his parents commanded him to do, which were common,
small works, as they are in the house; how fine children we would be if
we followed his example, and did also those things which our parents
commanded us to do, it would be as bad and small as it could be.

(23) Therefore, do not write great books about what the infant Jesus
has done. Just pay attention to what the father and mother need in the
home and what they call the children: Only pay attention to what father
and mother need in the home and what they use to call the children. For
here it is clear that he did not run away to a monastery and become a
monk, but went with them to Nazareth, stayed among the people, and there
waited for obedience to his father and mother, and let himself be
brought up like another child.

(24) The crude and fanciful monks write that the infant Jesus made new
birds and other animals in his youth. But these are works that do not
belong to obedience and the fourth commandment. So the parents would not
have told him to do such things. For filial obedience requires other
works, namely, those that belong to stewardship, and which, as we see,
almost no one wants to do. Of such works the evangelist reports, which
are called obedience to parents.

(25) That it may be diligently observed, and that there may be no
doubt that these works are so sanctified and sanctified by the infant
Jesus, that we may shut our mouths, that we may come to them. But the
world does not allow itself to be told. Therefore we have left such
works and obedience standing, and in the name of the devil have gone to
monasteries, to St. James, and elsewhere. Everyone thought he would do
better and more deliciously than the dear little child Jesus. They did
not see that

**154 L. 1, 159.160.** On the other Sunday after Epiphany. **W. XIII,
365-368. 155**

Such household works and obedience to father and mother are sanctified
by this holy person, the Son of God, who himself in his youth carried
wood, stoked the fire, fetched water, and did such other household work
that we are not worthy to imitate him.

Therefore we should learn this history with diligence, and consider
ourselves blessed if we walked in such obedience and works, since we see
that Christ himself did not let such works spoil him. For they are a
thousand times better and holier works than the works of all monks in
monasteries can ever be. For the infant Jesus did not enter a monastery,
but was born in a monastery.

He stayed at home and served Joseph and his mother, as an example to us,
so that we might learn how such works are worthy, noble and holy, which
Christ our dear Lord Himself has done.

(27) So that this is the sum of today's gospel: Christ is Lord over
all, and yet, as an example to us, he lets himself down and is obedient
to father and mother, so that we may learn both, first of all to obey
God, and then also to be faithful to father and mother and all
authorities. In this way we can boast on both sides that we have done
right, and because of this all happiness and blessings will be with us.
May our dear Lord Christ grant us this, amen.

**The next Sunday after Epiphany. *)**

**John 2:1-11.**

And on the third day there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee, and the
mother of JEsu was there. JEsu and his disciples were also invited to
the wedding. And when there was no wine, JEsu's mother said unto him,
They have no wine. JEsus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with
thee? My hour has not yet come. And his mother saith unto the servants,
What he saith unto you, do. Now there were six stone water jars set
there, after the manner of the Jewish purification, and into each went
two or three measures. †) JEsus said to them: Fill the water jars with
water. And they filled them to the top. And he saith unto them, Draw ye
therefore, and bring unto the Master of the feast. And they brought it.
And when the master of the feast had tasted the wine that was water, and
knew not whence it came (but the servants knew, who had drawn the
water), the master of the feast called unto the bridegroom, and said
unto him, Every man giveth good wine at the first, and when they are
drunken, then the less; thou hast kept the good wine until now. This is
the first sign that Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, revealing his glory.
And his disciples believed in him.

1. this is the first miraculous sign that our dear lord jesus did on
earth, so that, as john himself reports, he might reveal his glory to
his disciples, so that they might know him by such a miraculous sign and
believe him to be the son of god and the true messiah, since he can do
what no other man on earth can do.

*) In the house, 1533.

†) Marginal gloss: "Such have not been common measures, but, as John
calls it, metreta, is harmless such a measure, which holds at half a
bucket or more."

cannot do, namely to change the creature and make wine out of water.
Such art is only God's art, who is a lord over the creature; men cannot
do it.

(2) For this reason, this miraculous work is primarily intended to
help us learn to recognize our dear Lord Christ, and to have recourse to
him with certain confidence when we are in need or in distress, and to
seek help and grace from him, which will certainly come to us in due
time. This is the most important part of today's gospel.

156 **L. 1, 160-162. On the other Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm,
368-371.** 157

(3) Since such teaching and comfort are found in all the miraculous
works of Christ, we will now speak especially of the miraculous sign the
Lord performs at the wedding, so that the doctrine of the marriage state
may remain among Christians, for it is very important.

4 It is especially necessary for this reason. For, as you know, under
the papacy the marriage state was greatly despised, and only virginity
and chastity were praised. But how God paid and punished the celibate
clergy again, we know to a good measure that not only the desire and
love for marriage is taken from them, but also the love for women is
almost extinguished. It is a great wonder that the godless sodomite
crowd in monasteries and convents in the papacy has not long since been
set on fire with hellish fire and sunk into the abyss of hell solely
because of this sin, which followed from contempt for married life.

(5) That we may have other thoughts of the marriage state, and not,
like Pope, flee and hate it, is the purpose of this gospel, in which we
see that the Lord performs his first miraculous sign at the wedding in
Cana of Galilee, in that poor little town, when he was thirty years old,
had already been baptized by John, and had now begun to be a preacher.
According to Pabst's holiness and wisdom, it would have been much
better for the Lord Christ to have done this before he entered the
spiritual ministry and was anointed and called by the Holy Spirit to be
a preacher.

(6) But this is an excellent and useful example, not only against the
pope's error, which is dead and gone with us, praise God! but also
against the future mobs, who consider it a great sanctity to leave the
married state and other civil beings, and run away into the desert or
wasteland, where one has better and quieter days than in the married
state, where one has to quarrel, scold, and sometimes even beat one's
wife, children, servants, maids, and evil neighbors. Therefore, the
married state could be called a laborious state, since there is enough
toil and work involved when you lose sight of God's creature,
foundation, blessing and word.

want to put. On the other hand, the monks called their life a holy,
perfect life. But, as seen before, it is truly a lazy, quiet, good,
sweet and epicurean life, since they have had everything enough, and
have left the poor people in the world, to whom their food has had to go
sour, and have nevertheless had to guess at the name that they were in a
blessed, good state.

(7) Although the example Christ has given us here is great and
excellent, it has not helped the hopeless people. It may have been read
in the church, but there was no one who could have seen this light and
said, "If it is so good to go into the wilderness or run to the
monastery, why did Christ go to the wedding? Is it so evil to live in
the world and become married: why then does Christ honor the married
state with his presence and with such a glorious miracle?

8 Now the hut would have had its opinion if such a monastic or hermit
life had been set for two or three weeks, for one year or two. But that
one not only flees marriage, but also conspires for eternity, that is,
despises and dishonors the marital state to the highest degree, and
instead of it seeks not a holy state, but rest and a quiet life, against
God's command and order.

9 Therefore learn here that our Lord God honors the fourth commandment.
For where there is marriage, that is, father and mother, there must be a
household; there will be wife and child, menservants and maidservants,
cattle, fields, crafts and food. All these things in particular the Lord
has commanded us, as a holy life and blessed estate, that no one should
despise him, but honor him and consider him great, as he honors him.

(10) Therefore this gospel is a good sermon for the young people, that
they may learn how to serve our Lord God in the home, and that it is not
necessary to do anything special, as the smeared and shorn multitude
did. For a householder who rules his house in the fear of God, who
trains his children and servants in the fear of God and in knowledge, in
discipline and respectability, who

158 **L. 1, 162-164. On the other Sunday after Epiphany. W. xin,
371-374.** 159

is in a blessed, holy state. So a woman who waits on the children with
food, drink, cleaning, bathing, may not ask for a holier, more holy
state. Servants and maidservants in the house, too, when they do what
their masters tell them to do, serve God; and if they believe in Christ,
it pleases God much better if they also sweep the rooms or wipe the
shoes, than all the monks pray, fast, say mass, and what more they boast
of for high divine services.

(11) For this reason, one should by no means despise such domestic
life in the married state, nor, as the monks have blasphemed, consider
it a worldly, unholy state. For here we see that the Lord Christ himself
goes to the wedding. This does not apply to the wedding alone, but to
the entire household; God wants to honor this, as the fourth
commandment, which is the highest in the other tablet, shows.

(12) Therefore, if you are a father and a mother, remain in that
position, and learn that God is pleased with you when you do what you
ought to do because of that position. If you are a servant or a maid,
learn that God is pleased with your status. For God Himself blessed and
honored the marriage state, honored the marriage with His presence and
first miraculous work, when He was already a preacher. He might also
have said, "I will not come, I will wait for my preaching; it is a
worldly thing; I have been commanded a spiritual office, according to
which I must keep myself.

13. But he, as the highest bishop, does not let the office, since he
had special command to it, err in such, does not despise the marriage,
which is the beginning of stewardship, but honors, praises and extols
the works in such a state, so that everyone should be willing and say:
Because God has set and ordained me to serve as a maid, as a servant, as
a child, as a husband, as a housemother, to the married state and to
stewardship, I will gladly do it and serve my God in such a state with
joy. For I see that the high preacher, my Lord and God, Christ JEsus,
gives himself here, and comes on

the wedding, not only in honor of this state, but also to help and
preserve it.

This teaching was necessary against the heretics and the pope, and is
still necessary today against the red spirits, such as Anabaptists and
the like, who come and say: There is nothing wrong with keeping house,
things are going this way and that, now one has unfaithful servants, now
one must quarrel with the neighbors, now one is entitled to another
accident with wife, children, food; how can one think of God and serve
God with so much unrest, of which there is neither measure nor end in
married life? I did not want to look at it, I want to run away to a
monastery, since I am discharged from such unrest 2c. So we went in the
name of the devil, one to this order, the other to another order and
state.

15 Let this be remembered, lest such mad spirits come again. For it is
clearly stated here how the Lord Christ himself, coming to the wedding,
did not separate the bride and bridegroom from each other, but left them
with each other, and even helped to make the wedding more honest. With
such a beautiful example he wanted to teach us that it should also
please him where one faithfully helps and serves the household. For if
there be any lack, let it not dismay thee: only see thou have Christ
with thee, and be not ungodly: and he will make wine of water, and so
bless thy estate, that thou shalt have enough; and at length whatsoever
is needed shall be found, though it be lacking and straitened for a
season.

This is also seen in experience. If husband and wife live together in a
fine Christian way, our Lord God feeds them so easily that they get more
than they think. And I believe that no craftsman who is otherwise
diligently dedicated to his work and who fears God would be able to get
so much money in one pile on a table, as much as he can earn in a whole
year, if he dared to keep it. But God's blessing goes on secretly, so
that today a penny is saved, tomorrow another penny, and one helps
oneself in such a way that one must feel God's blessing in such quiet
housekeeping. So that our dear Lord

160 L. i,i64-i66. The other Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 374-376. 161

Christ will turn water into wine in my house and yours this very day (if
we are godly and pious and let him take care). He makes one piece of
bread become ten, and one skirt last as long as three. For this reason,
if only we would open our eyes, we should say, "Lord, the works of
stewardship belong to you, and you are served by them, for you have
honored them and still honor them with your blessing. Therefore I will
not despise them, but will diligently help them in my state.

The evangelist reports in particular how Jesus' mother was also there.
She may have been the bride's mother at the wedding time. For she takes
care of the affair as if she were particularly concerned about it, since
she sees a lack. For it seems as if it had been a matrimonial wedding,
at which nothing but wine and bread had been lacking. Now think, if God
did not like the marriage state, should not Jesus have said to her:
Mother, you are so glorious and great, you alone among all women are a
virgin and a mother of the Son of God, therefore you alone should wait
for the church and the service: so you go here to this work, how one
performs the wedding well? And it is true, it is ridiculous that the
holy mother should give herself to this little work, and be a maid at
the wedding, and serve the people with cooking, sending, and other
things. But all this is done, as I have often said, so that we may learn
to recognize this state, which Christ and the Virgin Mary honor so
highly.

18 Nevertheless, such an example has not helped in the papacy, nor does
it help the disobedient, unfaithful household. For no one wants to
believe or believe it to be true that it is serving God when one serves
faithfully and diligently in the home. Otherwise, servant and
maidservant, child and servant would be merry and happy to do all the
work, and would make a paradise out of their domestic service, saying: I
will do and leave whatever they want to please my lord and my wife.
Whether I am sometimes scolded, what is the harm? for I truly know that
my position is a blessing to our Lord.

For my Redeemer, Christ Himself, went to the wedding, and honored it
with His presence and His mother Mary's services: should I now not
gladly do and suffer something for the honor and service of such a
state? But one finds very few of such wives *) or servants; most of
them are so obdurate, even though they hear these stories, that they
still do not want to think about it, nor do they want to be moved to
have it in the house, so that they can serve God in the best way, more
than any nun or monk in the monastery, even if it would be so sour for
them. But no one takes it to heart, no one believes it. Therefore,
everything happens with unwillingness and reluctance, and it is not
possible that happiness or salvation can be with such unwilling
servants.

(19) For should not a godly and pious maidservant in the house, who
has to cook and do other things, take comfort and rejoice in this
example of the Mother of God, and say: That I have to cook and do other
things, that was just the service of the dear virgin Mary at the
wedding; she also made herself busy and saw to it that everything was
done well. And even though it is a small work that I do in the house,
and has no reputation, I do it in honor of God, who has commanded it,
and wants me to do such obedience and diligence, and I know where I will
please the descendant. Let the world therefore respect such obedience,
for what it will; but let them that will be Christians count it great,
and a right service of God, and perform it with all their will. Thus a
maid or servant in the house could take pleasure in his position and in
his work and please God, saying: "I thank you, Lord, that you have
placed me in this service, knowing that I serve you more than all monks
and nuns who have no command of their service. But I have God's
command, in the fourth commandment, to honor father and mother, to serve
masters and wives with all diligence and fidelity, and to help with
housekeeping; therefore, I will comply with it with pleasure and love.

*Ehehalt - spouse, servant. D. Red.

162 **L. i,i67-i69. On the other Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm,
376-379.** 163

(20) Whoever so engaged in the matter would do what he should do with
joy and pleasure, and would already be here in paradise; and our Lord
God would also be pleased with it, with all his angels. Likewise, Lord
and Lady, who in turn would richly reward such faithfulness and willing
service. For faithful, pious servants are held in high esteem
everywhere.

(21) But it is seen that they do not follow this, and that everyone
would rather consider it a service of God to go into a monastery than to
serve masters and wives diligently for housekeeping. But because the
fourth commandment has been so trampled upon and the married state so
despised, God has done right in making them monks and nuns and bringing
them into such a state that they have worn themselves out, and have done
God the greatest disobedience and disobedience, for he has never
commanded them, nor commanded them.

(22) Therefore let us learn well this example, that every man may
willingly and gladly serve and help that estate which our Lord God
Himself has highly exalted and honored, and has made a fountain and
source of all other estates on earth. For stewardship, or the married
state, must preserve all kings and princes: not only because kings and
princes come from the married state, but also because there would be
neither people nor interest if there were not married couples. For the
steward must acquire it, by which all estates in the world, from the
highest to the least, are preserved.

(23) Let this be learned, and be willing and obedient to it, that this
estate also may be honored and promoted of us; that every husband or
servant may learn to say, Lord, it is thy pleasure; thou thyself wast at
the marriage of Cana, and thy mother, the most blessed of all women,
didst that very thing at the marriage, which I do in my lord's house
and service. If she was not ashamed of such little work, but offered
herself to do it, why should I, poor maggot, think myself better, and be
ashamed of such housework, since I am a mere blasphemer against the pure
Virgin Mary?

24 In particular, if a husband and wife are devout and godly, they
should take comfort in the fact that God will not abandon them, but will
gladly add to them His blessings, and turn away all their deficiencies,
as He does here. For there is no other way out, husbands and wives must
have much food and other things. But if one has Christ at the wedding,
that one is godly, then the blessing and the help should not remain
outside. This you should learn and know today; for this is why it is
preached that you should remain all the more willingly in the services
ordered to stewardship, and not be deceived by those who come and say:
Stewardship, becoming married, is a worldly thing; whoever wants to
serve God must attack it differently, so that it becomes sour and hurts
him.

(25) As the Anabaptists, the blind people, do at this time, they run
away from their wives and children, boasting of a great cross and
holiness, which is painful. But it is nothing but evil with the skulls.
Cause, that does not hurt, what one takes for himself and puts out. That
hurts much more; that is why people are afraid to stay with their wives
and children, to suffer much from the servants and evil neighbors,
because one is caught more than with twenty ropes. The naughty boys get
rid of such ropes and live according to their own will. But this is not
called hurting oneself. But it hurts that you must be bound by God's
command to your wife, princes, neighbors, servants, since you have your
hands full on all sides to prove Christian love and patience. For then
you must hear, see, and suffer that you would rather have suffered; you
must nevertheless remain, and not run away, but say: I will do it all
gladly and suffer; for I know that God wants to be with the household
with His graces. Yes, I thank God from the bottom of my heart, who has
placed me in this blessed and pleasing state. If something is lacking,
He can help. And prove it here at this wedding, that he will do it
gladly and with pleasure.

(26) Learn these things from today's gospel, and call upon God for
His grace, that we may keep them, and so send us on our way in a
Christian way, amen.

[164 L. 1, 169. i7o. On the third Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 379-382.
165]{.underline}

**On the third Sunday after Epiphany.*)**

**Matth. 8, 1-13.**

And when he was come down from the mountain, much people followed him.
And, behold, a leper came and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou
wilt, thou canst make me clean. And JEsus put forth his hand, and
touched him, and said: I will do it; be cleansed. And straightway he was
cleansed from his leprosy. And JEsus said unto him, See thou tell no
man: but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift
which Moses commanded, for a testimony against them. And when JEsus was
come into Capernaum, a certain centurion came unto him, and besought
him, saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home, sick of the palsy, and in
great affliction. JEsus said unto him, I will come and heal him. And the
centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest
come under my roof: but speak the word, and my servant shall be healed.
For I am a man, and subject to the authorities, and have under me
soldiers: but if I say to one, Go, he goeth; and to another, Come, he
cometh: Come hither, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he
doeth it. When Jesus heard this, he marveled and said to those who
followed him: Verily I say unto you, I have not found such faith in
Israel. But I say unto you, That many shall come from the morning and
from the evening, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
in the kingdom of heaven. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast
out into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And JEsus said unto the centurion, Go thy way, and it shall be done unto
thee according to thy faith. And his servant was healed at that very
hour.

In today's Gospel, we are given two stories: the first about the leper
whom the Lord made clean, and the second about a centurion who had a
sick servant. The evangelist reports that Christ performed such
miraculous signs soon after his long sermon on the mountain. For this is
how it was to happen, that he first preached and then testified to his
sermon with miracles, so that everyone could judge that the sermon was
true and not false, and would believe sooner.

(2) We do not need miraculous signs, praise God, for the doctrine has
already been testified to with miraculous signs, so that no one should
doubt it. Nevertheless, it is especially necessary for those who speak
the word not only to be able to speak as Christians, but also to live as
Christians, and to bear witness with the work of doctrine and let their
faith be seen. For the kingdom of God does not stand, as St. Paul says,
in mere words, but in power. Where doctrine and work are in harmony,
there it produces fruit. Since, on the other hand, everyone

*This sermon is taken from the interpretation of the Gospel of Matthew.

must fret when life is evil and does not rhyme with doctrine.

Now these two miraculous works are not only to be regarded as a
testimony of doctrine (for because they are such works, which are beyond
all human power and ability, reason must conclude for itself, as we hear
in Nicodemo, John 3:2, that no one can do such signs, except God be with
him), but are also to be regarded as examples of faith and love. For who
does not see what a kind heart our dear Lord Christ has, that he allows
himself to be raised up and helped with a word, when otherwise all the
world cannot help? This is an indication that he does not mean any harm
to the poor, afflicted, miserable people; otherwise he would do as we
do, when we are unkind and angry, if someone comes and wants or desires
something from us, we do not give anyone a good word. Christ does not do
that. The leper has not yet opened his mouth, but soon Christ is there,
touches him, and says that he will gladly help him; and he helps him.

4 Such goodwill should not only provoke us to seek help from him in our
needs and hope that he will not abandon us, but should also make it
clear to us that we can

166 2. i, i7o-i72. On the third Sunday after Epiphany. W. xni, 382-385.
167

We have also shown such love and kindness to our neighbor, and in such
work, like Christ, see nothing but obedience to God and the neighbor's
need and improvement. For Christ seeks neither honor nor good with such
help; he only sees that the poor man needs such help, and that God's
honor is thereby promoted and obedience is thus rendered to him.

(5) But by doing this, you do not serve God by doing something good
for someone, so that he may serve you again and you may enjoy such good
again, but you serve yourself with it. But he who wants to serve God and
his neighbor rightly does not look at his benefit, but only at the need
that exists, and that God wants it and has thus commanded that one
should not leave one's neighbor in need, even if one should never enjoy
it for a straw, nor even earn all ingratitude with it. As we see in
another story, where Christ cleanses ten lepers, and only one comes back
and thanks him for the benefit, the other nine would not have looked at
him. It is not possible that Christ did not know of such ingratitude
beforehand. But regardless of such ingratitude, since they ask him, he
helps them and commands God to do the rest.

6 Likewise, one may say of love in the other miraculous sign with the
centurion. Christ reckons all these things together so that God's grace
and goodness may be praised and the poor people may be helped in their
need. This means a true love that looks at nothing but God's word and
command.

7 The example of faith is also exceedingly beautiful, that the leprous
man, who otherwise by reason of the law may not go among the people, nor
speak to them in their presence, nor do otherwise, comes to the Lord
Christ without all fear, falls down before him, and asks, "Lord, if
thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me. There one sees both: he believes
firmly and undoubtedly that Christ is so kind and so all-powerful that
he can help him in his illness, since otherwise it was impossible for
all men to help him; yet he, the Lord Christ, like other men, walked
along without any special pomp or appearance; nevertheless, whether he
had been able to help him or not, he was able to help him.

If he firmly believes this, he sends such a request home to the Lord
Christ, if he does not want to help him, that is, if it would be against
God's honor and his blessedness, he will gladly tolerate and bear such
misery.

(8) This means not only to believe rightly, but also to pray rightly;
as it is always the case with one another: he who believes rightly prays
rightly; he who does not believe rightly cannot pray rightly. For with
prayer it must first be so that the heart is certain that God is so
gracious and merciful that he will gladly turn our distress around and
help us.

9. but especially such trust should be firm and certain in the things
that concern God's glory and our salvation, such as forgiveness of
sins, salvation against the devil and death, that God will give His Holy
Spirit into our hearts, keep us in His word, not let us fall into any
temptation, and increase in faith and love all the days 2c. Such things
serve primarily for the glory of God and our salvation. For this reason,
the heart should never doubt when we ask God that He will gladly give it
and not deny us such a request. For this we need God's help, and God
has promised it to us in His Word.

10 But whoever would ask in such matters, as the leper does here:
"Lord, if you are willing," forgive my sin, make me blessed 2c., prays
wrongly. For we cannot doubt God's will that he will do this, since he
has already revealed his will to us in his word, that he wants everyone
to be saved, and for this reason he let his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ,
pay for all the sin of the world on the cross, and commanded that
everyone should hear him, accept him and believe in him.

(11) Why does the leper make his request by adding this word, "If you
are willing, you can cleanse me"? Here one must look at the trade, what
it is about. Earlier I said that as far as our blessedness is concerned,
and God's glory without means, prayer must not be put in doubt. For
God's will is evidently that He wants His glory and our blessedness
unhindered. But such an opinion has nothing to do with the temporal. One
can

168 L. 1.N2-174. On the third Sunday after Epiphany. W. xni, 38S-387.
169

be poor, sick, miserable and despised, and yet be saved, as is the case
with all Christians. Since happiness does not lie in such temporal lack,
but such lack can often lead to something good, whoever asks for
salvation and help should believe that God can and will help; but he
should still put his will in God's will: if it does not serve God's
glory, or if it is detrimental to our salvation, we would gladly bear
such a cross longer.

(12) That is, to pray rightly in such matters, namely, to believe that
God can help; and yet to set God neither time, measure, nor goal as to
how and when He should help us. For it is common with us that we do not
always know what and how we should ask, as St. Paul says in Romans 8:26.
On the other hand, we must confess that God knows what is best for His
glory and our salvation. Therefore, we should put our will in His and
not doubt that if such a request is for His glory and our salvation, He
will surely hear us.

(13) Therefore, we should keep this example in mind, so that we also
learn to pray in this way, and have no doubt in our hearts that God is
gracious to us, that He knows our needs and troubles, and that He wants
our needs and troubles to be taken care of. We should firmly believe
this, and yet throw ourselves down and say: Lord, you know the time and
the hour, therefore do what is good for me and honest to your name. Just
as the leper does here: that Christ can help him, he doubts nothing;
that he will help him, he doubts nothing; for otherwise he would not
have cried out to him, where he would have had a doubt about his will.
But besides this, he must confess that it is not his place, hour, manner
and way to determine when and how he is to be helped. Such faith and
obedience are especially pleasing to the Lord Christ; therefore he helps
the poor man at the hour, in the place and in the way he should not have
desired.

14 Hence the beautiful sayings from the prophets, Ps. 27, 14: "Wait for
the

My soul waits for the Lord, and I hope in his word; my soul waits for
the Lord from dawn to dawn. My soul waiteth for the LORD from morning to
morning"; Hab. 2:3: "Whether the promise be consumed, wait for it; it
shall surely come, and not be pardoned." For this can be seen in all
histories, that the help finally does not remain outside, even if it is
delayed for a long time. God also has his special reckoning on this. For
that is why He does not hear so soon, and delays the help, so that He
may have cause to give more and more abundantly than we can pray for or
understand, as St. Paul says Eph. 3:20.

(15) What does the Lord mean by this, that after he has cleansed the
leper, he directs him to the priest, and commands him to offer the
sacrifice, as Moses commanded? It is not wrong to say that in this case
the Lord Christ has presented us with an example of love, because he,
who had the power, does not want to deprive the priests of what was
given and granted to them by God; that we should also let everyone
retain his rights and not deprive anyone of what is due to him.

16 But the most important reason for this command is that the Lord wants
his miraculous work to be publicly witnessed, even by his enemies. For
the priest to accept the sacrifice from him, and to give him the
testimony that he is pure, serves to show that he and all men should
have accepted Christ and believed in him as the true Messiah. For there
were prophecies that Christ would do such miraculous works when he came
into the world. Therefore the Lord spoke these words, saying, "Offer
the gifts which Moses commanded for a testimony against them. As if to
say, "They will have to confess that you are pure and that you have
been helped; but that they still do not believe in me and do not want to
accept me as the Messiah, that is a pure and stubborn will, which must
be smelled. Nevertheless such a testimony against them shall serve
others, that they accept me and believe in me.

17 The pope wanted to establish the confession from this command,
because the sin is not

**170 L. i,i74-i76. On the third Sunday after Epiphany. W. xiii,
387-390. 171**

Leprosy can be compared to showing oneself to the priest and thus being
cleansed of sins. But it is a very lazy reason. For what do we care what
God commanded the Jews for leprosy? We have no such priests. And if we
did, it is certain that the priests did not make the lepers clean; but
if they were clean, they gave them the testimony that they were clean.
But how does this rhyme with confession, since it was thought to be for
the forgiveness of sins? For the lepers did not show the priests the
leprosy, but a beautiful clean body, when they came before the priest
with the sacrifice.

18 But it is useless to refute such lazy jokes. Whoever wants to
confess, let him do so. But we know of a right and necessary confession
only when the heart rises up against God and confesses its sin. This is
a confession of the heart, which does not lie, like the confession of
the ears or mouth. Nevertheless, such confession made against God does
not make one pure or pious; how could ear confession do so? But this
makes one pure and pious, that one with faith clings to the Lord Jesus
and his word, and believes in the name of Jesus forgiveness of sins, as
the same is promised to us in the word. That is enough of the first
example.

The other miracle with the sick servant is also a testimony of the
teaching of Christ, that one must confess, because God holds thus with
him with miracles, that his teaching is pure, right and good, and that
he is the right Messiah or Christ.

20 But besides this, here is a fine example of a special, high and great
faith in the centurion; as the Lord himself praises such faith to such
an extent that he has not found anything like it in Israel or among the
holy people.

21 Such faith is first seen in the fact that this centurion, though not
a Jew but a Gentile, nevertheless sends to the Lord Christ with full
confidence that he will not pay him anything, but as he is able, so will
he help him. For where this confidence is not firmly established in his
heart

If he had not been to JEsu, he would not, as Lucas writes, have bothered
the elders of the Jews and sent them to JEsu. But that he sent them to
him is an indication that he hopes to obtain something from him.

(22) With such trust and faith there is a peculiarly high and great
humility that he does not consider himself worthy to go to Christ
himself and ask him, but first sends the elders of the schools, and
then, when he hears that the Lord is coming, he sends his friends to
meet him, as St. Lucas says, and asks him not to bother, because he
considers himself unworthy that the Lord should go after him. So he, the
Lord, could do the thing for which he was asked with one word, even
though he was not there personally. This centurion believes this so
surely that he sets his own example, saying, "I am a man subject to the
authorities, and I have soldiers under me, and I say to one, 'Go, and
he will go;' and to the other, 'Come, and he will come: Come hither,
and he shall come; and to my servant, Do this, and he shall do it." If
then my word be so strong, who am a man; how much more must it be
strong, saith he to Christ, when thou speakest a word! This means not
only believing, but also preaching and teaching about faith and its
nature in the best and most glorious way. Therefore it would be
desirable that we could also believe in Christ, who dwells so richly
with us through his word, even though we do not see his person.

(23) It is a very good example that this man can rest so surely and
truly on the word of Christ. First of all, he makes sure of everything
that is good for Christ; then he does not ask any more, because he is
only supposed to say one word. He waits for this word with the highest
confidence and joy, as for the only treasure, so that his servant will
no longer lack anything, but will be fresh and healthy.

(24) Learn to follow him, you who already have the word. For there are
the comforting promises that God will be gracious through Christ, and
that through faith in Christ we shall have forgiveness of sins and
eternal life. But we lack the heart that this centurion has here, who
thinks, "If I have the word, I have it.

[172 L. 1, 176-178. on the third Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 390-393.
173]{.underline}

everything, then what the word promises will follow immediately. We
cannot do this; therefore it follows that we pay no attention to the
word, and in the meantime gape at other things; although the word is
all-powerful and, as this centurion here believes, cannot lie. What he
promises will certainly happen and be done to us.

Now such faith is to be praised all the more because this centurion is a
Gentile, who has no promise like the Jews, and therefore must not
presume or boast of the honor that the Jews, as God's people, had. For
this is the nature of faith, that it makes humble hearts, which do not
think much of themselves, nor are hopeful, and therefore cling to the
mere grace and mercy of God.

(26) We should also take comfort in this, so that when this thought
comes into our hearts, that we must confess how we are poor, miserable
sinners, and can boast of neither worthiness nor merit, we will not
nevertheless despair, but cling to the promise of God and desire His
grace. Such things are pleasing to God, and He wants them from us.
Otherwise it would not be called grace if we did not come to the promise
unworthily and undeservedly. Like this centurion: he cannot boast, like
the Jews, that God owes him something; therefore he himself may not come
before the Lord Christ, but thinks: "It is lost with me, I must enjoy
other people; nevertheless he holds fast to this: The man is so kind and
friendly, he will not let me.

(27) This is called and is right faith and right humility, to fear
because of unworthiness, and yet not to despair. For God wants both from
us: first, that we should not be proud; and second, that we should not
despair, but wait for grace; as the 147th Psalm v. 11. says: "The Lord
is well pleased with

To those who fear him and wait for his goodness."

28 The Jews did not do this, for they thought that God would be
favorable to them and do all good, which He would do; for they kept His
will, and deserved it for Him; they became proud and sure, and despised
grace. Therefore the Lord passed such a heavy judgment on them, saying,
"Many shall come from the morning and from the evening, and shall sit
with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out into darkness; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth." This is what shameful unbelief does,
that they are so hopeful and despise grace. Therefore, as little as it
helps them that they are Abraham's seed, so little shall it hurt the
Gentiles that they are not Abraham's children, if they only hold to
Christ with firm faith and sigh for grace and mercy. For this is God's
pleasure, that He may let those who are full go hungry, but He will
satisfy those who are hungry, regardless of whether they are Gentiles or
Jews. For neither Gentile nor Jew, neither circumcision nor foreskin is
valid before God, but only faith in Christ, that one may throw oneself
down in all humility and desire nothing but mercy.

(29) So this gospel, in addition to love, teaches very finely about
faith, what kind it is, how it keeps to the word and waits for the grace
of God in all humility. Whoever does this, it will be granted to him, as
it was to the leper and afterwards to this fine centurion, that it will
be done to him as he believes; that is, just as he alone has God's
goodness and grace in his heart, desires it and relies on it, so God
alone will deal with him according to grace, accept him and help him.
May God grant us His Holy Spirit, who will also awaken such confidence
in grace through Christ in our hearts and thus lead us to salvation,
amen.

[174 L. 1, 179.180. On the fourth Sunday after Epiphany. W. XIII,
408-412. 175]{.underline}

**On the fourth Sunday after Epiphany. *)**

**Matth. 8, 23-27.**

And he entered into the ship, and his disciples followed him. And
behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, so that the little ship
also was covered with waves; and he slept. And the disciples came to him
and woke him up, saying: Lord, help us, we are perishing. Then he said
to them: Ye of little faith, why are ye so fearful? And he arose and
rebuked the wind and the sea; and there was silence. But the people were
astonished and said: What manner of man is this, that the wind and the
sea obey him?

1 We see in today's gospel that such a history is held up to us in it,
from which we do not learn what we should do; for nothing is said here
about our works, but about what we should believe and how we should
comfort ourselves in hardships and adversities. For this reason, one of
the high sermons is about faith, which makes everyone think that he can
do it well, as if it were a bad and mean thing.

2 Therefore we will divide it: first, we will speak of the cross and
suffering; then of the Lord Christ and of faith in him, so that this
alone, as the one and best consolation, is valid and helps; third, of
the fruit and benefit that follows from faith after temptation. Such
pieces will finely indicate how a comforting history the evangelist
holds out to us in so few words, which we should not ever gladly
concede.

The first part is that the Lord Jesus enters the ship with his
disciples. There is no storm yet, but a fine, friendly, calm weather; so
the sea is also gentle and calm. Otherwise the disciples would have been
afraid not to enter the ship. But as soon as Christ sits in the ship
with his disciples, and they push off from the land and come into the
sea, such a great tempest arises that the little ship is covered with
waves, as if it were about to sink.

4 Let us take note of this history and make a proverb out of it, saying,
"This is how it is; when Christ comes into the world, he will be with
us.

*) Held in church in 1533, according to Dietrich, or 1531, according to
Röhrer. D. Red.

ship, it will not remain quiet for long; a storm and tempest will come.
For it is certain, as Christ also says in Luc. 11, 21. 22, that the
strong-armed man has his palace in peace and quiet until a stronger man
comes; then the strife begins, and there is fighting and strife. Thus we
see in the Gospel history that when all is quiet before, as soon as
Christ is heard with a sermon and seen with a miracle, there is fire in
all the streets. The Pharisees, scribes, and chief priests are in a
frenzy and want him dead, and especially the devil begins to rage and
rage. Christ says this long before, Matth. 10, v. 34-36: "You should
not think that I have come to send peace on earth. I have not come to
send peace, but a sword. For I am come to provoke a man against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the cord against her
sister-in-law. And man's enemies shall be his own household."

(5) But all this is for the purpose that thou mayest first consider
whether thou wilt be a Christian or not. For if you want to be a
Christian, send yourself into this storm and this strife, for there is
no other way out; he who wants to live godly in Christ, says St. Paul,
must suffer persecution. Therefore Jesus also admonishes Sirach, Cap. 2,
admonishes all believers, saying v. 1: "My son, if you want to be
God's servant, send yourself to temptation, hold fast, and suffer
yourself." As if to say, "If you do not want to be God's servant,
always go, the devil will leave you satisfied until you reach him.

176 2-1, 180-182. fourth Sunday after Epiphany. W. mi, 412-416. 177

ner time. But again, if you desire to serve God and to be a Christian,
only give yourself willingly: the weather and persecution will not
remain outside. Therefore, take courage that you will not be frightened
by it, as by an unforeseen accident. Do not be afraid of such weather,
but be afraid of God, so that you do not deviate from His word because
of the world, and defiantly dare to say: It was not started for the sake
of the world's favor; therefore do not refrain from anything because of
its disfavor and wrath. This is what the evangelist wants to teach us
when he says that the tempest rose first when Christ stepped into the
ship and came out onto the sea from the land.

(6) But this also serves us to know how to answer the wicked useless
blasphemers, who can do no more than blaspheme and speak the gospel:
Before this doctrine arose, all was quiet and full; now there is so much
misfortune that no one can tell of it, of the mobs, the war, the riots,
the troubled times, the Turks, and all the miseries. Now whoever wants
to stop such shameful blasphemers, let him speak to them: Dear, have you
never read it in the Gospel, as soon as Christ comes into the ship and
on the sea, that a tumult arises?

Now it is not the fault of the Lord Christ, but of the devil, who is
hostile to him and does not want to suffer him. So he is also hostile to
the gospel, and for this reason he would like to cause so much trouble
and distress on earth that it would have to fall to the ground. But the
blind, stubborn people do not want to see or notice this. They only
stand on the trouble and lack, and blaspheme that it is the fault of the
gospel. But what good comes from the gospel, how one can know God
through it, come to the forgiveness of sins and become holy, they do not
want to see.

(8) Just as the ungrateful, stubborn and unruly people, the Jews in
the wilderness, did. When they were in Egypt, and there was work for two
of them, they cried out to God to help them out of their misery, and
they wanted to be righteous. But what happened? When God delivered them
from such misery and they entered the desert, it was all forgotten. But
that was the worst thing, that everything was forgotten.

They had forgotten what and how much they had had to work and suffer in
Egypt. Only they remembered the flesh pots and the bread in Egypt. They
also knew the Pabst's art and picked out the good things they had had,
but what they had suffered in addition, they could keep silent.
Therefore, when God gave them the bread of heaven, they also despised it
and thought it was not as good as the meat in Egypt. Thus our nature and
evil ways are corrupted by original sin; God may do with us as He
pleases, but He cannot do right to us. Therefore, it requires great and
divine patience that he can tolerate such wicked boys for so long.

(9) If anyone had asked us twenty years ago, whether we would rather
have a year's drudgery, or let the monks and the priests always toil,
toil, and toil us, as was the custom at that time, do you not think that
everyone would have gladly chosen the drudgery, so that one could have
gotten away from the hard, unmistakable, and, as it was to be seen,
infinite drudgery? For there would have been the hope that what one year
had not given, the other would; but that drudgery went on for and on,
and from day to day increased the longer the more. We have so purely
forgotten such and other nastiness, praise the peace and the former
being, do not see what a terrible cliff is attached to it, that we have
been deprived not only of money and goods in such peace, but also of
body and soul, through false teachings and idolatry. And yet they could
not have overcome it. For at the same time there have also been great
times, pestilence, war and other plagues. Because such things are
happening now, they blame it on the gospel.

(10) But how thinkest thou that such things shall please God, who hath
no higher treasure than his word, and can neither help nor counsel us
better or more from sin and death, than by the gospel: and yet it is so
grievously dishonored and blasphemed in him that he is blamed for
causing all mischief 2c? ? But what kind of punishment will follow such
blasphemy? That God will blind the hearts and eyes of such blasphemers.

178 **L. 1, 182-184. On the fourth Sunday after Epiphany. W. XIII,
416-420.** 179

that they do not see the glorious, great benefits of God, and must thus
become and remain hardened with the Jews, so that they can do no more
than blaspheme God and finally go to the devil. Such a reward belongs to
them, and will certainly befall them. Otherwise you will have to suffer,
even though the gospel is not, so that not everyone will favor you and
you will have enmity. So Rome had to suffer war and all kinds of
misfortune before the gospel came.

(11) Therefore the gospel is not to blame for such things. All the
blame is on the devil and our ingratitude. The devil does not like the
gospel and would like to dampen it, therefore he causes all misfortune.
And the more powerful the word is, the more angry and furious he becomes
about it. If we are so ungrateful against such a great treasure, if we
do not want to accept it or need it, or even hate and persecute it, God
cannot tolerate it either; therefore he must come with all kinds of
punishments and plagues to ward off ingratitude.

(12) This is the first thing that thou shalt learn, if thou wilt be a
Christian, to send thyself into the storm. But if thou wilt not, go thy
way; thou shalt know when thou shalt die what thou hast done.

The other piece is about the right kind of faith, which goes forth in
such a battle and storm, and finds itself in Christ, and awakens him.
Let this also be well remembered. For our opponents, the papists,
consider faith a very small thing. On the other hand, they think much of
free will. But I wish they were also in the ship, that they would try
what free will can do in such fear and hardship.

The apostles have learned finely here. Their faith was as weak and small
as they wished; nevertheless, if it had not been for such weak and small
faith, they would have despaired of free will and sunk into the abyss of
the sea. But because there is little faith, as Christ himself testifies
when he says, "O you of little faith," they have a remedy so that they
do not despair, and they run to Christ, wake him up and seek his help.

(15) If the small and weak faith does this, what should the strong and
great faith do? As the example of the leper and the centurion of
Capernaum showed eight days ago. Therefore, free will is nothing; it
loses itself and cannot stand when the trains come here and it comes to
the meeting. For there our thoughts are nothing else but that we scream
and wish ourselves a hundred miles away. That is, free will does not
comfort the heart, but only makes it more and more despondent, so that
it fears even a rustling leaf.

(16) But faith, though small and weak, still stands and is not
frightened to death. As can be seen here in the disciples. Death was
before their eyes, for the waves were crashing with such force that they
covered the little ship. Who would not pale in such distress and danger
of death? But faith, however weak it is, still holds like a wall, and,
like little David against Goliath, that is, against death, sin and all
danger, does not despair, but seeks help where it is to be sought,
namely, from the Lord Christ, wakes him up, cries out to him, "Oh Lord,
help us, we are perishing."

(17) So faith, though destruction is before the eyes, makes one wait
for help, and pray, as the Psalm says, "I believe, therefore I speak.
For no one can pray unless he believes. Nor can free will, for it looks
only at the present need and danger, but it does not see the person who
can help in such need and danger; and therefore, because of free will,
man must die in his sins. But it is faith, even if it is small and weak,
that takes hold of this person, the Lord Christ, and obtains help.

018 Now if such faith had been strong and steadfast, as that of Jonas
the prophet, which abode in the whale unto the third day, they might
have said unto the sea and waves, Smite always; ye shall not be so
strong as to overthrow the ship: and though ye finish it, yet will we
find a vault in the midst of the sea, where we shall sit dry, and not be
drowned. For we have

180 **L. 1, 184-187. On the Fourth Sunday after Epiphany. W. XIII,
420-425.** 181

a God who can sustain us, not only on the sea, but in and under the sea.

19 This is true faith, which does not, like free will, look only at the
present, and because of this is frightened and despondent, but it looks
to the future and to the contradiction. Therefore, even if he is stuck
in the jaws of death, he still takes courage and holds on to this
consolation that he can be helped, as we see here in the weak faith of
the disciples. Therefore, faith is not a small art, nor a bad thing; it
is a divine power that does not come from free will, but is given to us
by the Holy Spirit through the Word.

20 Our adversaries, the papists, do not know this; otherwise they would
not fight it so hard when we speak: Faith alone makes blessed, that is,
faith alone finds consolation when sin, death and eternal damnation come
along and want to push us to the ground. That is why they are seen to be
bold and proud as long as the sea is calm and the weather is fair. But
when the storm rises and evil wants to happen, all courage and comfort
fall away. For there is no faith, but the powerless, desolate free will,
which forgets God and his word, and nowhere knows where from.

Now here it is a special misfortune that Christ is resting in such
distress of death, and sleeps of a right, natural, strong sleep, which
perhaps came to him from the fact that he had worked and preached
himself tired during the day, or had prayed during the night and had his
temptation. For I believe that he suffered a great deal of temptation
from the devil during the night, as he complains in the 88th Psalm, v.
16: Pauper sum ego, et in laboribus a juventute mea. "From my youth I
have been wretched, and have suffered much; I suffer thy terrors, that I
almost despair." Therefore he was seldom cheerful, always walking in
heavy thoughts, when he was full of sorrow and grief; as the same Psalm
indicates before, v. 4: "My soul is full of sorrow, and my life is near
hell." And yet, though such sleep is right and natural,

yet he had to serve for the faith of his disciples, as all his works do.

22 This is still happening today, that the Lord is standing against his
Christians as if he did not see us, or had even ignored us; as he is
doing here in the ship, lying and sleeping, he does not care about the
weather, neither for his disciples, nor for the ship. But he is still in
the ship, even though he is asleep.

(23) These are the temptations that always strike, that our Lord
Christ causes the waves to fall over the little ship; that is, he causes
the devil and the world to rage against the Christians, so that one must
fear, as it is also before one's eyes today, that it will completely go
to the bottom. The pope and his crowd are hostile to the word, always
inciting the great potentates against us. So the devil does not let the
Turk celebrate either. There we sit in the ship, and have weather and
wind, that it would be better. Nevertheless, the Lord should sit quietly
and not let it be known that he wants to help us. This is his sleep,
which he does in the ship.

(24) But then we must take courage, and think that there is no need
yet. For he is the Lord, and is also with us in the ship. Even though he
stands as if he does not see us, we must stand as if we do see him and
believe him to be able to calm the sea, no matter how much it rages.

(25) So shall we also do in private trials, in our own danger and
temptation, which are particular to each one. When the devil comes,
reproaches you with your sin, and frightens you with the wrath of God,
threatening eternal damnation; think and doubt not: My Lord Christ is
not far off, but he sleeps. Then it is necessary that I find my way to
him through earnest prayer and wake him up, as the disciples do here.
They are more interested in their own destruction than in the Lord's
sleep; therefore they think, "In short, we must have an awake Christ
now, otherwise we are finished; for this reason they give him no rest
and wake him up. So learn thou also to do; for both must be done. If you
want to work with

182 2.i,i87-i8g. On the fourth Sunday after Epiphany. W. xm, 425-^31.
183

Christ into the ship, the weather will not remain outside, and Christ
will want to sleep, so that we may feel the challenge properly.
Otherwise, if he were not asleep and would fight the weather as soon as
it came, we would never know what it would be like for a Christian, and
we would still think that we were doing it out of our own strength. But
here faith is strengthened by temptation, so that one must speak: No
human power could have helped; only God and his dear Word did it.

(26) Besides this beautiful and comforting teaching, the Lord Christ
is also presented to us here as a right, natural man, having body and
soul, and therefore needing to eat, drink, sleep, and other natural
works done without sin, as we do: lest we fall into the Manichaean
error, who took Christ for a ghost, not for a right man.

27) Just as natural sleep is a certain indication that the Lord Christ
is a true, natural man, so he proves his omnipotent divinity by calming
the sea with a word and causing the wind to cease, which is not the work
of man; it takes divine power to ward off the tempest of the sea with a
word.

28 Therefore, this miraculous work should be all the more pleasing to
us, so that we may see how God and man are one person in Christ. For
this reason he is able and willing to help all who seek help from him in
all troubles and temptations. Whether we have to suffer and dare
something about it, if it cannot be otherwise, what is the point? The
wicked must also bear their suffering and cross, yet have an evil
conscience and finally await eternal damnation.

29 The third part is about the fruit of such faith, namely, that others
also perceive such miracles, and say: "What kind of man is this, that
the wind and the sea obey him? Until now, they may have considered him a
bad man and not known or believed that one could seek and find help from
him in mortal distress.

should. But now they learn to recognize him, that he is the highest and
best emergency helper, since no one else can help.

(30) Thus it is that the more severe the challenge, the greater the
fruit and benefit it produces. The world is hard on us now, so that we
always think that we must endure, that the sea and the storm will
overgrow us and tear us to pieces. But let us hold fast to our word and
faith. What does it matter, there shall follow a beautiful, glorious
fruit, at which we shall laugh and be glad. The bitter hatred that is in
the Pope and the Turks against the church, about which we, as a woman in
childish distress, are afraid and have to shriek and groan, shall, if
God wills, bring something with it. Every person should hope for the
same for his own person, if the challenge seizes him, that it will not
go away without fruit.

(31) Alphonsus, behold your love, how this gospel is very comforting,
and teaches us a good and beautiful lesson, that if we would be
Christians, we must enter into the ship with the Lord Christ, and there
wait for the weather and tempests. If this is the case, then we should
hold fast to the faith and the word, and hope that we will not only be
saved from the weather or the tempest, but that a certain fruit and
benefit will follow from it; that we should not wish otherwise than we
have tried, and have learned strength and virtue through our own
experience of the word and faith. Who would complain about the cross,
because certain help and fruit should follow? But it hurts the old Adam,
who rebels at such bitter and sour drink, and would rather be
overridden. For this reason it is necessary that we remember such
examples often and much, and handle the word diligently, so that when
the challenge comes, we are prepared, and find ourselves in Christ, who
sleeps with us and pretends not to take care of us, and seek help and
salvation from him through diligent prayer.

32. May our dear Father in heaven, for Christ's sake, grant us all
these things through his Holy Spirit, amen.

[184 **L. 1, IM. 190. fifth Sunday after Epiphany. W. XIII, 431-^34.**
185]{.underline}

**On the fifth Sunday after Epiphany.**

**Matth. 13, 24-30.**

He set before them another similitude, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
like unto a man that sowed good seed in his field. But while the people
slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat and went away. Now
when the herb grew and bore fruit, the tares were also found. Then the
servants came to the father of the house and said: Lord, did you not sow
good seed in your field? where did the weeds come from? He said to them:
The enemy has done this. Then said the servants: Do you want us to go
and weed it out? And he said, Nay; lest, when ye sow the tares, ye pluck
up the wheat at the same time. Let both grow together until the harvest;
and at harvest time I will say to the reapers, Gather first the tares,
and bind them in bundles to be burned; but gather me the wheat into my
sheaves.

1 This gospel seems to be easy and to be understood well, because the
Lord himself interprets it, what the field, the good seed and the tares
are. But there are so many different interpretations in the teachers
that it is necessary to be careful how to arrive at the right opinion.

(2) For some interpret the weeds as heresies, and conclude from this
gospel that it is not fitting for secular authorities to strangle
heretics, because it says here that they should not be weeded out. And
Augustine himself confesses that he was also of such an opinion, but
afterwards was forced by example and irrefutable cause to drop such an
opinion.

3. some make no distinction between secular authorities and the
servants of this householder, and point the weed to the public
aversions, and conclude that Christian authorities should not possess an
embarrassing court.

4 Some, as the pope and his crowd, regardless of the fact that the Lord
forbids to root out the tares, because they judge and condemn the
teaching of the holy gospel as tares, they do not leave it at that, but
cannot rage against it enough and rage with murders and all kinds of
horrible tyranny. Since there are so many opinions, let us first see the
correct interpretation, and then we will give our opinion on the
question of how to deal with heretics.

5 So this is the opinion that Christ does not speak here of the heretics
in particular, but sets before us a likeness of the kingdom of heaven,
that is, of the whole Christian church as it is here on earth and will
remain until the end of the world, namely, that the Christian church
will be like a field sown with good seed. But there the devil finds
himself, and sows tares in the night, before men are aware of it. So
that good seed and tares grow together in the church, that is, good and
evil are among each other; this will never be prevented here in this
life. But in that life there, the pious and the wicked shall be
distinguished and separated, as the Lord says he will command his
servants in the time of harvest.

(6) That this gospel goes especially against the Donatists, Novatians,
Anabaptists, and such like groups, who have dealt with it, and still how
they could establish a church, where there would be no trouble at all,
but only pure saints. Therefore, if a case of weakness or otherwise
happened to a Christian, they immediately threw him out of the church
and no longer wanted to consider him a brother. Yet the command of
Christ is clear and plain, that men should be converted and repent, and
that the ministers of the church should especially labor that men
continue not in sins, but by right repentance depart therefrom.

[186 **L. 1, 190-192.** On the fifth Sunday after Epiphany. **W. XIII,
434-436.** 187]{.underline}

007 That it is so, the examples also prove. David's fall was very
grievous and terrible, but because he was sorry and desired mercy again,
he was granted mercy. Peter also fell hard, but he was granted mercy
again because he confessed his sin, wept bitterly over it, and desired
mercy. Also, just before his fall, the Lord says: "I have prayed for
you, that your faith may not fail" 2c. And Matt. 18, when he asks if he
should forgive seven times his brother who sins against him, Christ
answers him v. 22: "I tell you, not seven times, but seventy times
seven."

These are clear and certain indications that the Christians here on
earth will not be so pure, they will sometimes stumble and fall. Whoever
now deals with how he can make a church, where there is no sin nor fall
within, will condemn all such weak Christians, even the strong ones (for
none of them is so strong, he sometimes stumbles), as unchristians and
will have to exclude them from the church.

(9) Therefore the Christian church is of such an opinion that not only
are there many hypocrites and false Christians in it, and yet they have
the name as if they were Christians, but even the true Christians
themselves will never be so pure and holy, the old Adam will be tempted
and sometimes stumble. What need would Christians have of the petition
in the Lord's Prayer, since they pray it every day? Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us? item: Do not
lead us into temptation? Such a request is a certain indication that
honest Christians can fall and fall into temptation at any hour. Whoever
would exclude such people and not allow them to be Christians would lose
the Christian church altogether and would not find any Christians
anywhere.

10 But it does not have this opinion. Right Christians, as I said, are
weak and often fall; but they rise again from sins through repentance
and faith in Christ. Nevertheless, among the same Christians who are the
right good seed, but still weak, are found the shameful weeds, the false
Christians, who nevertheless bear the Christian name and make a fuss
about the good field.

men. One must be accustomed to this and suffer it, and know that one
cannot root out such weeds, nor make the church of all things pure of
them.

Now Christ not only teaches us these things, but also shows us the cause
where such evil comes from, that in the church, where the right seed is
sown, that is, the word of God is preached purely and loudly, there are
nevertheless so many shameful weeds, so many hypocrites and false
Christians. But he shows such a cause to warn us against the trouble
that otherwise all the world is in, saying, Nothing good comes from the
preaching of the gospel 2c., lest we also fall into the wrong thought,
since otherwise all the world is in.

(12) We can boast today, praise God, that we have the true gospel, and
we can truthfully convict our adversaries that they have false and
unfounded doctrine. But because the tares are also found among us in
heaps, that many an offence is caused by the unbelievers among us; for
avarice, usury, fornication, boasting, cursing, lying and deceiving are
going on with all their might, yes, more than in former times under the
papacy: such desolate nature brings the gospel and the preachers almost
everyone into disrepute, so that one says: If this doctrine were right,
people would be more pious. But Christ here excuses both the doctrine
and the teachers, and says that among the multitude that has the right
doctrine and is the good field, there are nevertheless many tares and
bad boys. This is not the fault of the doctrine, which is pure and
wholesome; nor is it the fault of the preachers, who like to see it
well, and use all diligence to see that the people become more pious:
but it is the fault of the enemy, the devil, who acts like a wicked
farmer or neighbor: if one sleeps and does no harm, he does not sleep,
but comes and sows tares in the good field. This is how it stands in the
likeness before this: He captures the hearts so that they do not heed
the word, and so from day to day the longer the further they get away
from it, and let the devil lead and drive them as he wants, into all
kinds of sin and shame.

188 **L. 1, 193-198.** on the fifth Sunday after Epiphany. **W. XIII,
436-439.** 189

Thirteen: But see thou whether it be not a poor trade and an abominable
blasphemy, that men should blame and lay to the charge of Christ and his
gospel that which the devil himself alone doeth; and yet almost the
whole world walketh in such blasphemy this day. For whatever misfortune
arises, soon one is there and cries out about the gospel, as if it were
the fault of the doctrine and the good seed; when the good seed by its
nature can bring forth nothing but good fruit; but where it does not
bring forth good fruit, there must be a wicked land and a hopeless
cursed ground.

14 For this reason, it is this opinion that every Christian, and
especially every preacher, should despair and despair of the fact that
he will never be able to have saints in his church. For the devil does
not leave it, he throws his seed in with it; which is only realized when
it shoots forth and grows up. This is what happened to the dear
apostles, Paul, John and others; hoping to have pious Christians and
faithful workers in the gospel, they were the worst husks and bitterest
enemies. It is the same with us: those who think they are pious and
righteous do us the greatest harm and cause the most trouble, because we
are asleep and do not worry about any misfortune.

(15) This is the only consolation, that Christ himself says it will be
so. For this reason St. John comforts himself in his epistle against
such trouble, saying, 1 Epistle, chap. 2, 19: "They went out from us,
but they were not of us. For it happens that what should be the best
becomes the worst and turns out the worst. The angels have become
devils. One of the apostles betrayed Christ. Christians have become
heretics. God's people have become such boys, who bring Christ to the
cross. This is the way it is and no other way. Therefore we should be
undaunted and not abandon our ministry when we see weeds growing up
among the wheat, but only then stop confidently to admonish the people
so that they do not get angry. For the tares will not and cannot alone

grow in a bad soil, but also under the wheat and in a good field.

16 For the devil, as it says in the Gospel, cannot dwell in desolate,
dry places; he wants to sit in heaven. He also likes to eat good, sweet
morsels; and he likes to eat pure fruit, because he considers his filth
to be musk and balm. The pure little fruit wants to live among the
roses, that is, he wants to be, sit and rule in the church. We have to
live and suffer this until that day, when it will be different.

17 Although it is very painful to remain among such evil men and have to
tolerate and suffer everything, we can take comfort in the fact that the
guilt is not ours. That is why God does not want to repay us. If only we
keep the word faithfully and diligently, it shall bring forth eternal
fruit. On the other hand, the wicked, who cause all kinds of trouble and
do not want to act like Christians, shall find their punishment, not
only here on earth, but also in the life to come, as the Lord says here:
"Those who do wrong will be thrown into the furnace of fire, with
weeping and gnashing of teeth. But the righteous will shine like the sun
in their Father's kingdom." The godly should look forward to this hour
and not let the trouble they cannot avoid bother them. If most of them
do not want to do right, let them. We may thank God that some
nevertheless accept the word, follow it and become more pious.

18 So this is the sum of today's gospel, that even among the right
Christians, since the right, good seed, the word of God, lies in a good
field or field, there will always be evil, bad boys and unbelievers. And
no one shall presume to change this. For the wicked will remain mixed
with the pious, says Christ, until the last day. Then they shall be
separated from them by angels; but from us men it shall not be. But
whosoever shall be subject thereto shall make evil worse, and shall
either pluck up the tares, or tread down the good wheat with the tares.

19. Here they have two questions. The first:

**190 L. 1, 195-197. on the fifth Sunday after Epiphany. W. XIII,
439-442. 191**

Whether the church may need its power, and exclude from the church those
who lie in public aggravation? The other: Whether secular authorities
should defend heretics with the sword?

(20) This is the answer to the first question: The church is not
forbidden in this gospel to banish or exclude sinners. For the Lord
speaks of such a casting out, which is done with the sword, as taking
the life of the wicked. Now the church or the ministry does not use the
sword, but what it does, it does only with the word. Therefore, although
sinners are banished and excluded from the church, the church accepts
them again if they convert and desire mercy. That is why the old
teachers say that if Matthew, when he was still a tax collector, and
Paul, when he persecuted the Christians, and the thief on the cross, had
been judged and strangled soon after the fact, as bad boys, as they were
in truth, then the wheat that grew from them afterwards, when they
converted, would have been uprooted with them. But it should not have
such an opinion that the church should strangle the wicked. It should
banish and exclude them, like pagans, so that they may come to the
knowledge of their sin and amend themselves, and so that others may then
take their example as an example and beware of sinning.

(21) Yea, sayest thou, why are not thieves, and murderers, and others,
dealt with in this manner, that they may be condemned, and not be
punished with the executioner? Then some could be preserved who die in
their sins without faith? Answer: Here you must realize that the Lord
speaks of the kingdom of God. There it should be so, that one does not
need a sword; otherwise one would want to pull out the wheat with the
weeds. But in the kingdom of the world, God has given another command,
which is called: "Whoever takes the sword shall be judged with the
sword. Christ does not speak of such a world kingdom here. Therefore one
must not mix it, but let it go in the kingdom of heaven, what should go
there. But the worldly authorities should be diligent and

that the condemned people may be taught rightly, so that, because the
body must bear its punishment, the spirit may nevertheless be preserved,
until in that life the body also rises in honor, which here is so
shamefully executed.

22 From this it is good to hear whether the secular authorities may also
defend the heretics with the sword, because Christ says here: One should
not pull up the tares, but save such judgment until the last day. For
this gospel can do no more than that this master's servants should not
pull up the tares. But these are servants, as reported before, not in
the kingdom of the world, but in the kingdom of heaven. They do not need
the sword, for God has not given it to them. But if they take it, as the
pope did, they do no good, and do only harm. But the secular authorities
have the sword with the command that they are to prevent all trouble, so
that it does not break in and do harm. But the most dangerous and
terrible trouble is when false doctrine and unrighteous worship break
in. Therefore, a Christian authority should be most concerned about such
trouble, since it always brings disruption of the regiments and all
kinds of punishment and misfortune, as can be seen in all histories.

Therefore it is very true what St. Augustine says to Vincentium:
Serviant reges Christo leges ferendo pro Christo. The kings should serve
the Lord Christ in such a way that they should help with laws so that
his honor is promoted. Et ad Parmenionem: Non dormiat severitas
disciplinae, quando crimen cujusque notum, et omnibus execrabile
apparet**.** Serious punishment shall not sleep when sin is in the
daytime, and everyone sees that it is an abominable thing. The sin, he
says, should be in the daytime and obvious, that is, one should not
hurry with the punishment, but inquire well about all things beforehand.
For one may sometimes think something is heresy, but if one judges
rightly according to God's word, then it is the right, honest truth.
That is why the papists are disagreeable, disgraceful tyrants, whom no
one can bring to any discussion and disputation, yet they always
continue with murders and

[192 **' i. in. i98.** On the Sunday of Septuagesimä. **W. xm,
442,443,462-465.** 193]{.underline}

all kinds of tyranny. Judgment shall precede punishment. But he who
would judge heresy must seek such judgment nowhere but in the
Scriptures.

(24) Where secular authorities find shameful error, thereby
blaspheming the glory of the Lord Christ and hindering the salvation of
men, and division arises among the people, where something bad tends to
follow, as we have now experienced more than one 2c.Where such false
teachers will not be rebuked and will not desist from preaching, the
secular authorities should confidently defend themselves and know that,
for the sake of their office, it is not their place to do otherwise than
to turn the sword and all authority to this end, so that the doctrine
may be pure and the people may be saved.

The church service must be pure and unadulterated, and peace and unity
must be maintained. So that one may give a hand to the other: those in
the spiritual regime with the word and ban; but the authorities with the
sword and force, so that the people remain united in doctrine and all
trouble and evil is prevented. So things are going well, and God wants
to give prosperity to both regiments. But whatever wicked boys remain,
who ask nothing of the Word and are not punished by the worldly
authorities, they will find their judgment on that day. May God
graciously protect us from this, and keep us in the good word, without
all vexation, until the end, and make us blessed, amen.

**On the Sunday of Septuagint. *)**

**Matth. 20, 1-16.**

The kingdom of heaven is like a householder who went out in the morning
to hire laborers for his vineyard. And when he had agreed with the
laborers for a penny a day's wages, he sent them into his vineyard. And
going out about the third hour, he saw others standing idle in the
marketplace, and said unto them: Go ye also into the vineyard, and I
will give you that which is right. And they went. Again he went out
about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. And about the eleventh
hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and said unto them:
Why do you stand idle here all day? They said to him, "No one has given
us anything to do. He said to them: Go ye also into the vineyard, and
that which is right shall be done unto you. And when evening was come,
the lord of the vineyard said unto his steward, Call the laborers, and
give them their wages, and lift up the last unto the first. And when
they were come to the eleventh hour, they received every man his penny.
But when the first came, they thought they would receive more; and they
also received every man his penny. And when they had received it, they
murmured against the master of the house, saying: These last have
labored but one hour, and thou hast made them like unto us, who have
borne the burden and heat of the day. But he answered and said to one of
them: My friend, I am not doing you wrong. Have you not become one with
me for a penny? Take what is yours and go. But I will give to this last
as to thee. Or have I not power to do what I will with mine own? Do you
look askance because I am so kind? So the last shall be first, and the
first last. For many are called, but few are chosen.

(1) This is a sharp gospel, from which young people and bad people
cannot learn much. Nevertheless, because it is read on today's Sunday,
we want to say a little about it.

Your love stops in this likeness,

*) Held in Haufe, 1534.

as the father of the house goes out early in the morning, and appoints
laborers to his vineyard, who work twelve hours; after that, others who
work nine; item again, others who work only six and three; last, those
who work only one hour. The work is very unequal, and yet the wages are
equal. For the householder does not make an agreement with anyone,
except with the first.

**1942 .1, 198-200. On Sunday Septuagesimä. W. xin, iss-E 195**

But to the last, who work only one hour, just as much as to the first,
with whom he became one for a penny to the daily wage. This would be
useless in the eyes of the world, nor would it be right; there is a
measure and a rule: he who works much is paid much; he who works little
is paid little. But therefore, where one has his conditional wages, he
should not and must not interfere with the master, even if he gives
something to another out of goodwill. But of course it is wrong to give
equal wages, because there is unequal work.

3 Now the Lord makes this likeness to separate his kingdom from the
kingdom of the world, and to teach us that things are much different in
his kingdom than in the kingdom of the world, since they cannot be equal
because the persons are unequal. For the fact that inequality is also
found in the world, that the master has more goods in the house than his
servant, and yet the servant has to work more than the master, has its
own special meaning; for this reason it does not belong to this
equality, in which the Lord abolishes all inequality, and wants to teach
us that in his kingdom everything is equal, and one should have and be
worth as much as the other.

4 But in the outward, worldly life, there shall remain inequality; as
then the estates are unequal. A peasant leads a different life and
status than a citizen; a prince a different status than a nobleman.
There all is unequal, and shall remain unequal. But in the kingdom of
Christ, whether it be a king, a prince, a lord, a servant, a woman, a
maid, or whatsoever they may be called, they are all equal. For no one
has a different baptism, gospel, faith, sacrament, Christ and God than
the other. For there one goes to the sermon at the same time, and a
servant, a citizen, a farmer hears the very word that the greatest lord
hears. So the baptism that I have, every little child receives it, no
matter what. The faith that St. Peter and St. Paul have, the Magdalene
and the thief on the cross also have. I and you, if we are Christians,
have it too. The same God and Christ that John the Baptist has, all
sinners have when they convert. There

All things are equal, whether one is superior or inferior to another by
virtue of his status, office, or gifts.

(5) Now this is the most important part of this gospel, that we should
take comfort from the fact that we Christians are all equal in Christ.
In the sight of the world the inequality must remain, that the Father is
more than the Son; the Lord more than the servant; that a king and
prince is more than his subjects. This is what God wants, and this is
how he ordered and created the ranks. Whoever wanted to make equality,
that the servant should count as much as his lord, the maid as much as
her wife, a peasant as much as his lord, would create a very
praiseworthy regime; as has been seen in the rebellious peasants. Now
let the world be as unequal as it can be, but let us comfort ourselves,
no matter how high or low we are, that we all have one Christ, one
baptism, one gospel, one Spirit; that no one has no better gospel, no
better baptism, no other Christ, than the least maid and the least
servant. For though another has more money, goods, and other things than
you, yet he has not another or better God.

(6) Let this be learned and diligently remembered, that every man in
his state may serve God with heart and desire, and say: I am not an
emperor, not a king, I do not have cities and castles like the great
princes; but I nevertheless have just as holy a baptism, the very Christ
who died for me and purchased eternal life for me, which the emperor
has. Such great possessions, which we have through our Lord Jesus,
should make us hopeful that we will learn to despise worldly glory, and
that we will have our defiance and comfort only in the fact that we have
been baptized in the name of Jesus, and that he died for us and ascended
into heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God, so that he may also
help us from sin, death and all misfortune.

7 Whoever then has these things, and knows that we are all equal in
Christ, goes about his work with joy, and is not troubled, though he be
here on earth, by this short time.

**196 L. 1, 200-202. on the Sunday of Septuagint. W. xm, 4"8-47i. 197**

The first is inferior in nature and status to the second. For it shall
be so, that in the outward life there shall be inequality, and one shall
have much, and another little; one shall be master, and another servant.
A Christian does not allow himself to be challenged, but says: "In the
name of God, on earth it should be no different; even though I have a
heavier status than lord and wife in the house; even though I am not as
powerful as a prince, king or emperor: I will not grumble about it, but
will gladly and willingly remain in my position until God does it
differently with me and also makes me lord or wife, and in the meantime
comfort myself that I know that neither emperor nor king has another
Christ or more of Christ than I do. But if they want to have more, I
know that they will find no place in this kingdom, for there it will all
be the same, since we are all pleasing to God only because Christ Jesus
suffered for us and cleansed us all, one as much as the other, from our
sins with his blood. I have this treasure completely and perfectly.
Therefore it shall not grieve me if I have any lack in things outward or
temporal; if only here is no lack, and in eternal goods I shall be equal
with all the saints.

(8) Let this then be our consolation, that we know that in the kingdom
of Christ there is no inequality; let us therefore go willingly in such
Christian hope, and do what we ought; so that every one may be glad in
his state, and devout in it. For everything must go off with joy when a
Christian can say from the heart: What shall I murmur for the sake of my
estate? For it is a good estate, though it be lowly and laborious. For
though it be not a princely estate, yet is it a Christian estate; what
more shall I have or desire?

(9) These first ones do not do this, who grumble and look askance
because they do not receive more than the others (2c). Neither do our
clergymen. They want our Lord God to reward them according to their
works, to see how much more they have done than others, to set them
higher in heaven for this reason, and to give them a reward.

They taught that when a priest stands over the altar, he does such a
work that he can share it with others and help them to heaven. For thus
they have taught that when a priest stands over the altar, he does such
a work as to be able to communicate it to others, and thereby also to
help them to heaven, as being better and having a better standing in the
kingdom of Christ than the laity. These grumble about such equality,
which is in the kingdom of Christ, and want to bring it to an
inequality, as it is in worldly classes. They have also taught that a
virgin in a convent is better for the faith than a wife. And whoever
still teaches otherwise today, they condemn as a heretic. That is why
the first murmur here and want to have more than the others. They tell
our Lord God how long they have worked and how sour it has become for
them. But what does he say? Because of the outward life you are unequal;
one may be more diligent and work more than the other, but no one has a
better baptism and a better Christ than the other. Neither shall any man
preach any other or better gospel than another.

(10) For monks and nuns to boast that husbands and wives have only the
common gospel and commandment, but they have the high gospel, and keep
more than Christians are commanded to keep in the common estate, is not
true, and is altogether contrary to the gospel; for they would make
inequality of the gospel, when Christ makes all things equal, and
teaches especially in the present gospel, that in his kingdom one shall
be counted as much as another. In itself it is not evil, nor does anyone
forbid that a virgin remain who has grace to do so. But to boast of it
before our Lord God, and therefore to be better than others, and to
expect more reward, that is the offence and the vexation, when the pope
takes offence, and therefore accuses us of forbidding good works. But he
does us violence and injustice, for we do not forbid good works. But we
say that in the kingdom of Christ all things are equal, because God does
not want to deal with all of us according to merit, but only according
to grace and mercy, for the sake of His Son Christ Jesus.

**198** L. i, 202-204. On Sunday Septuagesimä. W. xni, 471-474. **199**

11. After this we say, if thou hast such equality in Christ, then,
being a schoolmaster or a preacher, a master or a mistress, a servant or
a maid, work, and do as much as thou canst in thy profession, and abide
in such inequality. But in Christ we are not to be unequal, but equal.
The world, and the Jews in particular, are offended at this, and want to
be mad and maddened by it, when they hear that we Gentiles are to be
saved just as much, who are not circumcised and do not keep the Sabbath
and other burdens of the law, as they, who carry such burdens with such
great effort that they sweat over them; as the Lord in the parable
finely puts it, and says: The first thought they would receive more, and
murmured therefore, when every man received his penny, even as they
which had wrought but one hour.

12 But Christ will not suffer inequality at all. "Friend," he says,
"I do you no wrong; take what is yours and go;" that is, you already
have your reward, the land of Canaan; but now I will set up another and
new kingdom, where all shall be equal within. For the goods are mine;
therefore I may do with them as I will, but ye shall not teach me how I
should keep my servants. So the Jews are angry with eternal life and do
not want to be equal with us Gentiles; they accuse our Lord God of this,
as if he were doing them wrong, so that he must answer for it, and say:
"The property is mine, not yours; therefore it is none of your business
how I deal with what is mine. The pope and his crowd do the same, do not
want to enter the kingdom, where everything should be the same inside,
but want to be and have something special, and rather delay eternal
life.

(13) Therefore, this distinction between the worldly life and the
Christian life, or between the kingdom of the world and the kingdom of
Christ, should be carefully and diligently noted. For in the kingdom of
Christ all things should be equal, since we all have only one God,
Christ, Holy Spirit, Gospel, baptism, sacrament, faith. Because of this
equality, one is just as good, pious and holy as the other.

14. when we have these things, then we shall

Thanking God for such gifts, and rightly recognizing and praising them,
and saying: "I am looked upon for what I will, I am respected for how
little I will be looked upon; yet I have as much as all emperors and
kings, yes, than all the saints and angels in heaven. By what? Through
Christ. Therefore I will go and be a housemother, a householder, a
servant, or a maid, and will do with joy, with pleasure, and with love
all that my state requires, because I have such great treasure in my
Lord Christ.

(15) This is the lesson of today's gospel, that we remain unequal
here on earth, just as persons are unequal. A prince is a different
person from a preacher; a maid is a different person from her wife; a
schoolmaster is a different person from a mayor. Therefore they should
not or cannot lead the same way or being. Such inequality must remain.
But there in the kingdom of Christ it is said: I will give to one as
much as to another; because the kingdom of heaven, the redemption from
death and sins, no one has earned for me; therefore I owe it to no one;
but give it by grace to whom I will. Over such things we should be
careful not to grumble, but to thank God for them, and to draw out such
comfort in all the danger, toil, and labor that we bear in outward
inequality; so it will all become gentle and easy for us.

(16) From the last saying, "Many are called, but few are chosen,"
the crafty minds draw all kinds of unrighteous and ungodly thoughts,
thinking thus: "Whom God has chosen shall be saved without means; but
again, whom He has not chosen, let him do what he will, be pious and
devout as he will, yet it is ordained for him that he must fall, and
cannot be saved: therefore I will let it go as it may. If I am to be
saved, it will be by my doing or without my doing; if not, all that I do
and undertake will be in vain. What naughty, safe people grow out of
such ungodly thoughts, everyone can soon see for himself.

(17) Now in the day of the wise men, when we have heard the saying of
Micah the prophet, it is sufficiently evident that one must beware of
such things.

[200 **L i, 204-206. On Sunday Septuagesimä. W. xin, 474-477.**
201]{.underline}

The only way to study and think about God's will is to beware of the
devil, and to choose a different way; namely, to leave God in His
majesty and content with the providence, for there He is
incomprehensible. And it is not possible that a person should not be
angered by such thoughts, and either fall into despair, or even become
godless and reckless.

18. But whoever wants to know God and His will rightly, he should go
the right way, so he will not be angered, but improved. But the right
way is the Lord Christ, as he says: "No one comes to the Father except
through me. Whoever wants to know the Father and come to Him, must first
come to Christ and learn to know Him, namely: Christ is the Son of God
and the almighty, eternal God. What does the Son of God do? He becomes
man for our sake, he gives himself under the law, so that he may redeem
us from the law, he lets himself be crucified and dies on the cross, so
that he may pay for our sin; and he rises again from the dead, so that
he may make the entrance to eternal life for us through his
resurrection, and help us against eternal death; And sitteth at the
right hand of God, to represent us, and to give us the Holy Ghost, and
by the same to rule and guide, and to keep his faithful from all
temptation and invective of the devil. This is what it means to know
Christ.

19 If this knowledge is fine and firm in your heart, then begin and go
up to heaven and make your calculation: Because the Son of God has done
this for the sake of men, as God's heart is against us men, since His
Son does this by the Father's will and command. Isn't it true that
your own reason will force you to say: Because God gave His only
begotten Son for our sake and did not spare His Son for our sake, He
must not mean any harm to us humans. He does not want us to be lost,
because he seeks and needs the highest means to help us to live. This is
the right way to come to God; as Christ Himself preaches, John 3:16:
"God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son to be our
Lord.

that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. But if one holds these thoughts against those that grow out of the
foregoing opinion, one will find that those thoughts are the thoughts of
the wicked devil, since a man must be vexed, and either despair, or
become reckless and ungodly; for he cannot provide himself with anything
good to God.

20 Some have other thoughts, and interpret the words thus: "Many are
called", that is, God offers His grace to many; but "few are chosen",
that is, He allows such grace to happen to few; for few are saved. This
is, first of all, an ungodly mind; for how can it be possible, if one
thinks nothing else of God and believes that he should not become
hostile to God for this reason, because of whose will alone it is
lacking that we do not all become blessed? But hold this opinion against
the one that is found where one first learns to recognize the Lord
Christ, and you will find that it is all devilish blasphemy.

21 Therefore there is a far different opinion with this saying: "Many
are called" 2c. For the preaching of the Gospel is common and public,
whoever will hear and accept it; and God allows it to be preached in
such a common and public way, that everyone should hear, believe and
accept it, and be saved. But how does it work? As follows in the Gospel:
"Few are chosen," that is, few hold to the gospel in such a way that
God is pleased with them. For some hear and pay no attention; some hear
and do not hold fast to it, nor do they want to add to it or suffer from
it; some hear, but are more concerned about money and goods and worldly
pleasures. But this does not please God, and does not like such people.
This is what Christ means by "not being chosen," that is, not keeping
themselves in such a way that God would be pleased with them. But these
are chosen people who are pleasing to God, who hear the gospel
diligently, believe in Christ, prove their faith with good fruits, and
suffer what they should suffer.

This mind is the right mind,

**202** L. i, 206-208. On Sunday Sexagesimä. W. xm, 477-479. **203**

who can offend no one, but corrects people so that they think, "Well,
if I am to please God and be chosen, I will not suffer myself to live in
an evil conscience, to sin against God's commandment, and not to resist
sin; but I must go to the sermon, ask God for His Holy Spirit, not let
the Word leave my heart, resist the devil and his intervention, and ask
for protection, patience, and help; then fine Christians will be made.
On the other hand, those who believe that God does not grant salvation
to everyone are either desperate or certain, godless people.

who live like cattle, thinking, "It is already decreed whether I am to
be saved or not; why should I almost hurt myself? No, not so; you are
commanded to hear God's word and believe in Christ, that he is your
Savior and has paid for your sin. Remember the command and obey it. If
you find yourself unbelieving or weak, ask God for His Holy Spirit, and
do not doubt that Christ is your Savior, and that through Him, if you
believe in Him, that is, if you take comfort in Him, you will be saved.
May our dear Lord Jesus Christ grant this to us all, amen.

**On Sexagesimä Sunday. *)**

**Luc. 8, 4-15.**

And when there were many people together, and they hasted to him out of
the cities, he said by a parable, There went out a sower to sow his
seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and were taken up, and
the fowls of the air did eat them up. And some fell on the rock; and
when it went out, it withered, because it had no sap. And some fell
among thorns; and the thorns came up with it, and choked it. And some
fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. When
he had said this, he cried out, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And his disciples asked him, saying, What is this like? And he said,
Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto
others in parables, that they should not see, though they see; neither
understand, though they hear. But this is the same: The seed is the word
of God. But those who are in the way are the ones who hear it; then the
devil comes and takes the word from their hearts. Then the devil comes
and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe
and be saved. But those who are on the rock are those who, when they
hear it, receive the word with joy; and they have no root; for a time
they believe, and in the time of temptation they fall away. But that
which fell among thorns are they which hear it, and go away among the
cares, riches, and pleasures of this life, and choke, and bring no
fruit. But that in the good land, find they which hear the word, and
keep it in a fine good heart, and bring forth fruit in patience.

Your beloved hear in today's gospel that there are four kinds of
disciples who hear the pure word of God, and yet only the last keep it
and bring forth fruit; so that each one may look around and diligently
search out among which multitude he is, and so learn to send himself,
that he may one day also come to those who are a good country and where
the word brings forth fruit.

*) Held in the house 1533 according to ck, 1534 according to *a b c*
and according to Röhrer's information. D. Red.

(2) The first, saith the Lord, are the seed that falleth by the way
side; which fructifieth not, because it is either trodden down, or the
birds eat it up. The others, hearing it, and beginning not only to speak
of it, but also to believe, grow fine, as the grain falling on a stony
field. But as soon as a little hot summer day comes to it, it begins to
dry up, for it has neither root nor sap. So when persecution and
temptation come, such people fall away before the right fruit comes.

**[204 L. i, 2N8-sio. On the Sunday of Sexagesimä. W. xm, 479-482.
205]{.underline}**

of faith through patience. The third are the most recognizable here;
they are Christians, like the grain among the thorns, which, though it
grows up, cannot bear fruit, but must be choked, for the thorns overgrow
it. But the fourth are the pious disciples, where the word falls into a
good heart, and remains in it until it bears fruit through patience; for
they suffer over the word what comes to them to suffer, and exercise
themselves in love and obedience to God, and bear some a hundredfold,
some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold fruit. These are the four kinds of
disciples.

(3) Therefore let every man enter into his heart, and consider among
what multitude he is. The first three parts are of no avail; but
especially the first are the most grievous that hear the word, and when
they hear it, saith the Lord, the devil cometh and taketh away the word
from their hearts, that they may not believe and be saved. Mark this
diligently.

(4) So I should never have thought nor judged that the hearts should
be possessed with the devil, who hear the word, and yet pay no attention
to it, forget it and never remember it. Methinks it is without danger to
hear the word of God and yet not remember it; and those who do so are
bad careless people, and it is natural that they hear the sermon and yet
forget it. But Christ judges differently here, and says: The devil takes
the word out of people's hearts.

5 Then you see what is to be thought of people, children and servants,
when they hear a sermon, and go away carelessly, as if they had not
heard it, and did not even think of it. These cannot boast of the Holy
Spirit, for the devil is so close to them that he reaches into their
hearts and takes the word out of them. Therefore other bad habits must
follow, that they are disobedient, unfaithful, obstinate, selfish,
proud, unforgiving; for if the word remained in the heart and they heard
it diligently, it would make fine, obedient, willing, faithful, humble,
mild hearts.

(6) These are the first and most grievous; and such naughtiness
grieveth the Lord very much, neither reproacheth any company so much as
this.

For he says: "The devils, who hover in the air, take the word out of
their hearts, so that they do not accept the word, and think there is no
danger in letting the sermon go in one ear and out the other. But if you
want to know how great the danger is, listen to what Christ says, who
really knows better than all the world, saying, "The devil does this.

(7) Therefore, if you see a man speaking and preaching into himself as
into a log, as our miserly citizens and peasants do, and especially as
our counterpart, the papists, do; what is preached, sung, and said to
them is all as if one were striking into water: think no other than that
the devil has sat in their hearts, and is snatching away the seed, the
word of God, so that they will not believe and be saved. For if the
devil were not there, or if this were a natural, innate forgetfulness,
as one man is always more learned than another, there would still be a
desire for a man to think, "Oh, God, that I cannot remember anything!
Give me also your grace, and open my heart, that I may pay attention to
and keep what I hear in the sermon! With such people, who have a desire
for the word and would like to keep it, the devil has no place nor room;
otherwise such desire would remain behind. But they do not care; indeed,
they make believe that if they should miss a penny or a farthing, or
something even less, because of a sermon, it would be a great pity.
There is certainly the devil in it, and only think no one else.

008 Now this is the greatest multitude that hear the word, and regard it
not: for the devil plucketh it out of their hearts.

(9) The other two groups are not so wicked, but they are weak, they
lift up a little, and they notice something, and they put up with it.
Therefore the Lord does not give them to the devil as much as the first,
although the fruit does not follow with them either. Now these are they
who do not persevere in persecution, nor remain constant; but like the
wormy fruit on the tree, they remain hanging, because they are still,

206 **L. i, 2io-2i2. On Sunday Sexagesimä. W. xin, 482-48p.** 207

But as soon as a wind comes to them, it falls off in heaps: so are they
also: "For a time," says the Lord, "they believe"; but as soon as
the cross comes, they are frightened, will not and cannot suffer
anything. The fruit of eternal life must remain outside, along with
other good fruits that grow from the word and faith.

(10) The third company are those who, because of avarice, care, and
the pleasure of this life, do not heed the word. For he who is occupied
with temporal cares, scratching and scraping, and only wants to think
how he will become high and rich, weighs down the heart, as Christ says
Luc. 21:34, so that the right fruit is choked, like the grain among the
thorns. Work should be done, and each one should be most diligent and
diligent in his work; this is not forbidden but commanded. But to strive
and think only of temporal things, of thalers and florins; these are the
thorns that choke the word of God in the heart, so that it cannot grow
above itself nor bear fruit, because it is not thought of, and other
things are more important.

(11) With these three heaps, the word is in vain and in vain. Now this
is not a small, but a great and grievous harm, which a human heart can
do. Therefore the Lord diligently exhorts us all, saying, "Take heed
therefore how ye hearken: for to him that hath shall be given; but from
him that hath not shall be taken away, even that he thinketh he hath."
With such words he gives enough to understand that he does not speak of
bad things; for it is not to be joked about here that one would want to
think: "Oh, I will go on like this for a while, take care and do what I
have to take care of, yet I still want to hear God's word and believe,
when I once become more idle and have first gathered what is necessary
for me.

See to it that you do not deceive yourself. Who knows how long you will
live? How long you will hear the word? Or how God will attack and
afflict you? You alone can deceive and deceive; you will not deceive
Christ, who admonishes you diligently and earnestly enough, saying, "He
who has ears to hear, let him hear." He does not want you to

You should postpone it until another time, as we usually do. Now," he
says, "when you hear it, accept it, otherwise it will go badly with
you.

(13) Therefore let us be diligent that we may be found among the
little fourth company; therefore also pray earnestly that we may have
good hearts, receive and keep the word of God, and bring forth good
fruit.

(14) Now the multitude are the dear saints; but not the pope's
saints, who wear caps and plates, say mass, fast, have special clothes
and the like; but those who hear God's word, which the pope and his
saints, as you can see, are the worst enemies and fiercest persecutors.
But those who hear the word bear fruit a hundredfold, that is, much,
innumerable fruit. Or, as Matthew divides it, some bear fruit a
hundredfold, some sixtyfold, and some thirtyfold. For as the outward
offices are unequal, so also are the fruits unequal. A preacher serves
the church more than a craftsman, who only presides over his own house;
and yet both are Christians, redeemed by Christ from sins and death, and
heirs of eternal life. Let us also come among this small group, which is
the smallest.

15 But a fine, pure heart is needed, as Christ says, that is, such a
heart, which first of all is not careless, but is serious about the word
of God. Such a heart must be there first of all, otherwise the devil
will not come and snatch away the word. Secondly, the heart must be sure
and steadfast, not soft or cowardly, so as to be seduced or frightened,
and to dispute the favor or disfavor of men. For if we do not fear and
love God above all things, the word will not remain long, for it will
not remain unchallenged in the world, for the devil cannot tolerate or
suffer it. He is an idle lord, who drives his servants on and on and
does not let them celebrate; as we see in the papists, and are learning
even more every day. Thirdly, it must also be purified and swept out so
that there are no thorns in it; that is, we must no longer love to
burden ourselves with goods, money, honor and pleasure, because the word
of God and the devil are not to be tolerated.

[208 **1, 212-214. On Sunday Sexagesimä. W. XIII, 485-488.**
209]{.underline}

We should not be more concerned with other worldly matters than with the
word of God, as Christ says: "Seek first the kingdom of God" 2c.

(16) Wherefore if the heart be attentive, sure of the matter,
constant, and refined, it is a pure and refined heart, where fruit shall
surely follow: but yet in patience; for without cross and temptation,
without adversity and offence, there is no escape; as Paul saith, "All
they that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. Let
us then prepare ourselves, and, as Christ says, "hold our souls with
patience," and do not forget to pray; for it does not fail, as we
ourselves must confess, that unfortunately we are everywhere offended
and do not want to go anywhere, and of course it happens that we cannot
despise the temporal here on earth. So the devil does not celebrate
either, but tries in every way whether he can take the word from us, and
on the other hand weigh down the heart with worry, avarice, hopefulness,
anger and all kinds of naughtiness. As we can see, there would be much
finer people, if greed, honor, fornication and other things did not
overtake them and keep them from the word.

(17) It is necessary that we have good regard for such deficiencies
and infirmities of our nature, not to continue in security, but to ask
God for His Holy Spirit (as we have a clear, comforting promise, Luc.
11:13).: "The Father will give His Holy Spirit to those who ask Him"),
that He may clear away such sticks and blocks, sweep out such thorns and
thistles from the heart, so that we may hear and keep God's word, and
bring forth the right fruit, faith in Christ; by which faith we not only
live in the obedience of God, but also become God's children and heirs;
for this is the noblest cause that this seed should be sown, that is,
that the holy gospel should be preached in all the world, that it should
create and work such fruit in us as will last forever.

18 This likeness also serves us not to be surprised, although the word
does not bear fruit everywhere; for here we hear that the Lord himself
divides it thus, and speaks of four heaps, since only the one and the
smallest is righteous. The

The other three great multitudes are of no use at all; let them go, and
be not offended at them. For where the gospel is preached, let it be so,
that these three unfit disciples are found; and yet it is the fault
neither of the word, nor of him that leadeth or preacheth it: as the
blind papists always, like mad, raving men, cry out, let it be thought
that they cannot make our gospel more abominable, nor more ugly, than by
bringing forth the offences which the devil hath excited since the
gospel was preached.

(19) But if it be so, tell me, when Christ himself preached with John
and his apostles, were there not also great vexations, and the greatest
sins committed? When John the Baptist stood up and preached, everyone
ran to hear his sermons and saw that he was a holy man; nor did he hear
that he was possessed and had the devil. And King Herod, who, as the
Gospels testify, heard him much and gladly, finally had him strangled.
Yes, they heard Christ, the Son of God, themselves, and saw him raise
the dead and perform great miracles; nevertheless, they crucified him.
Why don't you also say: "John, Christ, the apostles were not true
preachers, otherwise the people should not have been so wicked, and they
should have changed to the right doctrine? But they must keep their
mouths shut; otherwise one would feel by their judgment that they are
enemies and blasphemers of Christ. But they make themselves believe that
they have a better right to reproach us and our teachings.

20 Now, we will leave it with our doctrine and not say now what we think
it is and why we do not want to be aborted by it. Just look at the words
of our Lord Jesus, who says: The seed is the word. Now no pope will ever
be so foolish as to say that the word Christ speaks of here is an evil
word or false doctrine. But what does Christ say about such seed, which
is righteous and good? How does it come to be? Namely, that only the
fourth part of it is clothed and bears fruit. Now who can deny that the
world does not remain evil, even though the word

[210 **A. i, 214-216. On Sunday Sexagesimä. W. xm, 488-M.**
211]{.underline}

and the sermon is right, pure, good, and fruitful in itself?

(21) Now I have said that we will not yet speak of our doctrine, for
which we hold it. But the papists must confess this, and have no thanks,
that although the preaching is right and the preacher pious, yet the
world remains wicked and does not improve on the word; for there is not
only this preaching of Christ, that only the fourth part of the seed
brings forth fruit, but also his own example (let John and the apostles
be silent), that he cannot make any man believe and accept the word.
Most of it is and remains evil and without fruit; the least and smallest
part improves and believes.

(22) If this happened to Christ, the Son of God and the highest
preacher, what wonder that it happened to John, the Baptist, the
apostles, and to us today? Do we therefore want to punish the doctrine
and say that it is wrong? Let it also be said that the seed which falls
on the way, on the rocks, and among thorns, is not righteous. But one
should turn it around and not blaspheme God. His word is the seed that
is sown; the same word is righteous and good, and by its nature cannot
but bear fruit. But if it does not bear fruit everywhere, do not blame
God and His word for that, but blame the land, which is not good, and
because of that such seed must perish in it and remain without fruit.

23 Therefore let not the papists reprove our doctrine, nor call it
unrighteous, because much offence is found in it; but let them reprove
themselves, and all other men that have not a fine and pure heart. For
the fault is not of words, but of hearts; they are unclean and unfit. To
them the devil comes, inciting and driving them against God's word, as
the Lord says in the other parable, Matt. 13, of the good field sown
with good seed, yet weeds grow in it. Do you ask,

where the weeds come from? Then hear and learn it from Christ. The
devil, he says, sows among the wheat; he cannot suffer it to be all
pure. And though he cannot root out all, yet he sows the tares among
them. But who will blame the word of God for this, and say that it is
the cause of such troubles?

(24) Now let every man learn here that the gospel will never be
otherwise than the Lord shows by the likeness, namely, that some are
reformed and become more godly; but there are always three times as many
who are offended. This is also the reason why the Lord concludes in the
next Gospel that many are called, but few are chosen; for because they
do not have a pure, fine heart, but give room to the devil and let the
word go, it is not possible for God to be pleased with them. Because of
this, not only do outward sins and offences follow, but, as the Lord
says here, such naughtiness is punished with blindness, so that they see
nothing with their seeing eyes, and what they hear they cannot
understand, nor send themselves into it.

(25) Therefore let no man offend, neither let him blaspheme the
gospel, though many an offence be found in it: for the fault is not of
the word, but of evil, wicked, possessed hearts. Just as it is not the
seed's fault that it does not bear fruit by the way, on the rocks and
among the thorns. Therefore, let no one be offended by such aversions,
but work so that he may have this seed, and ask God for grace to open
his heart through his Holy Spirit and make it pure; so that when we hear
the Word, it may remain in our hearts and bear fruit in patience, and we
may be saved through faith in Christ, which the Holy Spirit plants in us
through the Word and holy sacraments. May our dear Lord Jesus Christ
grant the same to us all, Amen.

212 **1.216.217.** On the day of the Purification of the Virgin Mary.
**W. XIII, 491-494.** 213

**On the day of the Purification of Mary. *)**

**Luc. 2, 22-32.**

And when the days of their purification came according to the law of
Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him unto the LORD: as
it is written in the law of the LORD, Every male that first breaketh the
mother shall be called holy unto the LORD. And that they should offer
the sacrifice, according as it is written in the law of the LORD, a pair
of turtledoves, or two young pigeons. And, behold, there was a man at
Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was devout, and
feared God, and waited for the consolation of Israel; and the Holy Ghost
was in him. And an answer was given him of the Holy Ghost, that he
should not see death, because he had first seen the Christ of the Lord.
And by inspiration of the Spirit he came into the temple. And when the
parents had brought the child Jesus into the temple, to do for him
according to the law, he took him up in his arms, and praised God,
saying, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace, as thou hast said:
for mine eyes have seen thy Saviour, whom thou hast prepared before all
nations to be a light to enlighten the Gentiles, and for the praise of
thy people Israel.

1 In today's Gospel, your beloved hear the story of how the infant
Jesus, when he was six weeks old, was brought into the temple. And the
evangelist calls such six weeks, according to the law, the days of their
purification; for Moses also calls it so. Now this was not a natural
law; therefore the Gentiles did not keep it: but God took hold of his
people in this way, and laid such a commandment upon them, that they
kept it so, that every mother, when she had given birth, after six
weeks, if it was a son, and after twelve weeks, if it was a daughter,
must go into the temple, and present herself with an offering.

(2) Such a commandment the pope also laid upon our childbed women,
that after the childbed they should be blessed before the church, as if
they were unclean, and otherwise should not go into the church or among
the people. But it is wrong, because the uncleanness, which was assigned
to the puerperal women in the law, is not a natural uncleanness, but an
imposed uncleanness, which is not valid apart from the law, and
therefore should not be imposed on anyone.

003 And this also was specially commanded in the law, that the
firstborn, after the six weeks, should be presented unto the LORD, and
given for his own: for so it is written in Moses,

*) Held in the house, 1534.

Levit. 12): "Every male that first breaks his mother shall be called
holy unto the Lord", not only men, but also cattle, cows, oxen, sheep,
2c., all of which should be called and be of our Lord God. Therefore the
firstborn son also had his special glory, that he was the lord of the
house, king and pope, father of the house and priest among the other
brothers. But because this would be too much among such a great people,
that the firstborn should always remain in the temple and be the Lord's
own, God gave the parents this freedom, that they could redeem the child
for half a florin, or a quarter of a florin, and a year-old lamb, or a
pair of turtle-doves, according to whether one was poor or rich; so they
took their son again, and yet he was called the son of our Lord God.

It seems that the Virgin Mary was not one but a fortune, because she
only offers the sacrifice that poor people used to offer, a pair of
turtledoves. With such a sacrifice she redeemed her son, and confessed
whether she was the right mother, but that the son was not hers, but
God's son and his own, because he was the firstborn.

5 For this reason, our Lord God has decreed among the Jews that the
first and second

*) 2 Mos. 13, 2. D. Red.

[214 L.i, 2i7-220. .On the day of the purification of Mary. W.xm,
494-497. 215]{.underline}

They wanted to have the firstborn male as their own, as a testimony and
memorial, so that they would know they had such a God who redeemed them
from Egypt and strangled all the firstborn in all of Egypt in one night.
As a sign of this redemption, he ordered the firstborn male, among
cattle and men, to be sacrificed and presented in the temple. This has
now been abolished and does not bind us Christians any more than other
ceremonies and laws given to the Jews alone.

(6) Now here is nothing special for us to learn without seeing how
Christ submits to the law when he was not guilty. On the feast of the
circumcision of Christ, your love heard of what we should comfort
ourselves with.

(7) For this reason we want to draw such obedience down now, so that,
just as it serves us there for faith, it also serves us here for outward
life and good works. For here the obedience of the infant Jesus and his
dear mother is praised and held up to our shame, since God cannot bring
it about with us that we do only half of what we owe to do, with the
loss of our blessedness and forfeiture of eternal damnation and hellish
fire.

8 Such disobedience and abominable naughtiness rhymes very badly with
this example, that the infant Jesus, who is lord over the law and
everything, and since Moses is a man, nevertheless humbles himself in
this way, and does what Moses, his servant, called other children to do,
who were unclean and sinners. The virgin Mary also does this; she knew
well that she was still a virgin and therefore owed nothing to the law
(for Moses speaks of such women who become pregnant in a common way);
nevertheless she goes, does not want to need such freedom, because it
might be annoying to others, who knew nothing about such trade, to do
what other women were obliged to do according to the law.

(9) These two examples of the infant Jesus and Mary, his mother,
should make us red with shame, and are written and preached so that we
may blush for the sake of the Lord,

We have everything, yet we do not do what we are obligated to do; yet he
does it for our sake, which his servant Moses calls him, and by right he
is not obligated to do. Whoever then has the color to turn red should
spit on himself and say, "I am not worthy to have the sun shine on me,
since my Lord and Savior thus throws himself under the law and sets his
own example of our iniquity. Because my Lord and Savior throws himself
so low under the law, and with his own example condemns our disobedience
so high that he could not be more shamefully disgraced; for that he
throws himself so low and makes such superfluous obedience, with the
same he scorns and disgraces us who are not obedient to the Lord, who
after all can cast us into hell or give us heaven.

10 So the obedience of Christ disgraces our disobedience, that we should
be ashamed in our hearts and say: I poor maggot, what am I doing? will I
not also be obedient to the Lord, and follow his example, who for my
sake became man, and was laid in the cradle, and carried to Jerusalem,
and obeyed his servant Moses, to whom he owed no obedience? For he
himself is the LORD; but Moses is hardly worthy to be called his
servant: nevertheless he doeth that which he is not bound to do. Again,
I do not do that which I owe and am commanded to do in my condemnation.
This is the first simple teaching of children, that we should be ashamed
for the sake of the example of our Lord Jesus Christ. Lord Jesus Christ,
that we are so wicked and disobedient.

The other teaching is about the glory of the first son, that God holds
him so high that he is called God's own and His son. This was a very
great glory and freedom, which the Jews also took upon themselves, and
others took their brothers for it, as if God did not respect them, they
alone being the dear children. As the examples show, in which it can be
seen that the firstborn have generally done the worst and behaved most
shamefully, for they were overcome by hope and considered themselves the
sole sanctuary of our Lord God, despising all others. And if it is still

[216 **L. 1, 220-222. on the day of the purification of Mary. W. xm,
497-sov.** 217]{.underline}

If we were proud monks, we would also want to be proud noblemen for the
sake of such fame; as one may feel in the monks. If they could lead the
fame and say: I am God's holy child, there is his word and order; how
do you think they would boast, because the lousy cap makes them so
hopeful?

(12) Now this hope has dealt a blow to the firstborn, so that they
have fallen, like Lucifer, the highest angel. Cain was the first son,
and there was a wonderful thing about him, that Eve gave him the name,
as if he should be the right man to crush the serpent's head, when she
said: "I have the man, the Lord. But as the angel Lucifer became a
devil, so Cain became an arch-villain and fratricide.

13 Ishmael was also Abraham's firstborn son; therefore, says the
Scripture, Genesis 21:9, he was a scoffer who despised Isaac, his
younger brother, and held him in low esteem, as if he were the heir, not
Isaac. So they all went away in hope that they alone were the sanctuary
of our Lord God and no one else; therefore God had to overthrow them.
Esau also thinks that he could not fail to be the ruler, but our Lord
God does otherwise. For since he let himself think that he was the
firstborn, that he should be worthy of hope, that he should oppress and
despise his brother, God made it so that he had to go behind the
blessing, just as Cain and Ishmael did.

(14) It is the same with the Jews. They would be the firstborn son in
the kingdom of God and Christianity, and we Gentiles the other son. But
since they wanted to be proud, our Lord God said, "No, you shall not
be, for I did not sanctify you as a people to be proud and to despise
others, but that you should be all the more grateful and obedient to me.
But because ye will not do these things, control yourselves, and let the
heathen come unto me, and they shall have the preference; and ye shall
follow behind, ye shall even be excluded.

015 So David also did: he took away the right of the first birth from
all the eldest sons, and set Solomon the youngest son,

to the king; for our Lord God wanted it so, since he could not otherwise
control the court.

16 And so it was with David himself. When the Lord sent Samuel the
prophet to anoint the son of Jesse as king in Saul's stead, the eldest
came forward first; he was a brave person and a proud fellow, as you can
see, 1 Sam. 17:28, that he attacked David hard in the camp as if he were
his servant, but the Lord said, "He is not;" until the sons of Jesse
all seven passed by, and the prophet had to ask, "Have you no more son
than these?" Then answered Jesse his father, "Yea, there is yet a
younger one without, waiting of the cattle." For Jesse could not think
that God would make something special of the youngest. But it was he who
pleased God. The eldest and firstborn did not please God, as he said to
Samuel: "I judge differently from men, for I look at the heart.

(17) But why does God not keep His own law and make David a king who
was the youngest son, when according to God's word and order the
firstborn should be king? That is why He does not want to celebrate
anyone, nor does He want His law, blessings and gifts to be bestowed
upon us, so that we may become proud and exalt ourselves. He wants to
have humble, not proud children. But he that will be proud, though he
set him high, may very well cast him down, and set him lower. Because
Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Eliab, the Jews, and the angels themselves were
proud, and wanted to have their advantage, which was given to them by
grace, for a right, and to despise and insist on others for it, they had
to go to the devil into the abyss of hell, regardless of their first
birth; as the 113th Psalm also says v. 5-7: "Who is like the Lord our
God, who has set himself so high, and looks on the lowly in heaven and
on earth? Who lifts up the lowly from the dust, and exalts the poor from
the dung ?" And the Virgin Mary in her song: "He pushes down the
mighty from the throne, and lifts up the lowly."

18 Therefore it is the way and work of our Lord God that he overthrows
the hopeful, 2c. for he does not want to suffer pride or defiance,

218 **D. 1, 222-224. On the Day of the Purification of Mary. W. XIII,
500-603.** 219

He does not give his gifts for us to consider as if we had them from
ourselves. For this reason, he often pulls out a poor man's child,
lifts him up, and on the other hand throws a king from the chair, to
death and all misfortune.

19 Thus among the Jews the firstborn was highly honored. For the rule in
worldly and spiritual affairs was due to the firstborn sons, according
to the word and order of God. But because they wanted to abuse such
honor for their own pride and preservation, God broke such law and order
for them. Reuben was also the first son, but Jacob left the curse behind
him that he should remain neither kingdom nor priesthood, both of which
were due to him by birth. Abraham, as it is believed, was also the
youngest son, but God gives him the right that was given to the eldest
and firstborn.

20 So it is quite a common example that the first sons are seldom well
turned out. This has done nothing but the great hope that they thought:
I am the first son, therefore I am lord of the house. I am our Lord
God's sanctuary, and his own; my brothers are nothing, God does not
look at them. Our Lord God cannot stand such pride; therefore He resists
the proud and throws them to the ground, and gives grace to the humble.

For this reason, no one should be overburdened with graces or gifts. If
you are learned and able to do more than another, use such gifts to
honor God and to benefit your neighbor. But if thou exalt thyself, thou
shalt incur the displeasure of God. So, if you are holy, beautiful,
rich, in sum, let the gifts be what they will, beware of pride; for God
proved in the first and highest patriarchs that he would not suffer
pride or pride; for this reason almost all are disgraces. John the
Baptist was well advised, but he is almost alone. Christ must have been
right, for there was no sin in him.

(22) The other firstborns in common have all abused such glory, fallen
from it because of pride and arrogance, until at last all Judaism has
fallen, and the Gentiles, who consider it an abomination, have been
destroyed.

have taken their place. For Christianity is now our Lord God's own, and
his first birth: not because of outward power or splendor, as the pope
boasts; but because of the Word and holy Sacrament. For though we are
unequal one to another according to outward birth, yet we are all equal
because of baptism; for we are all born of the Christian Church, which
is a pure virgin in the Spirit; which has the pure Word of God and the
holy sacraments, from which she conceives and ever gives birth to
Christians; who are the true firstfruits, and our Lord God's own, I as
well as you, you as well as me. There it goes right in the work, which
was there only in the image and figure.

(23) But if God had done something special, baptized me and you
specially, given me and you a special word and sacraments of our own, we
would also have gone to the devil for hope's sake. But because God does
not make anything special for any of us, we must all say and confess: We
have the same baptism, the same mother, the Christian church, the same
faith, word and sacrament; so no one can despise the other, you must let
me be a firstborn son as well as you, and I you as well as me. So they
are all at the same time, one as well as the other, kings and priests,
but only according to the spirit; for in the outward being a difference
must remain.

24 But that the pope, according to the spiritual rule, considers himself
better than others, he has no command; therefore no one but the wretched
devil has called it for him. For among true Christians it should and
must be so that no one is better than another. But the fact that
preachers, pastors and other church servants must be, does not make them
children of God; but baptism, the word and faith in the word must do it,
so that we become children of God and firstborn.

(25) Now let everyone learn that those in the Old Testament were an
example in which our Lord God made us see that He cannot suffer pride,
but overthrows everything that wants to go up, unless someone humbles
himself and puts himself down.

**220 L. 1, 224-226. On the day of the Purification of Mary. W. xm,
503-506. 221**

The world does not want to believe this and still abuses the bad, small
gifts for hope. For this reason God overthrows one after the other, so
that they tumble down like Lucifer and his angels from heaven.

(26) This is one part of today's Gospel, as far as the history of the
revelation in the temple is concerned. After that, the evangelist
reports what happened in the temple.

when the infant Jesus, as the firstborn son, was presented to the Lord
in the temple and redeemed with a sacrifice. We will speak about this in
the following sermon, now asking God for His grace, that He may protect
us from all hope, and through His Holy Spirit awaken our hearts to right
and earnest obedience and graciously keep them therein until the end,
amen.

**On the day of the Purification of Mary.**

**Second Sermon.**

**From the old Simeon in the temple.**

This is a very good history together with a beautiful sermon and
prophecy, which the old father Simeon publicly gave about the child
Jesus in the temple. It is one of the other revelations by which this
child was made known to the world, and especially to his people.

The first revelation was made to the virgins of Mary by the angel
Gabriel, Luke 1, and to Joseph by the angel, Matthew 1. The third
revelation was made to Elizabeth, the mother of Saint John the Baptist,
Luke 1, when she conceived the Blessed Virgin Mary, the mother of the
Lord, and the child leapt in her womb. The fourth revelation was through
Zachariam, the father of John, Luc. 1. For although he does not indicate
the person, he clearly testifies that Christ the Lord is present, and
that God has remembered and fulfilled His covenant.

(3) These revelations, which took place before the birth of Christ,
were followed by others after he was born. First, the angel to the
shepherds in the field; which shepherds did not keep silent, but, as
Lucas reports, spread the angel's sermon everywhere, Luc. 2. Then the
revelation through the star in the Gentiles, Matth. 2. and

Finally these two with the old father Simeon and the prophetess Hannah,
who both preached freely and publicly about this child JEsu in the
temple, that he was the comfort of Israel, who should help all the world
from sins and against death.

4 Now there is a very wonderful deal with Simeon. The evangelist
testifies that he was pious and godly, and waited for the consolation of
Israel; that is, all his hope was that God would soon fulfill his
promise and send the Lord Jesus Christ; he also had a firm trust that he
would not die, because he had experienced it and seen the Lord Jesus
Christ. This was not a mere thought, as we often have mere thoughts
about a thing and it turns out that way; but the Holy Spirit stirred his
heart, no doubt by the word of God, which he read in the prophecy of the
holy patriarch Jacob, Genesis 49, how Christ should come when the
scepter had fallen from Judah and had come upon a foreign people; item,
that he took the account of Daniel with the weeks before him. Such
prophecies gave the old pious man so much guidance that he was able to
think that it must now be the time to

222 **L. 1, 226-228. On the Day of the Purification of Mary. W. XIII,
506-509.** 223

that Christ should be born. But above this the Holy Spirit brought him
even further, so that he certainly thought he would still experience it,
and see the Lord Christ with his eyes and take him into his arms.

5 Therefore, at the very hour when Mary and Joseph, according to the
custom of the law, go to the temple to present the child to the Lord and
to redeem it with a sacrifice, old Simeon also comes to the temple, not
by chance or as he used to do, but because he has foreknowledge in his
heart through the Holy Spirit, and thinks, "Now is the hour when God
has put me off; now I will find in the temple what I have never found in
it, but for so long have waited for with great desire. He soon
approaches the child, takes it from its mother's arms with a happy
heart, hugs and kisses it, and preaches a short but very beautiful
sermon to everyone about what he thinks of this child.

(6) This will have been a very strange sermon to the people, but
especially the priests will have thought old Simeon a fool. For the
infant Jesus was a six-week-old child, like any other; and there was
still the vexation of being of poor people, who had no reputation. But
Simeon is not mistaken, and says freely: "The child is the only one we
must enjoy, if we want to be saved in any other way, not only we Jews,
but also the Gentiles and all the world. Dear old Simeon, how do you
know this? How do you see it in him? Is it a child like any other child?
Many such children are brought into the temple all the year round, and
they are great lords, because they have a special splendor with them.
Who told you that this child is the Savior?

This is the true miracle and revelation of the Holy Spirit, which Joseph
and Mary must marvel at and conclude that the Holy Spirit is in the old
man and speaks from him. Otherwise it was impossible that Simeon should
know what they both, Mary and Joseph, had heard and learned from the
angel alone.

8. from this you can see what a

Church, and how the Holy Spirit enlightened and governed them. In
Jerusalem were the chief priests, Herod, the scribes, the Levites and
the Pharisees, who cared neither for the Scriptures nor for the Messiah,
but only that they might live in great honor, power and splendor. On the
other hand, there was a poor, small, little group, Mary and Joseph,
Zacharias and Elizabeth, the shepherds, Simeon and Hannah the
prophetess, who had their hope and comfort not in worldly things, but in
the promise of Christ; they waited for it, they rejoiced in it, and it
was granted to them. But the chief priests had to go behind.

9 So it is still today: the true church is a poor, small, miserable,
despised little group, which has its comfort in God and his word, there
it deals with; otherwise it cares for nothing. On the other hand, the
pope and his crowd, who have the name as if they were the church, know
nothing about God, about Christ and his word; they should also know
nothing about it, since they only care about the temporal, and therefore
want to be praised as Christians, that they have more power, authority,
money and goods, than other common Christians.

(10) There is no need to be angry with either part. The high priests
have office, and sit in it, but are not the true church. Just as the
pope and bishops also have the office, they are neither church nor
Christians; otherwise they would not persecute the word, but accept and
promote it. Mary and Joseph, Simeon and Hannah, on the other hand, are
bad, simple folk whom no one respects. But they alone have Christ and
know Him, with whom the Holy Spirit dwells, guiding and leading them so
that they may know Christ and be saved.

I say that one should not be angry with either part. Let no one think
that because the pope and his company sit in a great office and power,
they cannot be wrong, they must be God's people. No, such is missing
here, as you see, since Christ was born. On the other hand, one should
not despise the poor little crowd, nor should one think, "What should
these people know that is special? For God

224 **L. 1, 228-230. on the day of the purification of Mary. W. XIII,
50S-511.** 225

He leads his kingdom on earth in such a way that the wise and
intelligent do not desire it, but the poor and miserable will rejoice in
it, for they have and know no consolation: whereas those take comfort in
their power, authority, riches and other things. That is enough of the
first part of this story, that the old Simeon recognizes the child Jesus
through the Holy Spirit, that he is the right Christian.

(12) Now let us also take his sermon before us, in which he teaches us
how he will comfort this little child and how he will enjoy it.
According to this, what it will do for others in the whole world, so
that we may also learn to know the Lord Christ and be saved. Earlier the
evangelist said that an answer had been given to the old man Simeon by
the Holy Spirit, "that he should not see death, because he had seen the
Christ of the Lord before. When this was fulfilled in the temple, and he
saw the child Jesus with his eyes and took him in his arms, he was happy
and of good cheer, and said:

**O Lord, now let your servant go in peace, as you have said.**

13 That is, now I will gladly die without fear and terror, yes, with all
joy. This is a wonderful and strange speech. For the way the world tends
to behave when it comes to the trains and death approaches is before our
eyes. There is no joy, but only unrest, anxiety, distress, fear, terror,
weeping and crying. And it is impossible for nature to do otherwise; as
can be seen in the unreasonable animals, since it is only a natural
death.

(14) But we men have a death, that is, the death of sins; for it is
because of sins that he is laid out for us. But what a timid heart sin
makes us, we all experience. Therefore our death is innumerably more
severe and terrible than the death of other creatures, for we must fear
God's wrath and judgment, which follows death and lasts forever. If
this were not the case, a person would not take so much pleasure in
death. It also hurts to lose one's wife and child, good friends,
beautiful houses and other things that one loves from earth,

But it is still nothing compared to the misery of knowing that we are
sinners and have God's judgment before us and are not safe from death
for a moment, can neither protect us from it nor save us.

Therefore the world turns back the song of dear Simeon and sings when
the hour comes: O God, I have not been your servant and now I am going
away in discord; my heart is anxious and sorrowful, I do not know where
to go or where not to go. What I suffer here on earth I know well, but
what I will get there I cannot know, and I still have to worry about
God's wrath, punishment and eternal damnation. So are the hearts of all
men, when it comes to this hour, that they should depart from here. And
it is impossible for reason to take comfort here or to think other
thoughts; it must be despondent and fearful and afraid.

Therefore it is an art above all art, if we could only learn and form in
ourselves that Simeon has such different thoughts. He is old, sees death
before him, yes, he feels it in his whole body, in all his limbs, since
it approaches from day to day, the longer, the closer; just as old
people decrease daily. But he does not allow himself to be challenged,
wishes that it will happen soon, says that he is undaunted and does not
care at all that he is to die, yes, death is welcome to him because he
has seen the Savior; for if that were not the case, there could be no
joy or glad heart in dying.

(17) Now what does such a heart do? He was also a human being, did not
always do what he should have done, and therefore must also admit his
guilt before God, that he is a poor sinner. But how do sin and peace go
together? Sin and strife, that is, an evil conscience, rhyme with each
other; but peace cannot suffer sin. Nevertheless, as Simeon does not let
death make him despondent nor frighten him, so he does not let sin take
away peace in his heart. Let this be a high, excellent, supernatural
art, which we should gladly learn and be able to do; for we

**226** 8.1, 230-232. On the day of the Purification of Mary. W. mi,
sn-si4. **227**

will also have to face such hardship and peril one day. Dear Simeon is
not envious, and will gladly share this excellent art with us, and says
where such a peaceful heart comes from:

**For (**he says) **my eyes have seen your Savior.**

18 He speaks of the child Jesus and gives him the name and calls him a
savior. Whether he asked the mother beforehand what the child's name
was, or not, as it is well to be believed, he nevertheless gives the
name correctly and finely, and baptizes the child just as the angel did,
that he is a Savior, and such a Savior who is called the Savior of God,
that is, whom God Himself has appointed and ordained as a Savior. Your
love heard of this name at Christmas and on New Year's Day.

God has already ordained saviors in worldly matters, such as: worldly
authorities in government, father and mother in the home, physicians in
sickness, lawyers in legal matters. Therefore, we should not think that
such a savior is the infant Jesus, because Simeon would be helped
against death and sin just as little as by the authorities, by father
and mother, who are sinners themselves and cannot protect themselves
against death. Since Simeon freely confesses that he is departing from
this life in peace, because he has seen this Savior, it must follow that
this child is a Savior against sin, death and hell; otherwise he would
not be comforted. Mark this well; for it can be spoken soon, but it
comprehends exceedingly much. For first of all this is true, it is only
this one child to whom Simeon gives this name. From this it must follow
that whatever is apart from this child, it may be called and appear as
it pleases, and it may be taken for whatever it pleases, it cannot be a
savior who can help against sin and death; but whoever takes it for a
savior must be deceived and remain in sin and death.

20 Therefore Simeon soon attacks the Law of Mosiah and the whole
priesthood with the sacrifice and other worship with this name in the
mouth, wants to protect everyone from it.

He warns that no one should accept or consider it a savior: whoever has
nothing more than the law, sacrifices and his good works, must go to the
devil with it, because nothing will help. For the fact that he alone
calls the infant a savior, it follows that nothing else but this infant
can help against sin and death. What do the Jews, who accept and boast
of their sacrifice and Ten Commandments as a Savior, boast about? What
do the unholy pope and his mob, who make the mass, pilgrimages,
indulgences and other works into a savior, boast about? For it is
decided that this name belongs to this child alone, and to no other work
or creature in heaven and earth.

(21) Therefore Simeon has actually set his words, saying, "My eyes
have seen your Savior," "your Savior," whom you, Father in heaven,
have ordained and made a Savior. For the world cannot leave it alone, it
also wants to set and make saviors against death and sin. A Jew thinks,
if he does not eat pork, keeps the Sabbath, is circumcised 2c., it shall
be helpful to him to obtain grace with God. A monk thinks that if he
vows himself to a monastery for the rest of his life, it will help him.
The monk will hold on to this saint, the other one to another saint, so
that he can pray for him and be his savior. And especially there was
neither measure nor end of foolish works and idolatrous worship in the
priesthood. The pious Simeon wanted to warn everyone and bring us there,
because we must confess that we need a savior, that we should take this
one, whom we did not create, but God Himself ordained; because we cannot
lack, we must be helped; because that is why this child is here, God,
His heavenly Father, has prepared it for us, so that it should help us.

(22) Therefore, whoever has this Savior, who is God's Savior, can
have a peaceful, quiet heart; for be death so terrible, sin so powerful,
the devil so wicked and poisonous always, we have God's Savior, that
is, an almighty eternal Savior; who is strong enough to rescue us from
the

228 **2.1, 232-234. On the Day of the Purification of Mary. W. XIII,
514-517.** 229

Death into life, from sin into righteousness.

(23) Everything depends on us opening our eyes with the dear old
father Simeon, and looking at this child, taking him into our arms,
loving him and kissing him, that is, that we place our joy, trust,
comfort and heart in him. For if it is firm and certain in our hearts
that this infant is God's Savior, through whom God wants to help us
against sin and death, then it must follow that we are satisfied and let
neither sin nor death frighten us, for we have a Savior against them.

24 But how does this child help? Not in any other way, for as the
Baptist John says, he is God's lamb, and takes our sin upon himself,
and sacrifices himself for it on the cross. That the infant Jesus is the
only, righteous Savior, who redeems from sin and death, without any
action on our part, only through his death and resurrection. For the
fact that a Christian should be pious and keep himself in God's will
does not earn him heaven, nor does he thereby obtain forgiveness of
sins; but it is an obedience that God wants. But the one who does not
want to obey God becomes disobedient to God and remains in sin. That
therefore this is the right, certain and definite art: Whoever wants to
escape from death and be free from sins, let him come to this Savior,
whom God Himself has ordained to take our sins upon Himself, to pay for
them, and thus to redeem us. Whoever does this will be able to say with
Simeon, "Let death come," or any other trouble, as they wish: "Lord,
now let your servant go in peace. But he who sets his heart and trust on
something else will have no peace, but a fearful, despondent heart; for
he has no Savior, and therefore must remain in death and condemnation.

(25) Now we should not think that Simeon had any advantage over us
because he saw the infant Jesus with his own eyes and took him into his
arms, for such bodily seeing did not help him. The other Jews also saw
him, but they still went to the devil. But this helps Simeon, even
though he is with the

He could not see with his eyes more than a baby, as other six-week-old
babies were, that he nevertheless believed that this baby was the
Savior. He could not see this with his eyes, but had to believe with his
heart. Do likewise, and Simeon will have little or no advantage. For
though he sees what you do not see with your eyes, you believe what he
believes, and such faith helps you from sins and death, as it helped
him. What more could you wish for? And this is the reason that Simeon
continues to preach about this child, and not only wants to enjoy his
company, but also takes others into such company, and says:

**Which you have prepared before all peoples.**

This child is a savior against death and sin. And Simeon consoles
himself. But he says, "God was not concerned with me alone; there are
more of them in this gracious company. For God has prepared this Savior
before all nations, that he should be the Savior of all the world, and
not of me alone, nor of his mother alone.

(27) Again, learn that Simeon makes no distinction at all between Jews
and Gentiles, though there was a great difference between them in
worship and other things. But he does not care about that; he sees that
if one is to speak of sins and eternal death, there is no difference.
Jews as well as Gentiles are sinners and guilty of eternal death, and it
does not help them at all that they are circumcised, called God's
people, have the law and keep it; this does not absolve them of sins and
death. But if they are to be made free, it must be through this Savior
alone. Therefore he throws everything into one lump and says: "God has
provided and prepared this Savior for all peoples. Just as the promise
made to Abraham also says that through his seed all the families of the
earth will be blessed. He who calls all the families of the earth, or,
as Simeon says here, all the nations, excludes neither Jews nor
Gentiles. But if all generations are to be blessed, then it follows that
all generations under

230 **L. 1, 234-236. On the Day of the Purification of Mary. W. XIII,
517-519.** 231

are under the curse and wrath of God. So, if this Savior is prepared for
all nations, it follows that all nations are without help and Savior, if
they do not have this Savior. This is one thing, that Simeon makes all
things equal and says: Jews and Gentiles are damned sinners; but if they
want to be saved, it must be through this Savior alone.

Secondly, pay careful attention to these words, and think about what
good comfort they bring. All our troubles, worries and cares are because
we cannot deny our sins, that we must fear God if we are to die today or
tomorrow, that he will deal with us according to our merits and punish
us for our sins. We cannot believe that He will be merciful, forgive
sins and make us blessed for nothing. But what are such thoughts
basically other than as if God were an unpleasant God, a serious judge
who overlooks nothing but wants to let the sharpness go and use it? Thus
our hearts judge God, are therefore afraid, fall into despair, know
neither counsel nor help to stand before God's judgment. But what does
Simeon say here? He portrays God far differently than you think in your
heart. For if it were God's opinion to punish sinners and not show them
mercy, what would it take for Him to give us Christ, who would be our
Redeemer? But now Simeon says that God has prepared such a Savior, set
him apart, and ordained that all nations should enjoy him and be saved
through him.

Therefore, it must be God's will and mind, as Paul also says in 1
Timothy 2:4, that all men shall be saved through Christ the Savior, not
temporally, but against sin and death; for this Savior belongs to it,
whom God has prepared for all peoples. Who then will fear or be afraid
of such God, who would like it to be well with us in eternity, and
himself decrees and creates everything that belongs to it?

(30) Now that some, and even most, are condemned and not saved, it is
not really God's will that they should be so.

and grant the people such a great accident; but that the people do not
comply with such a gracious will of God, nor do they want to accept this
Savior, whom God has ordained to help all. If a rich man wanted to give
enough to all the beggars in a city, but some would not go to him and
take money from him, what would be the fault that such beggars remained
beggars and did not also become rich? Not really the rich man's fault,
but their own, because they are such lazy rascals, and do not want to
find themselves where they are destined. The same is true of the world.
Simeon, the pious arch-father, does not lie. God has prepared this
Savior so that all nations may have him, enjoy him and be saved through
him.

31 If then the Jews are in despair, and will not be; neither will the
pope, nor the Turks, nor the Gentiles be; neither wilt thou be: how
shall he be dealt with? So you may always go and look for other saviors,
and see how you will fare. God will not do anything special for you. If
you want to be helped, accept this child. If you believe that God will
be merciful to you for his sake, forgive your sin and make you blessed,
you will certainly be saved, for he is the Savior against sin and death.
But if thou wilt not be helped, that is, if thou wilt not accept him,
then abide in God's wrath and condemnation, and thank no one for it,
but thyself, and thy abominable, terrible unbelief and stubbornness.

32 Therefore there is no lack of God, he has prepared the Savior; this
is an indication that he will not be ungracious and let us perish
without help. Yes, that is more, he has prepared him for all nations, so
that everyone may enjoy him: not only Simeon, Mary, Peter, Paul, but all
nations, no one excluded. Whoever needs help against sin and death shall
find it, for God, as a gracious Father, has decreed it. Therefore,
beware that you do not exclude yourself through your unbelief and deny
yourself this help, which God has not only promised you, but has also
provided most faithfully, as Simeon preaches here. For that one does not

[232 **u. i, M-M. On the Day of the Purification of Mary. W. xm,
519-522.** 233]{.underline}

might think it has a different opinion with these words, he adds finely
rounded, how and for what God has prepared this Savior, and speaks:

**A light to enlighten the Gentiles, and for the praise of your people
Israel.**

(33) The opinion is clearly stated, first, what it means, "all
nations," that is, the Jews and the Gentiles; and second, for what
purpose such a Savior is prepared. The Gentiles are in deep darkness.
Because they have no word of God, they cannot know anything about God.
The devil and God are one to them, for they fear God as well as the
devil; indeed, they often seek and hope for help from the devil rather
than from God, as is evident. Therefore, all kinds of sins follow, where
the knowledge of God is not, such as idolatry, blasphemy, and all kinds
of naughtiness and bad behavior. These are the pagans.

And God prepares this Savior also for the Gentiles, as the words clearly
indicate. But for what purpose? That he would leave them in such
darkness, that he would condemn them? No, do not blame God for such
things, otherwise you would do Him the greatest injustice; but for this
purpose He is preparing this Savior, that He should enlighten the
Gentiles, that is, bring them to the Word and knowledge of God and thus
make them blessed. This is what Christ is to do to the Gentiles, the
great desperate sinners; and he is to do it out of God the Father's
order, who wills it so.

(35) Surely this must be a gracious God, since there is no gall, no
wrath, nor unkindness, but only grace, favor, love and kindness, as the
Lord Christ says, John 3:16: "God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. For this reason we cannot put any higher
dishonor on God, because we would think of Him that because we are
sinners, He would therefore make us enemies and let us perish in sins.
And yet we feel how such things are so deeply ingrained in our hearts;
otherwise we would have more courage and a glad heart, and not be so
timid and fearful.

Here again we see how St. Simeon studied diligently in the prophets. For
he did not learn such an art from himself, but just as he learned from
the prophecy of Jacob and Daniel the time when Christ was to come, and
just as he learned from the prophecy of Abraham that this Savior
belonged to all peoples or nations on earth, so that they might be
redeemed from the curse and helped against sin and death, so he also
studied and learned from the prophet Isaiah that this little child
should be a light to the Gentiles. For thus says God, Isa. 49, 6: "It
is a small thing that you" (he speaks with Christ) "are my servant to
raise up the generations of Jacob, and to bring again that which is
neglected in Israel; but I have made you a light of the Gentiles, that
you may be my salvation to the end of the world." Simeon must have
studied and taken in this saying, otherwise he would not have put it so
artfully into this short sermon or song. So now the Gentiles shall enjoy
the infant Jesus, that he may be their light, give them the gospel, and
bring them to the knowledge of God and into everlasting joy; for this he
is prepared.

(37) The Jews have not passed away in such dreadful darkness as the
Gentiles; for they have had the word of God, and are called the people
of God; therefore there shineth unto them a glorious light, which the
Gentiles have not. What then is Christ to do among the Jews? Or what has
God prepared him to do among the Jews? He is to be their "prize." For
although God had highly adorned this people with His word, worship and
all kinds of gifts, our disgrace still clung to them, that they lay in
sins and under death, they could not help themselves. Such shame was far
more and greater than his outward honor. Therefore Simeon says: "The
Jews have had an honor in the world before all the Gentiles, but it is a
small honor compared to the damage that still lies on them. But now they
shall come to glory, so that they shall not only be God's people on
earth for a time, but also in heaven forever through this Savior. This
means

**234 L. 1, 239.24".** On the Sunday of Estomihi. **W. xm, 522-52s.
235**

Isaiah also says that Christ is to raise up Jacob and bring Israel back.

38 This is the beautiful, glorious sermon of Christ, what he teaches,
how we should all enjoy his salvation, and through him, as our one and
only Savior, be saved, and therefore have a peaceful, joyful heart in
death, dying, and all kinds of misfortune and temptation. This should be
preached today, because especially the history of this feast and the
dear old father Simeon with his prophecy give reason for it.

But what is happening? The pope has a lot of other things to do today.
First of all, he must consecrate wax and candles, which is very
important. For how else could a Christian die if a consecrated burning
light were held before him? Nor would it be for the poor
child-worshippers; for where they did not make little crosses of such
consecrated candles and stick them on the walls, the devil would lead
them away. O shameful, wicked papists: since you should take the infant
Jesus in your arms with the pious Simeon, and consecrate both the dying
and the mourners to him, as to the only consolation, you want to perform
such a great work with a wax candle; this shall drive away the devil and
ward off eternal death.

After that, they held a procession, each carrying a burning light in his
hands. This is today's glorious service in the Pabst's churches; and
such candle-carrying is supposed to signify the procession when Joseph
and Mary went into the church with the infant. After that, there are
many interpretations of what the candles mean. If you ask where such a
manner and service came from, they themselves, the papists, answer that
it was a pagan custom to walk around the towns and villages with lighted
candles on the first day of the feast; this was changed by Pope Sergius,
who ordered it to be a proper service. But what do you think of this
pope and all papists, that they learn from the pagans how and what kind
of worship should be performed in the Christian church? Such blindness
is a vain reward, and comes from the fact that this glorious sermon of
the infant Jesus was left lying around and nothing was asked about it.

41 Therefore we should thank God diligently for this grace, that we have
been delivered from such blindness and now see the beautiful blessed
light that Simeon preaches about here. May our dear Father in heaven
graciously preserve such light, enlighten us with it, comfort us, make
us happy and blessed, amen.

**On Sunday Estomihi. *)**

**Luc. 18:31-43.**

And he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and all things shall be accomplished which were written by
the prophets concerning the Son of man. For he shall be delivered unto
the Gentiles; and he shall be mocked, and reviled, and spit upon; and
they shall scourge him, and kill him; and the third day he shall rise
again. But they heard none of these things, and the words were hid from
them, neither knew they what they spake. Now it came to pass, when he
was come nigh to Jericho, that a blind man sat by the way side begging.
When he heard the people passing by, he inquired what it was. Then they
told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by. And he cried out,
saying, JEsu, thou Son of David, have mercy on me. But they that went on
before afflicted him, that he should hold his peace. But he cried much
more, Son of David, have mercy on me. And Jesus held his peace, and
commanded him to be brought unto him. And when they had brought him nigh
unto him, he asked him, saying, What wilt thou that I should do unto
thee? And he said, Lord, that I may see. And Jesus said unto him, Be
thou seen; thy faith hath helped thee. And straightway he saw, and
followed him, and glorified GOD. And all the people who saw these things
praised God.

*) Held in the house, 1534.

236 **2.1, 240-242. On Sunday Estomihi. W. XIII, 525-528.** 237

(1) In today's Gospel there are two parts. The first is the prophecy
in which the Lord tells the twelve apostles about his suffering. And
these are the words which the angels on Easter Day hold out to the women
at the tomb, saying, Luc. 24:6, 7: "Remember how he said unto you,
while he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of man must be delivered
into the hands of sinners, and be crucified, and the third day rise
again." For the Lord Jesus is now on his way from Galilee to Jerusalem,
where he stayed and was crucified. The other is the miracle of the blind
man.

(2) Of this prophecy the evangelist tells us three times that the
disciples did not understand. For they thought he spoke strange words,
having a peculiar understanding. For this reason it was as if they heard
a strange, unknown language, of which they could not understand a word.
And that was because their hearts were so set that they thought: This
man performs so many miraculous signs, he raises the dead, he gives
sight to the blind, 2c. that we must see and grasp that God is with him.
Therefore, he must become a great lord in time, and we, his servants,
will also be princes and great lords. For who would want to harm such a
mighty man, who can heal and drive out death and all plagues with a
word? Therefore their heart was thus: God is too good in him, he will
not let him suffer anything; but that his words are as if he were
speaking how he should suffer and die, that will actually have another
interpretation. This was the simplicity of the apostles.

(3) This shows that all the works of God are of this kind: if they are
spoken of before they are done, they cannot be understood; but when they
are done, they are understood and stand. So John reports several times
that Christ's disciples only understood afterwards what he had spoken
to them. Therefore, God's word and faith belong together. For when God
speaks, he cannot speak otherwise than of things which are far beyond
reason, and which we naturally cannot understand nor comprehend;
therefore it is to be believed. Now when one has believed it, than

then one should also know that it is true and understand it correctly.

4. as if to give an example: God's word teaches us about the
resurrection of the dead, which reason does not understand. Therefore it
can be seen that worldly people, and above all the scholars, mock us and
take us for fools, that we believe it, and let ourselves be persuaded
that there is life after this life. So that God became man and was born
of a virgin into the world, this also reason does not understand;
therefore it must be believed until we come there and see it, and say:
Now I understand it, yes, I also see that it is true what I believed
before. So that one should obtain God's grace and mercy through water
baptism without all merit, and receive forgiveness of sin through
absolution, is also very false in the sight of reason; therefore it
considers Christians foolish and foolish to believe such things. For it
thinks: If one is to reconcile God, something higher and better is
needed, namely good works, which make us sour and hurt. As we have the
example of Pope Paul before our eyes, who points people to their own
merit through his preaching.

5 For reason will not accept that it should believe that through baptism
and faith in Christ alone all that belongs to salvation should be
accomplished; for it sees that the word is a small thing; he who leads
it is also a poor, frail sinner. That a man should stake his life and
limb for eternity on such words is ridiculous. Therefore, even if God's
word is spoken to people so clearly and plainly, reason still does not
understand it, it still does not believe it. For this reason, the gospel
must have and keep its name before the world as heresy and a doctrine of
the devil, since people are seduced with it and taught that they should
do no good; reason cannot judge otherwise.

(6) Therefore, learn to believe the word of God with simplicity, and
say in your hearts, "Well, if I do not see, grasp or feel that it is
so, then I hear that God says it. He is so powerful that he can make it
true, so that in his time and in that life I will grasp it and
understand it, even see it.

238 **L. 1, 242-244.** On the Sunday of Estomihi. **W. XIII, PP28-531.**
239

and grab if I don't understand it right now.

(7) This is also seen in examples. Before David attacks Goliath, he
thinks he will strike and kill him, as he says to Saul: "The Lord who
delivered me from the lion and the bear will also deliver me from this
Philistine. 17, 36. 37. Item, to the Philistine himself he says v. 46:
"This day the LORD will deliver thee into mine hand, that I may smite
thee, and take thy head from thee." Everyone has heard these words from
the mouth of David, but they have considered them a lie and a mockery.
And it is true that if it had been David's word alone, and not God's,
it would have been nothing. But they are God's words, and David
believes them before he hears them. That is why it comes out this way,
and it does not matter if it was disgraceful to others, and they could
not believe that it would happen this way and come true. For it was
unbelievable to reason that David, who was considered a small person
compared to Goliath, should throw down and cut down such a great, strong
giant with one stone. But David believed and did it. Then one could see,
yes, grasp that it was true and not a lie.

8 But before, when only the word was there that David said, "The Lord
will deliver you into my hand today," it was the greatest lie, yes, an
impossible thing. For reason makes its calculation, as Saul did in 1
Sam. 17: David is a boy, a shepherd, who has not been in any war, and
comes with a stick and a sling, as if he wanted to fight off a dog; as
Goliath scornfully reproaches him and says: "Am I a dog, that you come
to me with a stick?" But the giant comes with his armor and great
spear. Is not this a likeness of armor, and a ridiculous thing to
behold, that the little young archer David should do such a thing, which
no man in all the camp may be afraid to do? Well, David didn't see it
himself, but he believes it, that God has blasphemed the

would punish his enemy and help him; and it came to pass thus.

9 Thus it goes through and through: God's word and work is always
considered impossible before it happens. Nevertheless, it happens, and
is exceedingly easy and small when it comes to pass. But before it comes
to pass, it is not to be known or understood, but to be believed. For
how sin is washed away by baptism, and how we shall rise from the dead
on the last day, is something that reason will never understand;
especially because it is seen that many a holy man is eaten by birds,
torn to pieces by dogs and wolves; some are burned to ashes, and the
ashes are thrown into running water: as the pope did to St. John Hus at
Costnitz. So reason thinks: Where will our Lord God take the body again?
Well, says God, I say it, it is my word. Therefore, it is not only
unbelievable, but also impossible to see. But if you believe it, it
shall come true; for I am almighty and can make all things out of
nothing.

What were we a hundred years ago? No more than the child that will be
born twenty, thirty, forty years after us. Since God is able to make all
things out of nothing, He will also be able to make something out of
that which was something. Therefore, one should not look at whether a
thing is possible, but one should say: God has said it; therefore it
will happen, if it would otherwise be impossible. For even though I
cannot see or grasp it, He is the Lord who can make an impossible thing
into a possible thing, and out of nothing into everything.

(11) Therefore they are exceedingly grievous fools, who would measure
our Lord GOD's word and work according to their reason. For since I
cannot bring a dead man to life, should God not be able to do so either?
Therefore, let everyone beware that he does not measure God's word and
work according to his own sense and ability. For if our reason could
grasp and comprehend everything, our Lord God could have kept his mouth
shut. But because He speaks, it is a

240 **8.1, 244-246. On Sunday Estomihi. W. XIII, 831-535.** 241

Sign that our reason does not know nor understand everything, and that
God's word is above and against all reason; as can be seen in
experience.

12. I proclaim the forgiveness of sins, and absolve or release you from
the command of Christ. Then you hear the word, and when you have heard
it and are absolved from sins, you still do not feel that God and His
angels are smiling at you. You know nothing of such joy, of which the
Lord says, "The angels in heaven rejoice over one sinner who
converts."

13 So when you are baptized, you have the skin and the flesh after
baptism, which you had before baptism. But shall both absolution and
baptism be nothing? Oh no. Therefore learn to say: God baptized me. God
has absolved me from sins through His Word. Therefore I firmly believe,
even though I do not see or feel it, that God looks upon me and calls me
His Son; and Christ, my Lord, calls me His brother; and the dear angels
have a special great joy over me. These things, I say, I believe, and
have no doubt at all. If the pope does not believe it, it does not
matter; I will believe it, for God will not lie to me in His word.

(14) The disciples here could not do this art; otherwise they would
not have discussed it long, or wondered; they would have decided: Just
as he speaks, so shall it be done; for the man cannot lie, let it be
done when or how he wills. But the blind man, as the evangelist reports,
can do such art exceedingly well. His eyes are so blind that he cannot
see a thing with them, but as soon as he hears the word, "Behold," he
believes. That is why it happens to him as he believes. Such a word,
while it is still alone, speaks of a thing that is not there. For the
blind man's eyes are still closed; but soon after the word, because he
believes, the work follows, just as he believed. So the disciples also
should have done. Even though they did not see as they could, they still
believed because they had his word. For nothing belongs to the word but
faith.

This is the first thing we should learn from today's Gospel, namely, to
believe the Word of God with all our heart, without wavering. The pope
knows nothing about such faith, nor does he teach anything about it. But
you should know and be able to know that there is a Christian heart that
not only hears God's word of forgiveness of sins, but also firmly
believes it, and does not doubt it, even if it does not feel or see
anything about it. For this is to be found and followed only afterwards.
When we have firmly believed, the experience will also be found that we
will say: Oh, I am glad that I have believed. But the others, as,
Papists, Turks, Jews, who have not believed God, will stand and cry out:
Woe is me, that we have not believed! Who would have thought of that? So
they will have to believe in the end. But it will be lost, and they will
not be able to help, it has lasted too long.

(16) This is the first thing, that we should not be offended at the
word of God, even though it be wonderful, false and impossible; but
stand firm on it: If God has spoken it, then it must be done. For no one
should ask whether it is possible, but only see whether God has spoken
it. If God has spoken it, He is so powerful and true that He can do it.
Therefore it should be believed; but he who does not want to believe it
blasphemes God to the highest degree. We should diligently guard against
such sin, so that we do not doubt God's word, let God make it sound as
false as it ever can. For what God speaks will certainly be true. So we
have God's word in baptism, in the Lord's Supper, in absolution and in
the sermon; God Himself speaks to us, absolves us of sins. We should
believe this and consider it true, and not doubt it. This is the first
part.

17 In the other piece, about the blind man, the evangelist teaches us a
real begging art, that one should learn to be horny before God, be
insolent, and always stop. For he who is stupid soon lets himself be
rejected and is not fit for begging. One must take off one's little cap
of shame and think that our Lord God wants us to be horny and to beg.

**242 L. 1, 246-249.** On the Sunday of Estomihi. **W. XIII, S35-S38.
243**

should stop. For it is his pleasure and honor that he wants to give
much, and it pleases him well that one should do much good to him.
Therefore, one should do it as unashamedly as he likes. For he who wants
to wait until he is worthy of God's giving him something will certainly
never ask for anything. Therefore, it is best to take off one's cap of
shame and open one's mouth quickly and say: "Lord, I am in great
trouble and distress here and there, both in body and soul, and
therefore need your help and comfort; you will not deny me this, but
will certainly grant it, according to your gracious promise.

The beggars in the streets and alleys know this art well, but people do
not like it, get tired of it, and reject such beggars with bad words.
But our Lord God likes such beggars, who stop confidently and do not
want to be turned away. As we see here in this blind man, he would have
liked to have healthy eyes. Therefore, when he hears the noise passing
by, he first asks what it is. When he hears of Jesus, he begins to cry
out, "Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me. Those who go before him
threaten him to be silent, but he does not turn back; indeed, the more
he is resisted, the more confidently he cries out.

(19) This is a true lecher and a fine beggar, such as our Lord God
loves. Therefore we should take good note of this example, and also come
before the Lord Christ and ask him: "O Lord, I am a poor sinner; grant
that your kingdom may come to me also, and forgive me my sin. Help here,
help there 2c. He who thus begs and impudently entreats does right, and
our Lord God is pleased; for he is not so disgusting as we men. We can
be made weary, unamused and unwilling with lust; but it is a great honor
to him that he should be thought a great lord, and not desist, but say,
"O Lord, it is your honor to be glorified by my begging of you.
Therefore, dear Lord, see not that I am unworthy, but that I am in need
of thy help, and that thou art the only right helper of all sinners.
Therefore it is in your honor that I call upon you, so that I cannot
escape your help. 2c.

(20) Such insolent prayer, which perseveres and is not deterred, is
pleasing to God. As we see here with the blind man; as soon as he begins
to ask, the Lord immediately calls him to Himself, and everyone has to
get out of the way. And he, the blind man, is not ashamed of anything
and lets himself be led to him. Immediately the Lord asks him: "What do
you want me to do to you? You can see how the Lord's hands are open. As
if to say, "Ask what you will, and it shall be done to you. The blind
man does not tarry long, and says, "I pray that I may see. The Lord
answered, "Yes, you shall see. This is what it means to ask insolently,
but to be answered very graciously. This is what we should learn to do
for the blind man, and so we should lead him out with our prayers and
present our need to Christ, believing for sure that he will hear us and
grant us.

(21) In the priesthood we ourselves despised our prayers and thought:
If others do not pray for us, we will get nothing. But no Christian
should do such a thing; but, as soon as the need comes, run into the
chamber and fall on his knees, saying, "Lord, here I come, needing this
and that, though I am unworthy. But see my need and my sorrow, and help
for your glory's sake. So learn to pray unashamedly, and do not doubt
that God will give you what is good and useful to you for the sake of
Christ. For the promise is clear and certain: "Whatever you ask in the
name of Jesus shall be done for you. But see to it that you do not grow
weary, but persevere. The more you do it, the better the Lord likes it;
he will not let you tire of your prayers. Yes, your prayer would be so
strong and earnest, he should give you the same hour, what you desire,
which otherwise he would not yet do and would delay for a long time; but
he hears and grants you for the sake of anxious prayer. How I hope that
the last day will not be so long in coming, but will come sooner than we
can think through the anxious groaning of Christians. As the Lord Luc.
18. gives a similitude of the widow, who would not relent, when the
judge, who asked neither God nor man, said, "I can no longer suffer the
widow to persecute me.

244 **L. i, 24s. 2P.** On the Sunday of Invocavit. **W. xm, 538-540.**
245

so deceive; I will help her, that I may depart from her, and be
henceforth delivered from the running. "But should not GOD," saith
Christ, "also save his elect, which cry unto him day and night, and
should have patience over them? I tell you, he will save them in a short
time." As if he wanted to say: Prayer makes God hurry, otherwise he
would not hurry so.

(22) Therefore prayer serves that we may obtain a thing the sooner,
which otherwise would be longer delayed; yea, since nothing would come
of it at all. So that this example serves that we should be impudent
beggars and learn to pray, and not let ourselves be weary, but say,
"Lord, it is true that I am a poor, unworthy sinner.

I do, but nevertheless I must have this or that; give it to me. For here
it is not a question of whether I am pious or not; a few things are
enough, that I am needy, and that thou wilt gladly give what is useful
to me for body and soul.

(23) So if you pray and hold fast, he will surely say to you, as to
this blind man, "What do you want me to do? Be thou sighted; thy faith
hath helped thee." For to pray and not to believe is to mock our Lord
God. But faith alone is based on the fact that God, for the sake of
Christ, His Son and our Lord, will be merciful to us, hear us, protect
us, save us and make us blessed. May our dear Lord and Savior, Christ
Jesus, help us to do this, Amen.

**On Sunday Invocavit. *)**

**Matth. 4, 1-11.**

Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, that he might be
tempted of the devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, he hungered. And the tempter came unto him, and said, If thou be
the Son of GOD, let these stones become bread. And he answered and said,
It is written: Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Then the devil brought him with him
into the holy city, and set him upon the pinnacle of the temple, and
said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, let thyself down: for it is
written: He shall command his angels concerning thee, and they shall
bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Then said JEsus unto him, Again, it is also written: Thou shalt not
tempt thy Lord God. Again the devil took him up into a very high
mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them. And said unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt
fall down and worship me. Then said JEsus unto him, Remove thyself from
me, Satan: for it is written: Thou shalt worship GOD thy LORD, and him
only shalt thou serve. Then the devil left him; and behold, the angels
came to him and ministered to him.

In this gospel you hear how the Lord Jesus was tempted three times after
his baptism, after he had been forty days and forty nights in the
wilderness and had eaten nothing; or as Lucas says, these three
temptations lasted the whole forty days, so that he went about with one
many days, and perhaps not according to the order as Matthew tells here.

*) Held in the house, 1534.

Now this is a broad gospel, especially if one wants to apply it to the
whole of Christendom, which is also tempted by famine and persecution,
by heresy, and finally with the empire of the world; as the histories,
whoever has respect for them, finely show. But we do not want to go so
far this time, but stick to the common doctrine. And first of all, let
us take this example of our dear Lord Christ before us, in which we see
that every Christian is a Christian,

**246 D. 4, 250-252.** On the Sunday of Invocavit. **W. XIII, 540-544.
247**

As soon as he is baptized, he is ordered into the army against the evil
devil, who is charged against him and persecutes him because he is
alive. If then the poisonous enemy cannot, by his temptation, bring
about the fall of the Christians and prevail against them, he does as he
did with Christ, and sees that he hangs them on the cross and kills
them.

(3) All Christians are in such a position. For this is to be well
reckoned, because he has not spared the Lord Christ himself, but has set
himself up against him so well, he will spare us much less, since he
knows that we are much weaker and less equipped. Therefore we may send
ourselves out of such a journey, and learn from the Lord Christ here how
we may also meet such an enemy, so that he must desist from us. But this
happens only through faith in God and His Word. Whoever has such armor
and needs it rightly will remain safe from the devil. But whoever does
not have it or needs it wrongly can neither be advised nor helped
against the poisonous enemy.

For this reason, every Christian should diligently attend to preaching
and to the Word of God, learning it diligently and practicing it;
besides this, he should always be in God's ears through earnest prayer,
that he may bring his kingdom to us and not lead us into temptation, but
graciously protect us from all evil.

Now it says here that the Lord Jesus was led by the Spirit into the
wilderness, that is, the Holy Spirit called him into the wilderness.
This is what the evangelist especially wanted to report, that one should
beware of his own devotion; since Christ himself did not go into the
wilderness out of his own devotion, nor did he wrestle with the devil
there; as many do, and undertake many things without God's word, out of
their own devotion. But it shall by no means be. No one shall begin
anything or run to serve God, unless he knows that God has commanded him
to do so, either by His word or by men who have power over us in God's
stead. For whoever does something without such a profession, as monks
and nuns have run into the monasteries, does not only do no service to
God, but also does no harm to God.

service, but does against the obedience of God.

(6) Therefore this example of Christ is good for us to consider, that
he did not run into the wilderness of his own accord, but was commanded
by the Holy Spirit; that we also may do these things, and not undertake
anything of our own devotion, but may boast and say in all that we do:
Let it be done in obedience and commandment of the word. You have often
heard this teaching, that one should take special care to be sure that
God has commanded it, and not do anything apart from His word.

(7) There is no need for a new commandment concerning the common
customs and works of love, for these are already commanded in the Ten
Commandments. Our Lord God commands everyone to hear God's word, to
love God, to call upon God, to be obedient to father and mother, not to
kill anyone, not to commit fornication, but to become married. All this
is God's creature and command; therefore, one must not ask the Holy
Spirit to call you or me specially to be married, to be father and
mother 2c. Such a command is there before. But to start something
special, to run into a monastery, and to serve God there, item, not to
eat meat, eggs, butter during the fast, not to sing Hallelujah during
the fast, there is no command nor word of God about it; therefore it is
a stinking dirt before God and no service of God.

8 Now let us also consider the temptations one by one. The first is that
the devil says to the Lord JEsu, seeing that he hungers: "If thou be
the Son of God, say that these stones become bread. This does not seem
to be such a hard challenge. For we think: What harm could it have done
Christ? He could easily have made stones into bread. If he had done more
and greater things! But he does not want to do it, because he
understands the devil very well in his language, who is not primarily
looking for Christ to do a miracle; but, as one can clearly see from
Christ's answer, he would like to take away his faith and trust in
God's mercy, and put the thought into his heart: God has forgotten you,
he does not want to take care of you, he wants to let you die of hunger,

248 **2.1, 252 -254'.** On the Sunday of Invocavit. **W. XIII,
544-547.** 249

and will not allow you a piece of bread. Therefore the Lord answers,
"Devil, not so; man does not live by bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds from the mouth of God. So this is the devil's suggestion,
that he should think only of bread, and pay no attention to God's word,
unless he has bread.

9 Such temptation still goes on today, that the devil puts such thoughts
into people's hearts: If you are God's son, God cannot be angry with
you. Therefore, now, be confident, be stingy, and be generous in the
world's trade; it will do you no harm, you cannot sin. For if God
should not want to grant you food and bread, he would have to be a bad
God and a merciless father. With such thoughts he turns citizens and
peasants into scoundrels, so that they continue to scrape and sting, and
think that God will not be angry because it is only a matter of daily
bread and food. I must, everyone thinks, take care of my wife and child
and provide enough for them 2c. So the devil puts a lid on sin with the
word, saying: You are the son of God. As if he wants to say: You cannot
sin or do wrong. As it is seen everywhere in the world, that no one is
conscience-stricken because he asked little of the word, and asks only
for bread or food. Therefore this temptation still goes on in the world,
that the devil makes light of the word, and drives people not to care so
much for the word as for the bread.

(10) Then must one learn and resist such temptation, saying, Devil,
thou wouldst gladly take me from the word; no, thou shalt not succeed.
For before I would lack the word of God, I would rather lack bread and
die of hunger. For it is ever better that the body should perish, than
that it should be preserved by food, and that the soul should die and be
lost forever. 2c. The devil does not like us to think such thoughts, and
therefore always gets in the way with temptation, and works so that we
only look at the fullness of our stomachs and despise God's word,
thinking

I do not need it, God is my Father, should He not grant me bread and
food?

(11) If any man would save himself from such temptation, let him learn
here from Christ that a man hath two kinds of bread. The first and best
bread, which comes from heaven, is the word of God. The other and lesser
is the temporal bread that grows out of the earth. If then I have the
first and best bread from heaven, and am not brought by it, then that
temporal bread shall not be lacking, nor shall it remain outside: rather
the stones should become bread. But the others, who leave the heavenly
bread and take only the temporal, when they have such a full belly, they
lie down and die. They cannot even eat the good, but must leave it
behind and die there eternally hungry. But it shall not be so.
Therefore, if the devil tempts you with persecution, lack, hunger and
sorrow, suffer and fast with Christ, because the Spirit is driving you
in this way, and do not abandon your trust in God's grace. Then the
dear angels will come and become your table servants, as the evangelist
says here at the end of Christ.

(12) This is the first part of the first challenge, that we should
learn to hold God's word in high esteem and believe it, and not let any
lack or misfortune move us to conclude that God is ungracious to us,
that He does not want to help us, that He has forgotten us. There is no
one to comfort us against such temptation but the Word of God. This is
such bread and meat: he who eats of it, that is, he who believes the
word, has eternal life. Mark this well. Again, temporal bread, which all
the world hungers for, lasts only until the hour comes, then it is
finished, and after that we must die of hunger for eternity.

The other temptation is that the devil brings the Lord Jesus into the
holy city of Jerusalem and sets him on top of the temple, saying, "Let
him be brought down, and he will not be harmed, for he is the Son of
God; therefore all the angels must wait for him before he should strike
a stone. 2c.

250 **8.1, 254-25". On Sunday Invocavit. W. xiu, 547-54".** 251.

This is a severe and spiritual challenge to faith, since faith is also
challenged on the other side, just as it is challenged above with sin
and the wrath of God. For where the devil cannot make us despair of God,
he tries on the other hand to make us presumptuous and hopeful and too
bold. As if the devil wanted to say: "Do you want to argue with me from
God's word; stop, I can do it too. Then you have God's word: "He will
command His angels over you, and they must build you a stairway and
carry you on their hands. Now jump down, let's see if you also believe
such a promise of God.

(15) Christ must be understood and regarded as a man who has hidden
the divinity in his humanity. Just as on the cross he presents himself
as a pure and honest man, lamenting and crying for help and salvation,
so here he also presents himself as a pure and honest man. That is why
the devil thinks he wants to get him to tempt God with an unnecessary
miraculous sign. For this reason, he introduces the 91st Psalm as a
testimony; however, he leaves out the necessary part: in viis tuis, the
Lord will keep you "on your way". With such a saying, the prankster
wants to tear out of the eyes of the Lord Christ what he was commanded
to do, and lead him in a way that he was not commanded to do. For Christ
is now in the wilderness, not because he is to perform miracles, but
because he is to suffer, he is to be a suffering man: so the devil wants
to lead him out of the way, where God has ordered him to be, and
persuade him to perform an unnecessary miraculous work.

16 But Christ drives him back, saying, "It is written: Thou shalt not
tempt God." For there is a stairway or staircase; therefore it is
unnecessary for me to go down. Because I can go down the stairs without
going, it would be wrong for me to go down without need and without
God's command.

17 This is also a necessary and useful lesson, that it is called
tempting God, where someone wants to step away from the ordinary command
and do something new and special without God's word. As monks and

Nuns do this, who, out of their own devotion, take on a special life;
afterwards they say that Christ has commanded it, since he says: "Leave
everything and follow me. There is not only reason, but also Scripture.
But here you see that the devil can also lead scripture and deceive
people with it. But he has the defect that he does not lead the
Scriptures completely, but takes only so much as serves his cause; what
does not serve him, he omits and is silent about it.

(18) The Anabaptists also do this, writing a great deal about how no
creature should be trusted or relied upon. After this they say: Baptism
is also a creature, for it is nothing but water; therefore one should
neither trust nor rely on baptism. They do not want to believe in God's
grace at baptism, but grope with their hands. They do not lack the
Scriptures, but they lack that they do not guide the Scriptures
correctly. For if God's word were not written, "Unless one is born
again through water and the Spirit, he will not see the kingdom of
heaven," it would be wrong to seek God's grace in baptism or water.
But there God's word stands firm, "He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved." For faith and baptism, word and water, must be
together; this the blind people do not want to see.

So Christ also contradicts the devil and answers: If I walk in my ways
which God has commanded me, I know well that the angels are with me, and
must watch over me and keep me. So when a child walks in his filial
obedience, father and mother, servants and maids go in their office and
occupation, as accident befits them, then God will save and help through
His angels. But if they go out of the way, the angels shall not be
there; then the devil can break their necks every hour, as he often does
out of God's decree, and it hardly serves them right, for they should
not make new or different ways, for that is still tempting God.

020 Now this is a temptation which no man understandeth, except he have
tried it. For just as the first drives one to despair, so

[252 **L. 1, 256-258.** On the Sunday of Invocavit. **W. xm, 549-553.**
253]{.underline}

drives them to presumption and to such works that do not have God's
word and command. A Christian should take the middle road, so that he
neither despairs nor is presumptuous, but remains simple with the word
in right trust and faith. This is how the dear angels should be with us
and not otherwise.

The third temptation is only traditio humana; it is very gross, that the
devil, through honor and violence, subjects us to idolatry, contrary to
God's word. It helps a great deal that the outward holiness has such a
great appearance before reason, and glitters far more beautifully than
all obedience to the Word of God. For the pope does not consider the
married state to be a holy life, item, nourishing and teaching children,
being industrious, obedient and faithful in the house, as much as he
considers it a holy and great thing, where one goes, puts on a gray
skirt or cap, does not keep himself like other people, does not eat meat
on Friday, fasts, goes on pilgrimages 2c. This makes such an appearance
that king and emperor bow down before it.

(22) With such devotion and self-invented spirituality the pope arose,
that he and his company did not want to do what other people do, because
the same would be too small. But this has a special reputation, if one
runs into a monastery, becomes a monk and our Lord God's (as they
boast) own servant, since one seeks neither money nor goods and even
forgives the world. For this is how the monastic life has been praised;
although it has had a different opinion, as everyone knows well. But
summa summarum, this is a real diabolical challenge. For it is an
unbidden holiness, and is not called serving God, whom, as Christ says
here, one should serve alone. But if one does not serve God alone, then
one certainly serves the devil. He also rewards, as he promises Christ
here, and gives good life, fine sinecures and great dominions as wages.

23. But he who wants to serve God, let him do what God has commanded in
His word. If you are a child, honor your father and mother. If you are a
maid or a servant, be obedient and faithful. If you are a master and a
wife, do not offend your servants with words or deeds, but do what is
good for you,

and also keep them in the fear of God. That is then serving God and His
word, and not the person. For there is his word, which commands and
wants such things. Now call it what you will in the sight of the world,
that it may serve masters or wives, fathers or mothers, neighbors or
children, but it is a true service of God. For God has ever written his
word over my neighbor's head, saying: You shall love your neighbor and
serve him.

(24) That the pope does not respect this command and makes a special
holiness out of it, where one puts on a gray cap and eats neither butter
nor meat, but oil and herring during fasting, that is just a devil's
specter. For God's command and word is not there. That is why it rhymes
with piety, which is valid before God, just as it rhymes with stone
buildings, when children make little houses out of sheets of cards.
Cause, you cannot serve God, unless you have His word and command. If
his word and command are not there, you do not serve God, but your own
will. So then our Lord God says: "Whom you serve, let him also reward
you; which devil has called you? I command you to serve your father and
mother, to serve your authorities and your neighbor; you let that stand,
and in the meantime you do what I have not commanded; shall I put up
with that? No, nothing will come of it.

(25) Thus the pope and his company are pure idolaters and servants of
the devil. For he not only despises the word, but also persecutes it;
nevertheless he wants to be holy for the sake of this outward worship,
which he has done with caps and plates, with fasting, eating fish.
Reading mass, and what is more like that; no one can make him stop. Why?
Because the devil has shown and promised him the kingdom of the world.
This makes him mock our preaching and worship. For we are beggars in
this, and must suffer much. But his worship he lifts up to heaven; for
there he has money and goods, honor and power from, and is a greater
lord than emperor and king can be. There you can see how the devil is so
powerfully seated with him with this challenge. But we are to give the

**254** L. i, 258-2so. On the Sunday of Reminiscere. W. xm, 553-555.
**255**

To face the devil and say to him, as Christ says: "Devil, get thee away
from me, for it is written: "Thou shalt serve God thy Lord alone",
that is, to look to God's word alone and follow it, and not to worship
outside of it. We must await the challenge of all three because we are
alive. Therefore, we are to learn here how to protect ourselves with
God's word and to endure it, so that we may take the middle road; and

Therefore, do not let us be deprived of faith, so that we have stone and
not bread when we hunger, nor become presumptuous in faith, or finally
fall away from the right worship of God for the sake of money and goods;
but at the same time remain steadfast in faith and the fear of God. Our
dear Lord Christ, who overcame this temptation too well for us, give us
also strength, that we may overcome it through him and be saved, amen.

**On the Sunday Reminiscere. *)**

**Matth. 15, 21-28.**

And JEsus went out from thence, and escaped into the region of Tyro and
Sidon. And, behold, a Canaanite woman went out of that border, and cried
after him, saying, Lord, thou Son of David, have mercy on me: my
daughter is evil afflicted with the devil. And he answered her not a
word. Then came his disciples unto him, and besought him, saying: Let
her go from you, for she is crying out to us. But he answered and said:
I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And she came
and fell down before him, and said, Lord, help me. And he answered and
said, It is not good to take the children's bread, and to cast it to
the dogs. And she said, Yea, Lord; but yet the dogs eat of the little
bread that falleth from their masters' tables. And Jesus answered and
said unto her, O woman, thy faith is great: let it be done unto thee
according to thy will. And her daughter was healed that very hour.

1 This is a high gospel. But it was put on this Sunday, just like
others, that it also says about the exorcism of the devil; thus they
wanted to indicate that one should become pious and confess. But it is a
bad and right papal piety that lets itself be saved for a whole year
until this time. And it is done with miserable fasting and unwilling
confession, since one has no command to do so.

2 Therefore we must first know that this gospel does not speak of such
child's play and puppet work; but it is a high and difficult teaching,
of the right struggle and fear of death in faith before God, from which
we are to learn that no thing should deter us from calling and praying
to God, even if He Himself says no to it.

*) Held in the house, 1534.

speaks. As one learns in mortal distress, the devil pushes and stirs up
thoughts everywhere, so that our Lord God cannot be seen in any other
way than as if he did not want us. It is terrible when the black, thick
clouds dim and cover the bright sun; there is trouble above all trouble.

This battle is presented to us here in the woman, since not only the
person, but all other circumstances are so evil that they cannot be more
evil. First of all, she is a Gentile woman, which is the first
circumstantia that makes the matter difficult, that she is not a child
of Abraha, nor of Abraham's seed; therefore she has no right to ask
anything here, because she is a stranger. The same should have pushed
her so before the head that she should have said: What shall I ask? it
is lost. Cause, I am a pagan, foreigner

256 **L. 1, 260-262. On Sunday Reminiscere. W. XIII, 555-558.** 257

Female; but he is a Jew and sent to the Jews 2c.

(4) If we should feel such a violent shock in our hearts, we would
soon lie down and let go of prayer. For it is no joke when the
conscience stands there and says: Ah, you are not one who should pray,
you do not belong to Christ; let Paulum, Petrum pray, our Lord God does
not hear you; you have no faith, perhaps you are not chosen, you are not
worthy nor sufficient for such high work that you should stand before
God and ask him for something. With such thoughts the devil can bring us
to despair; for it is a very great blow.

(5) Now look here at this woman, and learn how to behave in such a
case as she behaves. She goes and does not see this, but is blind in
spirit, so that she forgets the play and cannot remember that she is a
Gentile and he is a Jew. For her trust and heart in Christ is so great
that she thinks: He will not let me go. With such faith she erases the
fact that she is a Gentile. Another would not have done this without
faith, but would have thought: You are of the devil, it is in vain that
you pray; let his people ask, with you it will do nothing; would
therefore never have asked. For he who does not believe cannot pray. But
the woman does not let herself be challenged, does not dispute with
herself: You do not belong in the house, you are an excluded pagan, and
not worthy to be carried by the earth.

(6) Such is a hard and evil temptation, when the devil thus poureth in
the heart, saying, Why long wilt thou pray, thou art mine; lift up for
it, and curse God, it is just as much; thou shalt not be saved. Such
devilish thoughts can prevent an untrained heart from praying at all and
falling into despair.

(7) Therefore this history is written for our sake, that we may not be
offended at it, if the evil enemy should reproach us, saying, Thou art
not a Christian, thy prayers do nothing. No, by all means do not turn to
it, but say thus: Let me be who I will, and I will ask nothing of it.
For whether I

Even though I am a sinner, I know that my Lord Christ is not a sinner,
but remains righteous and merciful. Therefore I will confidently call
and cry out to him, and turn to nothing else; for I have no time now to
dispute whether I am saved or not. But this I feel, that I need help;
come therefore, and seek it in all humility 2c.

(8) This is called following this example. For the woman was a
heathen, and therefore she could not, indeed she must not, conclude that
she was not saved; nevertheless she swallows such a hard and large
morsel, and goes before the Lord Jesus, and does not let such thoughts
hinder her in prayer. So do thou also, and say, Lord, I come now, and
must have this and other things; where else will I take or seek, but
with thee in heaven, through thy Son, my Saviour Christ Jesus? This is a
battle piece and a very great miracle in the heathen damsel.

9 Now the text says that she cries out, "Ah, Lord, Son of David, have
mercy on me," and complains of her distress, "My daughter is tormented
by the devil. Christ hears such a cry, but he does not answer her a
word. This is the other shock, that our Lord faces God just as she was.
She is a pagan, who does not belong to the inheritance, nor should she
enjoy the benefits. Therefore, when she runs after Christ and asks him,
he remains silent as if he had nothing to do with her. From such two
cartouches an iron wall should fall down. For she should ever have
thought: Where is now the man, who is so praised to me by everyone, how
he is merciful, hear soon and help gladly? But as I see and experience,
he hears when he wants to and not when we need it. But the poor woman is
not yet frightened. But what else does she encounter?

(10) Thirdly, the disciples are tired of crying out and are more pious
in their mind than Christ himself. For they think he is too hard and
unkind; therefore they go to him and pray for the woman: Ah, Lord, give
and help her, for otherwise she will not let go. 2c. This is a delicious
example that one should not let up in prayer.

258 **2.1, 262-264.** On the Sunday of Reminiscere. **W. XIII,
S58-S61.** 259

Taulerus writes an example in one place that one should desist. But it
is wrong to preach in this way. For we find the refraining all too early
among us. So this example also shows sufficiently that one should by no
means desist, but should always pray, and say with the woman here: I
cannot now dispute whether I am pious or wicked, worthy or unworthy, I
cannot wait now; I have something else and more necessary to do. "My
daughter is badly afflicted by the devil," I must have advice and help
for that. You can see that such hard blows give the one who feels his
need only the more earnestly to plead and beg that he be helped,
regardless of how evil and unworthy of help he is. 2c.

(12) Here is the third challenge, or thrust, that Christ says, "I am
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. He also strikes
the disciples on the head, and neither the woman nor they who pray for
them will listen.

13 Then she should have thought: Surely this must be a hard man who will
not listen to other people who ask of themselves and unasked. And the
truth is, Christ is nowhere painted so harshly in the whole gospel as
here. Nevertheless, it does not desist, but lusts for and for, has
devoured three great cartouches.

14 Since her cries and other intercessions do not help, she also enters
the house, as Marcus says. This may well be called half an impudent
woman. She ran after him in the street with a shout; now that Christ is
going into the house to get rid of her, she runs after him and falls
down before him. But these things are prescribed for our learning and
comfort, that we may learn how heartily Christ is pleased when a man
thus leaseth and continueth.

(15) Yet the Lord is not yet to be found, as she would have him. For
listen, what does he say to this woman? "It is not good to take the
children's food and throw it to the dogs. If he had said such a word to
me, I would have been

I would have run away in disgust, thinking, "What you are doing is in
vain; there is nothing to be gained. For it is an exceeding hard word,
that the Lord should thus cast her at his feet, not leaving it that she
is not a child or a heathen, but calling her a dog. This is worse than
if he had called her a heathen. Yes, it is just as much said as if he
said: You are of the devil, as you walk and stand, just always troll
yourself, you have no business here. That means highly tempted. If St.
Peter or Paul said such a word to me, I would be scared to death. But
what should it be now, since Christ himself says it to this woman?

(16) Therefore this is a great and excellent example, by which one
sees how powerful faith is: it takes Christ by his words when he is most
angry, and turns a harsh word into a comforting dialectic, as we see
here. You say, she says, I am a dog: I let it happen, gladly want to be
a dog, only keep me like a dog. Give your children the bread, put them
at the table, I do not desire such things; only let me pick up the small
pieces of bread from under the table, and allow me that, without which
the children would not enjoy, but would go for nothing; I will be
content with the same. So catches the Lord Christ with his own words.
Yes, that is even more, with the right of the dog it wins the right of
the child. For where does he want to go, dear Jesus? he has caught
himself and must now leave. But if only he could, he would gladly let
himself be caught like that.

(17) Now this is the right masterpiece, a peculiar and strange
example, which therefore is prescribed for us, that we should learn it,
and not be turned away from the man, God granting that he call us dogs
or heathen. For the dogs must also have masters and food. So the
Gentiles must also have a God.

(18) With such hard holding and firm faith the Lord is caught, and
answers, "O woman," if thou canst suffer and endure these blows in thy
heart, "let it be done unto thee according as thou believest." For it
is a strange judgment. He saw that the other Jews were soon

260 . **l. 1, 264-266. On Sunday Reminiscere. W. XIII, 561-564.** 261

They were annoyed by one word, because he says: They must eat his flesh.
But this woman always holds on to the hope that he will help and will
not let go of him.

(19) Here we see why the Lord was so hard on her and refused her help,
namely, that he did not show his unkindness because he did not want to
help, but so that her faith would be revealed, and the Jews, who were
heirs to his kingdom and children, would learn from the Gentile woman,
who was neither heir nor child, how they should believe in Christ and
put all their trust in him. For this is what Christ wants, and it
pleases him so much that he can no longer conceal his goodness and
kindness, saying, "Go, be it done to you as you wish." So he gives her
the right of the dog, and not only makes the daughter well, but offers
to give what she desires and wants, and sets her among Abraham's seed.
Faith brings her to such grace that she is no longer called a dog or a
pagan, but a beloved daughter and a truly holy woman.

20 Such an example serves to show us whether our Lord God is keeping us
a long time, so that we should not let up, but firmly believe that he
will finally say yes to it; and whether he is not already saying loudly
and publicly that he is secretly in his heart, until the time comes that
you must experience and see it, if only you do not let up with praying
and stopping, nor are you lazy. As can be seen in other examples. Joseph
cried out and continued to pray for thirteen years, asking God to help
him. But the longer he prayed, the worse he became. The more he prayed,
the worse he got. This is still the case today with Christians: when
they have cried out and cried to God for a long time, they do not feel
any improvement, but the longer it goes on, the worse it gets, just like
Joseph. If God had redeemed Joseph sooner, Jacob, his father, would have
been happy. But Joseph would have had to remain a shepherd. But since it
took so long, he became a ruler over all of Egypt, and God accomplished
much good through him, not only during the seven years of the rebellion,
but also in other areas of world and church government.

Egypt alone, but also the surrounding countries have been improved 2c.

God still wants to do this with us. If he has long denied us our
request, and has always given us the no, but we hold fast to the yes,
then it shall finally be yes and not no. For his word will not lie:
"Whatever you ask the Father in my name, he will give you."

But our reason is highly annoyed by such delay and would like God to
hear us as soon as possible. It is necessary not to be angry. Let our
Lord God say no, and hold out the request for a year, two years, three
years, or even longer, and only beware that we do not let hope and faith
in His promise be torn from our hearts: then in the end something will
have to come of it, that He will give far more than you have asked to
give. As it happens to this woman, if she had desired and wanted more,
he would have given it to her.

23 Therefore our Lord God will teach us that it is not always good to
hear soon. In great distresses it does; as when you fall into water or
are at war, it does not take long to wait when the distress is so near
and great. But if the delay and the waiting can be endured, then one
should learn that he is glad to forgive, but still, as the prophet
Habakkuk says (2:3): "If the promise be consumed, wait for it; it will
surely come, and will not be forgiven.

(24) So he now also departs and lets the pope and the Turks rage
against us. We cry out and do miserable things, but he does not hear and
acts as if he does not know us, and makes us suffer as miserably as if
we had no God. But it will not always remain so. Therefore let us have
no doubt about it; we have the word of consent in heaven, which is
certainly in the heart of the Lord Christ and God his Father, even if he
builds four or five iron walls in front of it and the devil shoots a
vain no to it. But he learns to say: I believe that God will be merciful
to his church and save it when it cries for help. The word of yes is in
his heart, according to the promise of Christ: "What you ask the Father
in my

262 **L. 1, 266.267. On Sunday Oculi. W. XIII, 564-567.** 263

name, which he will give you." Therefore I will not dispute whether I
am qualified and worthy to pray, but that the word of yes will surely be
there if I only pray and hold fast.

(25) So this history is a particularly beautiful example of a right
faith, that it wants to be practiced, and that it shall finally overcome
and attain everything, if we follow this woman; she also does not want
to let the word of the Lord Christ Himself be taken out of her heart,
that He will be kind and help.

26 But we are especially comforted by this history against the common
temptation to which we are exposed.

For the rest of our lives, we must not allow our faith and trust to fall
away when we think of our unworthiness and sinful lives. For if Christ
wanted to look more at our worthiness and merit than at his mercy and
our need, he would not have helped this young lady. But he will be
merciful and gladly help, if only we continue to trust and pray. May our
dear Lord God help us, so that we may also come hereafter, and with firm
faith rely on His word and promise with all our heart, and through
Christ, with the help of the Holy Spirit, become eternally blessed,
amen.

**On Sunday Oculi. *)**

**Luc. 11, 14-28.**

And he cast out a devil, which was dumb. And it came to pass, when the
devil was cast out, that the dumb man spake. And the people marveled.
But some of them said: He casts out devils through Beelzebub, the chief
of the devils. But the others tempted him, and desired a sign from him
out of heaven. But he heard their thoughts and said to them: Every
kingdom, if it be divided against itself, shall be desolate, and one
house shall fall upon another. If Satan also be at variance with
himself, how shall his kingdom stand? Because you say that I cast out
devils by Beelzebub. But if I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do
they cast out your children? Therefore they will be your judges. But if
I cast out devils by the finger of God, the kingdom of God will come to
you. If a strong man keeps his palace, his own remains in peace. But if
a stronger man comes upon him and overcomes him, he takes from him his
hardness, on which he relied, and divides the spoil. He that is not with
me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth. When the
unclean spirit departs from a man, it wanders through dry places,
seeking rest, and does not find it; so it says: I will return to my
house from whence I came. And when he cometh, he findeth him clothed and
adorned with besomes. Then he goes and takes to himself seven spirits
worse than himself, and when they come in, they dwell there; and
afterward he becomes worse with the same man than before. And it came to
pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the people lifted up
her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and
the breasts which thou hast sucked. And he said, Blessed are they that
hear the word of God, and keep it.

1 Today's Gospel, as you have heard, is about the casting out of the
devil. And is just the opinion (like the one eight days ago) placed on
this time, that one through repentance, penance and confession has
reformed and cast out the devil.

*) Held publicly in the castle church before the "Churfürsten, in the
year 1534.

to cast out. But if you read this gospel today or tomorrow, in summer or
in Lent, it is very rich, in which the work of our dear Lord Christ is
held up to us, which not only took place at that time, but will remain
until the end of the world and as long as his kingdom remains on earth.
Of such a work the gospel has eight today

264 **L. 1, 267-269. Am Sünntage Oculi. W. XIII, 567-570.** 265

Days also acted. But here it is written how it has been interpreted by
people in many ways. This also gives a fine, useful teaching, as you
will hear. But first we want to say about the work of Christ.

(2) That our dear Lord Jesus here casts out a devil is written for our
special comfort, that we may learn and know that he is Lord over the
devil and his kingdom, and that such a work as was then begun in the
flesh shall not cease, but shall remain in Christendom until the last
day. For for such work Christ hath left behind him his instrument, holy
baptism, the reverend sacrament, the word and absolution, and other
things that pertain unto the ministry of preaching, that the devil's
kingdom should be destroyed therewith, and that he should be taken from
among them, and cast out of them 2c. For thus it is written: Verbum meum
non redibit vacuum: Just as the rain that falls on a dry land does not
go away without fruit, it greens afterwards and everything comes to
life; so also God's word certainly always produces fruit in some. For
the Holy Spirit will always be with the Word, enlightening, setting on
fire and purifying hearts, and thus redeeming them from the tyranny and
power of the devil.

(3) Whether therefore this shall not appear in the sight of the world,
nor be seen with the eyes of the flesh, as it was when it was bodily
done by Christ, there is no power in it: for the world is not worthy
without this, that it should see one little spark of divine power: but
it shall be blind, reproachful, reviling, and blaspheming; as we see it
doing to the Lord Christ here. But we, who have and accept the word,
shall see and know it, and comfort ourselves with all our heart that God
has left us the power here on earth, that we can, yes, should and must
cast out devils without ceasing.

For every child that is born is born into the kingdom of the devil,
where he reigns as a lord and exercises all the tyranny of sins. But if
it is brought here for blessed baptism according to Christ's command,
by which it is born again into the kingdom of God, as Christ says in
John 3, the devil must depart and go out. For then the child is born
again by God through Christ.

God's grace is promised, because it is baptized into the death of
Christ. So a poor, afflicted conscience, which the devil has
precipitated with a heavy fall, or otherwise afflicted by temptation,
comes to me, laments its distress, and desires comfort and instruction.
Then I have orders, and every Christian, that I should comfort and
strengthen my brother, and promise him God's grace through the merit of
Christ. Then the devil must also give way: not to me, who am a poor
sinner and wretched man; but to the word which our dear Lord Christ has
left us on earth. So if you have a stupid, frightened conscience, and
cannot grasp firmly enough the consolation that God will be merciful to
you and forgive your sin, our dear Lord Jesus has ordained his supper as
a certain consolation, so that because his body and blood are given to
you as food and drink, you may have no cause to doubt that his body was
given for your sin and his blood poured out for your sin. But where
there is such faith and trust, it is impossible that the devil should
keep his seat longer and not leave the inn.

5 So this work must go on for and for in Christianity, which must bite
itself with the serpent, and must always forcefully oppose and fight
against the devil's kingdom, as it does, and more than Christ himself;
as he says John 14:12: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that
believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works
than these shall he do: for I go unto the Father."

6th Cause, the Christian church carries on its ministry much further
than Christ: he did it only in the small corner of the Jewish country
and converted few people; for he preached only until the fourth year. On
the other hand, the Christian church, through the help of its Head and
Lord Christ, who sits at the right hand of God, carries out this
ministry for and for, that it preaches, distributes the sacraments and
punishes the devil in his ungodly nature forever, and casts him out
today in one place and tomorrow in another, even from itself. For we are
not yet completely rid of all things, and must defend ourselves against
him and beware of him at all times.

266 **8.1, 269-271. On Sunday Oculi. W. xni, 570-573.** 267

(7) Such things grieve the devil very much; therefore, just as we
drive him out by the preaching ministry and the holy sacraments, so he
tries us again, if he cannot sit with us again, that he may drive us out
into the world by persecution. This is how it has always been and will
be until the end of the world, as Christ himself encountered. For he
would not suffer the devil, but cast him out whithersoever he was
desired; neither would the devil suffer him, and brought him by the Jews
to the cross, and cast him out into the world. But it did not go well
with him.

For Christ not only cast out the devil from the poor man of whom this
gospel speaks, but he appeared, as it is written in 1 John 3:8, to
destroy the works of the devil, so that the devil has no power over all
who believe in him. But those who do not receive him remain under the
power of the devil and must finally perish, like the Jews. The
believers, however, will be safe from this; indeed, they cast out the
devil through the word, and on that day they and Christ will be judges
over the devils and all the ungodly.

In the papacy, as you know, the devil has brought his kingdom and power
very high, so that although the holy sacraments and the word remained
out of God's mercy and grace, there was no right understanding of
either sacrament or word, as everyone must confess. Nevertheless, even
in the papacy the devil had to give way to the Word and leave through
holy baptism. For God's promise cannot withstand anything. Thus, the
Holy Spirit does not want to let his effect be interrupted, although the
person who leads the Word and administers the Sacrament is not pious,
but godless.

(10) Therefore, we should thank God for such abundant grace from the
bottom of our hearts and not complain about it, even though the devil
harasses and sometimes torments us because of it. For it grieves him
exceedingly that we poor sinners should cast him out, such a hopeful,
powerful spirit, by the word alone, and that he must go out against his
thanks and will. Therefore he remembers

He is determined to take revenge on us and shoots at us with persecution
and other temptations. We shall gladly suffer this for the hope that we
know that we shall not cast him out here alone, but on the last day, as
I said, he will be judged and condemned for eternity and into the abyss
of hell.

(11) We should learn from this work that we should not think so little
of the word of God and the holy sacraments, nor speak shamefully of
them, as is commonly done, especially by worldly men. It is true that
the sacraments are evil outward works, as the eyes judge; so also the
word is an outward thing, which may be grasped with the ears and read
with the eyes; just as Christians are also bodily men. But to hold it in
low esteem, and therefore to despise it, is of no avail. When a
Christian walks along and speaks according to the command of Christ, the
devil must flee and cannot stand against it.

(12) That the Word and the Sacraments are held in such low esteem
should not provoke us to despise the Word and the Sacraments, but to
heartfelt thanksgiving, that we may say: Thanks be to our dear Lord God,
that he has placed the highest power in such a small, weak vessel. For
we humans are like a straw against the devil, that where he should or
could exercise his power against us, he should not let us live for a
moment. But what does our Lord God do? He lights the poor little straw
by his word, the heavenly fire, and makes such a light and brightness in
the world that the devil does not know where to stay; and must flee
there today, tomorrow in another place and go out. Therefore, St. Paul
calls the gospel a power of God through which men are saved. This is
such power and strength, which is called God's strength, and brings man
from sin to righteousness, from death to life, from hell to heaven, and
from the devil's kingdom to God's kingdom.

13. we Christians should learn these things, and

268 L. i, 27i-274. On Sunday Oculi. W. xm, 573-S80. 269

We should thank God for it, and esteem His word and holy sacraments
glorious and great, yes, as our highest treasure. But the unbelievers
are not worthy to see such glorious majesty and power of the Word of
God, according to the saying: Tollatur impius, ne videat gloriam Dei:
"The wicked must depart, lest he see the glory of God". And as Isaiah
says of the Jews, "With your ears you will hear, and will not
understand; with your eyes that see, you will see, and will not hear,"
chap. 6:9, 10. But we should thank God that we have known and
experienced such great majesty and power of the Word; and we should
rejoice and take comfort in it, even though we are poor beggars and
sinners, that we have the power with us, from which even the devil must
be terrified and flee.

14 So the work is still going on among Christians, that is, casting out
devils, making the dumb speak and the deaf hear, though it is not done
bodily. For it is much greater and more to cast the devil out of the
heart than to cast him out of the body. For he is much more firmly
seated in the heart. But Christ also casts him out bodily, so that we
may see his power with our eyes, and believe all the sooner that he will
also cast him out where he is most firmly seated, and by such a small
thing, namely by the word, absolution, baptism, the reverend sacrament
2c.

15. God has given us such a gift and grace, for which we should thank
Him diligently, and confidently use it against the devil and cast him
out of men spiritually, regardless of the fact that he will cast us out
of the world physically here for it. But when the last day comes, then
he shall be cast out forever for this. This is the first thing for which
we should thank God and rejoice.

16. further follows in the gospel, what the pious, the virgin world
says about it. Here we find three kinds of disciples. The first are the
most pious, namely, the people who marvel at such work of Christ, and no
doubt thank God for it. These are the small group of people who have
their eyes opened and see the glory and divine power of Christ.

The power of the word is such a gloriously great thing before them that
they cannot marvel enough that the word should convert so many people so
lightly and easily, and cast out the devil with power, and therefore
cannot get enough of it.

17 But there are two other multitudes whose hearts are so hardened that
even with seeing eyes they do not see that there must be a great divine
power to make a dumb and deaf man speak and hear as easily as another
man, and to make him quiet and sensible, who before was furious and
impetuous. So there are a number of such disciples who see the work of
Christ with their eyes, but find it so blind, mad and foolish that they
take the contradiction out of such miraculous work and attribute it to
the devil.

18 If only they would say thus: He casts out devils, therefore perhaps
he will have a special art or grace from God. They do not do this, but
say boldly: It goes against God, the devil is in him, it is nothing but
a deception and a ghost. As if they wanted to say: Should it be a
miraculous sign? Yes, it is a pure devil's work. So they have blind
eyes, and such a muddied, hardened heart, that they do not see God's
miraculous work, but even turn it around and say: It is a devil's
ghost, as the jugglers juggle. Moreover, they are so sure of such sin
and atrocious blasphemy that they give the devil a very contemptible
name, calling him Beelzebub, which in German is a bumblebee or large
mosquito. This is to highly despise the devil, as if they were great
saints and full of the Holy Spirit, against whom the devil would be like
a bumblebee. Paul, the great apostle, does not despise him in this way,
but calls him a prince and god of the world. But these great saints
think that the more they can despise the devil, the less art it is in
the Lord Christ to cast out devils. What, they say, should this be for a
special miracle or high work? It is a bad art to the devil that he casts
out another devil.

19 So, even though they cannot go against the truth, they knowingly
blaspheme and do not

270 **L. 1, 274-276. On Sunday Oculi. W. XIII, S8O-584.** 271

They do not see that they themselves are possessed by a thousand devils,
because they are full of blasphemy, murderers, liars, deceivers, and do
the devil's highest will, because they go along as if the devil did not
concern them at all.

20 The same thing is happening today. The dear Gospel is preached,
praise be to God forever, purely and loudly, in all discipline and
silence; we should certainly take comfort in the fact that some pious
people accept such preaching with all their hearts, become happy about
it, and marvel at such grace and good deeds, thanking God for them from
the bottom of their hearts. Again, there is no shortage of those who do
not know how to blaspheme sufficiently. Our opposite confesses that it
is founded in Holy Scripture that one should take the Sacrament under
both forms (as they call it), and that Christ has forbidden neither
marriage nor food: yet they condemn such and other articles as heresy.
It would be no wonder that before such sin the sun would turn black, and
such blasphemers would devour the earth. But they are so safe, careless
and without any concern, as if they were sitting in the lap of our Lord
God; I will not say that they should be afraid of the devil, as
Christians are afraid.

21 They learn by experience that the devil can also bring down the
righteous and drive back God's work (where it is imposed on him).
Therefore they do not call him Beelzebub or Hummel, but, like Paul, a
prince and God of the world. For we see how strong he is, and feel it,
where he once seizes someone and leads him into error or heresy, he
holds so strongly that one can hardly bring him out and right again with
much and long teaching and admonishing. So, if he throws a man into
fornication or adultery, into avarice, anger, hatred, envy, or other
vices, I mean, he holds fast. If a rope or a chain does not help, he
takes a hundred of them, so that one should not wind himself out of it.

22 Therefore, Christians do not despise the devil as the works saints
do, calling him not a bumblebee, but a mighty lord, prince, and God of
the world, who has

People can strangle, lead into sin, in despair, heartache, fear, worry,
sorrow and all kinds of distress, where God does not intervene. But the
pope and his crowd do not know and do not believe such things, even
though they see and experience them.

23 Therefore, because the Pharisees blaspheme Christ and his work so
abominably, it is easy to suppose that, though they are not possessed
bodily, as the poor man here is, yet they are seven times more violently
and dangerously possessed spiritually; because they (like our papists)
not only do not understand the word, but so blasphemously profane it
besides; and are so sure of it, as if they were well pleased.

24 This is written for our comfort, if we want to cast out devils and
preach God's word, that we also wait for what is written here, that
some are surprised; but others think that our doctrine is false and
seductive, which does great harm and only drives people away from God;
for this reason they blaspheme it as heresy and the doctrine of devils.
This shall not vex us nor make us weary. It is true that it is very
painful that the papists blaspheme shamefully and are so sure of it that
they are no more afraid of the devil than of a bumblebee. But it
happened to the Lord himself in the great miraculous work, when he cast
out devils by the finger of God; then they blasphemed that it would be
as bad a thing to cast out devils as to cast out a bumblebee swarming
around one's head; for that the devil would have helped him. This is
one group of wicked, evil disciples who see such work, but do not thank
God for it, but still blaspheme.

(25) The third disciples are almost as bad as the others, without
saying it so crudely, pretending to believe if they had a sign, as they
like it. These do not lack that they do not see the sign. They do see
it, but they think it is an earthly sign and not a real sign, and they
would suffer if he, the Lord, wanted them to think that he made a sign
in the sky, a new moon, new stars, or something like that. These are
very wise people who teach our Lord God thus

**272 L. 1, 276-278. On Sunday Oculi. W. XIII, 584-588. 273**

They wanted to know what signs he should do. They wanted him to put on a
jester's cap like a juggler, to appear before them and to show them
what they wanted. Just as if our Lord God had nothing else to do, but to
atone for their presumption.

26 Today you will also find such disciples in the world, and there are
only so many of them, and most of all among the great lords, you will
have different respect for them. For what is now the common speech among
worldly wise, powerful people everywhere, but this, that they say: What?
should I believe the sermon, which has now come among the people from
poor beggars, as, runaway monks and perjured priests? I would believe it
if the pope, emperor, king and princes preached it or accepted it. These
also show our Lord God how he should become wise, the pious man, and
attack things more wisely, and send them such a sermon as they would
like. Yes, let them order you, dear noblemen.

27 And with us, who pretend to be good evangelicals, it is almost the
same. You can see both in the courts of the lords and in cities, where
everyone is subject to rule the preachers, that they should preach as
and what pleases the lords. But where a preacher, in accordance with his
office, punishes the vices that are so publicly practiced that one can
easily know the persons, even if one does not name them, then the cry
goes up in a heap that it serves for sedition and is therefore not to be
suffered by the authorities. One could well preach the gospel otherwise,
so that one does not disgrace and disgrace the people so publicly. So
the authorities must be called disgraced and reviled if one speaks the
truth. But how do you feel about such pious people? Do you not think
that they are somewhat like and related to those who see the glorious
miraculous sign here, but do not want to think it is a miracle, because
he is fooling them with what they would like? So they want to be lords,
not only over their country, people and community, but also over the
word and the church. They may be pious children, because God should have
air on.

28 But it does not have the opinion, if one says, worldly authority
should be honored.

Do not reproach them, nor speak evil of them, as if they were to have
worldly authority over God and His word; but let them be under God and
His word as well as their subjects, and obey Him. If they do not do so,
they shall be washed, and their mouths shall be opened, and they shall
say what they do not like to hear, and they shall not ask anything,
whether they are angry or laughing. For the gospel shall not spare any
man, no matter how high he may be, but shall punish iniquity in every
man.

(29) Therefore there are pastors and preachers on whom a very heavy
burden has been laid, that they should conduct their ministry in such a
way that they give an answer and an account of it on the last day. If
they do not tell you and do not punish you for what they owe it to their
office to say and punish, then God will demand your blood from their
hands. Why then would we preachers for your sake complain more and
preach to you as you would like? If the word is not ours, we are not
there for your sake, as if you had appointed us, and we had to preach
what is convenient for you. Preachers cannot, will not and should not do
this. If anyone does not want to hear it, the door of the church is open
to him, and he may go out and leave our Lord God's preaching ministry
unhindered.

(30) These are the three kinds of disciples whom the Lord has here in
this great miracle. The first praise it, and are pleased with it, and
marvel at it. The others are hostile to it and desecrate it. The third
would like it to be done according to their head and not according to
his pleasure. The gospel has such disciples all over the world.

Therefore the preachers, just like Christ here, must quarrel with such
and not let them have their way; but save the honor of the Lord Christ
and answer for his word, and do not ask anything about it, even if they
do not want to be converted or persuaded. We have done our part if we do
not keep quiet about their blasphemy. If they will not accept it, let
them go until they realize what they have done and whom they have
despised, violated and blasphemed.

274 **2.1, 278-28". Oculi Sunday. W. xm, 588-593.** 275

The Lord first answers those who say, He casteth out devils by
Beelzebub, and gives a fine, bad, natural answer, "A kingdom, if it be
divided against itself, cannot stand. If then one devil casts out
another, it follows that the devils are at variance, and therefore their
kingdom cannot stand.

This is a worldly image that reason can grasp and understand. For where
husband and wife are divided in the house, so that he breaks jars and
she breaks pots, the household will not be able to last long. For
experience teaches that disunity tears apart and devastates land and
people, household and everything.

(34) Therefore the Pharisees and scribes here speak against their own
reason, like mad, insane people, who not only have no Christian
understanding, but also no human reason. As we also see in our
opponents, the papists. Even if we do not lead the Scriptures, we can
still use reasonable causes in many things to reprove their nature and
doctrine, and to defend ours. But nothing helps, all work and effort is
in vain.

Now it is necessary that we pay attention to the fact that Christ says
that the devil has a kingdom, and a very large kingdom, which is finely
divided. Therefore, whoever angers one devil angers them all; whoever
attacks one attacks them all. Otherwise, if they did not hold together
in this way, we would have many more people deprived of the pope. But
the fact that not all accept and believe the word is because the
devil's kingdom is so powerful and holds together so diligently.

You attack such a kingdom when you are baptized, hear the word, and
receive the sacrament. But that the devil does not prevail against you
is because just as the devils hold together, so the kingdom of Christ
also holds together. Therefore, if the devil attacks you, he has also
attacked the one above at the right hand of God, as he says to Paul,
"Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?" We may take comfort in this,
and learn that it is no joke for a Christian, since we have such a great
kingdom against us.

and would have to be in peril at all times if God did not stop us with
His grace.

(37) Here you may ask: How is it that the exorcists are such evil,
desperate boys and still cast out devils? God does not do that, but the
devil. I have seen one myself that was full of devils, but the priest
who summoned him was so sure that he put his hand in the mouth of the
possessed. How can it be otherwise than that one devil casts out
another?

38 Answer: St. Paul says, "The devil will perform signs in the last
days, but they will be false signs. For he does it not for the sake of
the gospel, that he may promote it, but that he may lead men away from
the faith, and bring them into idolatry. Thus St. Cyriax, St. Unstet and
other saints were used to bring the possessed and to cast out the devil.
But he did not go out because of this, as if he could not sit any longer
and had to leave; but he did it willingly and gladly to strengthen the
superstition.

Item 39: At times he acted as if he were very afraid of a consecrated
light, consecrated salt, water and other things, when his only purpose
was to strengthen such superstition in the people, so that they would
the less come to the right faith and trust in God's word and grace.
That it was, as Paul calls it, mendacia signa, lying, false miraculous
signs and only a ghost.

40 But look at the true signs, when Christ and the apostles cast out the
devil by the word, and he went out against his will, and you will find
that he has changed much. Cause, then he must go forth for the testimony
of the divine word and honor, and strength of the Christian faith. He
cannot do this with his will, so neither the cross nor consecrated water
nor any other trickery will help.

41) But where the devil is to make use of it, and to strengthen his
lies with it, so that the ungrateful world, which will not call upon
Christ, may call upon the devil and go deeper into it.

276 **L. 1, 280.281. On Sunday Lätare. W. XIII, 5W-M5.604-606.** 277

If he is to fall into superstition, he may well have a bad boy
exorcised. For it is not so that the gospel may be praised and the truth
recognized, but that his error may be confirmed, that monastic life, the
intercession of the saints, pilgrimages, vigils, sacrifices of the Mass
and other things may be considered a holy thing; that is why he is so
willing to do it.

42. but where the casting out of the devil is to see the finger of God
and to have the kingdom of heaven approaching, he locks up

and defends himself as long as he can; as Christ says in the parable of
the strong-armed man.

43 Therefore, let us thank God for such grace that He sent His Son to
help us against the devil and cast him out, and left His word with us,
through which this work is still being done today, destroying the
devil's kingdom and building up and increasing the kingdom of God. In
such grace may God graciously preserve us through His Son and Holy
Spirit, Amen.

**On Sunday Lätare. *)**

**John 6:1-15.**

After this JEsus departed over the sea at the city of Tiberias in
Galilee. And great multitudes followed him, because they saw the signs
which he did on them that were sick. And JEsus went up into a mountain,
and sat there with his disciples. Now Easter, the feast of the Jews, was
near. Then Jesus lifted up his eyes, and beholding many people coming to
him, said to Philip, Where shall we buy bread, that these may eat? (This
he said to tempt him, for he knew well what he was about to do). Philip
answered him, Two hundred pennies worth of bread is not enough for them,
that every one of them may take a little. One of his disciples, Andrew,
Peter's brother Simonis, said to him, "There is a boy here who has
five barley loaves and two fish; but what is this among so many? And
Jesus said, Make the people lie down. And there was much grass in the
place. There encamped about five thousand men. And JEsus took the
loaves, and gave thanks, and gave to the disciples; and the disciples to
them that were encamped; and to them also of the fishes, as much as he
would. And when they were full, he said unto his disciples, Gather the
fragments that remain, that nothing perish. So they gathered, and filled
twelve baskets with fragments, of the five barley loaves that remained
for those who had been fed. When the people saw the sign that Jesus had
done, they said: This is indeed the prophet who is to come into the
world. When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him,
that they might make him king, he departed again into the mountain by
himself.

1 This is one of the gospels, where our dear Lord Christ teaches his
Christians how to trust him, that he will not let them die of hunger,
but by his blessing will provide them with all they need. Therefore this
is such a sermon, which the miserly, who can think of nothing but their
own profit, are not worthy to hear, much less to believe. For they do
hear how the Lord here, through his

*) Held in the house in 1533; in 1534, according to the Wittenberg
edition of 1558. D. Red.

But they do not want to let it come to that, that he may also do it with
them. For this reason, they are stingy, and they act as if Christ could
not or would not do such miracles with them, but had to take care of
himself, otherwise they would be missed. Christ has nothing to do with
such people.

2 But to them that keep his word he comforteth here, not in word, but in
work, to make them eat; that we should not doubt, nor think,

278 **L. 1, 281-283. On the Sunday of Lätare. W. XIII, 606-608.** 279

how we feed ourselves, but place our heart and trust in Christ. We will
not lack such faith. For Christ will be with us, and will bring to us
the wealth, though there be not more than five loaves, yet will he bless
so that five thousand men, without wife and child, shall be filled, and
there shall remain far more than there was at the beginning. For before
there was scarcely half a basket of bread; yet there remain twelve
baskets of fragments.

The sum of the teaching of today's gospel is this: We are to be devout,
and follow the word of God diligently, as these people do here, and
believe that God will see to it that we get food and find sustenance. As
can be seen in the history here, even though they are not all devout,
because there are still some right, devout hearts among them, and they
think more about how they can get to the Word than about eating, that
the Lord cares for them, and provides for them without their thoughts,
so that they also have food. As if he wanted to say: My dear man, learn
and seek first the kingdom of God, hear my word, believe in me, and do
diligently what you are commanded to do in your state; if you do this,
let me take care of the rest. If thou art not rich, if thou hast not
many thousand shekels, I will provide enough for thee. For you cannot
eat gold, silver, money or stone; it must be bread that grows out of the
ground. Whether thou canst not get bread out of the ground, whether thou
hast house, or farm, or field, or garden, believe, and follow me, and
thou shalt have bread enough.

This is what we learn and see every day. A poor little student who is
diligent and pious, God can make a great doctor out of him. A poor
servant girl who is godly and faithfully serves her ruler, God provides
her with a pious husband and gives her house and farm. One sees many
such examples every day of how God helps poor people above Himself. On
the other hand, those who do not fear God, do not heed His word, and are
otherwise unfaithful and industrious, must remain poor beggars and
cannot make a living all their lives.

(5) If a bad boy does not want to learn diligently, or otherwise be
wicked, wanton and unfaithful, he should know that our Lord God will let
him go, run away to war, be stabbed or shot, or become an executioner or
otherwise an unworthy person. So a maid who does not want to be godly,
to be chaste, to be obedient, or otherwise serve unfaithfully and
diligently, God will let her fall into sin and disgrace, so that nothing
will come of her for the rest of her life. Such is right and vainly
deserved reward. Why are they not pious, and believe in Christ, and
follow his word? then Christ would be with them, and say: Let me take
care of you, how I lift you up, bring you to honor, and make you rich
2c.

(6) So that this gospel teaches us to believe in Christ, that he will
preserve us and give us enough, if we are only devout, look at his word,
and follow it with these people here, and dare and suffer something for
it. For the work that the Lord is doing here is like a sermon, as if he
wanted to speak: If thou art godly and pious, if my word is dear unto
thee, I will feed thee, thou shalt not be forsaken, I will surely make
something of thee. But if thou wilt not be godly, despise my word, or
otherwise do wrong, and then thou remain a beggar; so be it unto thee,
the fault is no man's but thine own. Or, though thou be made a beggar,
thou shalt go to the devil, and thy goods shall not help thee. So that
it shall be decided: He who despises the word of God. If anyone despises
God's word and does not want to do what God says, God will not do what
he would like and needs.

(7) This is what the Lord wants to teach us here, that with five
loaves he will feed five thousand men who followed him in the
wilderness, with their wives and children, of whom there may have been
five thousand; they all have enough and there is still much left over.
This does not mean to preach with words, as he does in Matt. 6:33, where
he says, "Seek first the kingdom of God, and all the rest will be
yours"; but with action. As if he wanted to say, "I am rich and can
feed you well; only you see to it, be pious, keep to God's

[280L . **1, 283-286. On Sunday Lätare. W. xm, 608-611.**
281]{.underline}

Word and follow it: then let me see where you can find food. This is the
doctrine of faith, as much as it is presented to us in today's
miraculous work.

(8) But besides such teaching and comfort, there are two little things
here which the evangelist has diligently tried to show: the first, that
the Lord asks the disciples, and they show their discretion; the second,
that he is called to take up the fragments, and does not want anything
to go in vain.

(9) Now as for the disciples Philip and Andrew, it is easy to see what
the cause is: although the Lord provokes us to faith through such
wonderful blessings, yet such faith is not righteous in us. For we all
lack, as the disciples lack here, to see only how much we need. But how
much Christ can give with his blessing we do not want to see.

10 Philip estimates the number quite accurately. He says: One must have
bread for two hundred pennies, if each one is to have only a little. Now
a penny, which in Latin is called a denarius, is worth half a place, and
eight such pennies or groschen make one florin of coin. If there had
been five thousand men alone, and otherwise neither woman nor child, one
would have been entitled to bread for three and a half heller. That is
not too much for a hungry stomach, where one has nothing else. But there
are also many women and children, as Matthew reports in chapter 14, who
are not counted. So you see, Philip is not lacking in arithmetic, he
finely estimates what he would have to have if he were to feed many
people with bread in the desert. We can also make a fine calculation of
what we need and must have for our household for a week, a quarter of a
year, a whole year. But as soon as we see that the supply is not there,
we become fainthearted and sad about it, and think that we must leave
home, run away, or even die of hunger.

(11) It is the same with Andrew, who sees how the Lord would like to
help the poor people, and therefore indicates that there is a small
supply of five loaves and two fish.

But as soon as he thinks of such a large pile, of so many mouths and
hungry bellies, such a supply is to him as if nothing were there. What
is this, he says, among so much? He immediately abandons faith for the
sake of the bill and thinks that the people cannot be helped.

(12) This is the common lack that we still feel today, not only for
food, but also in all kinds of hardships and troubles, that we know how
to make a fine calculation of what we need, as it would be necessary for
us to be advised and helped. But if it does not arrive as soon as we
would like, we have nothing more to gain from such a bill than
displeasure and sadness. And it would be much better if we let God take
care of it and did not think about what we need. Then there would only
be a lack if the need were found; otherwise the need would not remain
outside, and we would not be able to help with our worries. Therefore we
must eat and gnaw before the time with our thoughts and plans, which are
in vain and in vain. For we will never think ourselves rich nor worry.
But we can think and worry ourselves sick, consumptive, mad and foolish,
as can be seen in daily examples.

(13) Since our reason cannot do otherwise than to reckon exactly and
to see what we need, and this is quite contrary to faith, the evangelist
did not want to leave it unreported, so that we might learn from the
disciples' example how such reckoning is so utterly false and vain, if
we are otherwise Christians and have Christ with us. According to
reason, Philip and Andrew think right, and it is impossible that a
reasonable man could think differently or make a better calculation. But
we Christians not only have reason, but also the word of God. Therefore,
we should not only be able to calculate accurately, but also to believe
with certainty. And where we do not know how to calculate, we should
stick to the word and faith.

14. for behold, what a Christian has for a master of food and a steward
in the

**282 8.1, 286-288. On Sunday Lätare. W. XIII, 611-614. 283**

Lord Christ. We cannot give any longer than we have. But John says of
Christ: He gave of the bread and fishes, not as much as there was, but
"as much as he would. Do not think that he alone did it at that time
and will not do it again among his Christians. For as reported before,
we see examples of this blessing every day: not only with food, that God
gives and helps poor, meager, lowly people, who fear him and love and
value his word, but also in all kinds of other needs, that he
miraculously and unexpectedly provides counsel. For he is almighty and
has promised us help and salvation.

15 Therefore, where we lack the account, it is up to us to keep to faith
and prayer, and to take comfort in the fact that we have such a God, who
not only can increase a small supply by His blessing, as He miraculously
and unexpectedly increased flour and oil for the widow in Sarepta, but
He can also make everything out of nothing. We should take note of this
comfort and, as Christ says in Matthew 6, strive to seek first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness. The rest, what we need for our
sustenance, we should leave to our Father in heaven, who will give it to
His own, as the 127th Psalm v. 2. says, sleeping, that is, they should
have the blessing, and yet not know how and where it comes from; as it
also happened here. For it was such a miracle that the loaves and fishes
grew visibly under the hands of the Lord Christ, when he broke one piece
in two and gave the other part of himself, the same piece soon became
one more. This is what the Lord wanted to put in our eyes and hearts, so
that we would learn to trust Him and not only calculate according to
what we see in front of us or have in store.

We see how miserable things are in the world now. The Turk does not
celebrate, the longer the closer he comes to us. But we grow from day to
day, the longer the more in disagreement and disloyalty against

each other, they decrease in people and money. The pope on the other
side does not celebrate like that either; he is as hostile to our Gospel
as the Turk is to Christianity. That is why there is no stopping him and
his pile, always making one practice after another, how they could
dampen the doctrine and re-establish the old idolatry. When a Christian
sees such trafficking, the challenge is not absent; reason begins to
calculate and to think about the matter diligently, as much as it can,
seeking ways and means how to help the matter. But because such means
are not at all suitable and the calculation does not want to be correct,
it is impossible that a heart should not be saddened by it and almost
despair, as if everything would have to fail and break. But because such
a challenge does not remain outside (for flesh and blood cannot be
otherwise than its kind), Christians should learn, where the account
will fail, to hold to the word and begin to believe.

(17) But what does the Word say? Item, what shall we believe in such
distress? Believe that Christ has overcome the world, and that the gates
of hell shall not prevail against his congregation, Matt. 16:18; "The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears upon their
prayer," Ps. 34:16; "Who is he that can hurt you, if ye do that which
is good? Even though you suffer for righteousness, you are blessed," 1
Pet. 3:12-14; "The Lord knows how to deliver the godly from temptation,
but to keep the unrighteous until the day of judgment, to torment
them," 2 Pet. 2:9; as Peter shows in the same place with the example of
the righteous Lot of Sodom.

18 Therefore, whoever takes God's word and promise before him and
builds firmly on it, the account, even if it is lacking, will not be
able to make him fainthearted or bring him to despair. For he sees a
Lord above him who reigns in the midst of his enemies and takes pleasure
in it, where they will not yield to his word and will not leave his
Christians satisfied, so that he then proves his name and power on his
enemies and pushes to the ground everything that rebels against him, as
he did to Pharaoh and the Egyptians. Thus

[284 **n i, 288-2W. On the Sunday of Lätare. W. xm,** 285]{.underline}

By the help of the word one comes to the point that one can have hope,
even though there is no hope. For reason, because it does not see help,
must despair. But the word shows certain help, as long as we keep
faithfully to the word, remain devout and call upon God. But whoever is
godless, lives in sin and an evil conscience, and still wants to rely on
God's promise, with which he comforts the pious, would be lying a fool.

(19) Now this is the defect of the disciples here, that they are able
to reckon so well, but they will not believe nor see what Lord they have
in Christ. Otherwise Philip would have said, "For two hundred pennies'
worth of bread there is not enough for each of them to take but a
little"; but praise God that we have you with us, my dear Lord Jesus;
for through your blessing and help, though we have not a penny and are
in the wilderness, yet we will have bread enough; for you can do an art
that other men cannot do. Andrew would also have said, "There is a boy
here who has five barley loaves and two fish"; if I were to distribute
it, it would hardly be enough for ten of them; but if it goes through
your hand, all of them will have enough to eat, and will still remain.
This the word by faith would have taught them. But because word and
faith have disappeared through exact reckoning, it is evident that they
have no confidence in the Lord to advise them. Therefore it is said: If
you want to be a Christian and cannot leave your arithmetic, then take
the word before you, hold firmly to it and learn to believe it;
otherwise you cannot be helped.

(20) Where our dear Lord Christ is thus seen with us through his
blessing, we are to pick up the pieces, as he calls the apostles here,
and not let them perish. For just as our reason in its lack only wants
to reckon and not to believe, so where the blessing of God is plentiful,
the world cannot and will not properly take its place in it.

21. some misuse the blessing for abundance; as you can see, when it is
a wine-filled year, everyone makes believe that God has given it so that
they may have all the more

should drink and kill. But it does not have the opinion at all. One
should diligently store up God's blessings and not waste them, but save
them for future need. As Joseph taught the king in Egypt, he should use
the seven good years to save himself and his country from famine during
the seven bad years. Thus, if God gives a year's good fortune to this
or another craft, so that the merchandise is good and goes well, such a
blessing should be diligently saved, and one should not think that
because of it he will consume all the more and let it grow. No, God's
blessing should always be cherished and saved for a future need. But
because one does not do this, but rather misuses God's blessing so
shamefully for sins and disgraces, one drives God with such naughtiness
that He must stop at Himself, and where there has been one good year,
two or three evil years must follow. For how else can God resist the
shameful evil world and the abominable abuse?

Some, however, abuse the blessing in the sense that they put it behind
them and save when the years are good, so that they can profit from it,
squeeze the poor, and increase the market as they wish. These are also
morose, harmful people, who certainly do not (may not) show any mercy to
God, unless they mend their ways; otherwise it is impossible that God
should not be vehemently angry with them. For the Lord did not mean to
say that he would take up the crumbs that were left over, so that you
should be stingy with them, but that you might serve your neighbor's
need with them, and help the poor people who are lacking all the more
easily. So you will buy and gather grain, wine and other things at the
proper time, when it becomes expensive, so that you may press other
people with them and scrape and scrape them to your liking. Just as if
God had given you a good year, that you might enjoy it alone, and atone
for your shameful stinginess with other people's harm.

For this reason, God must also let His punishment go here. Whoever
trusts in His word, we have heard, even though he lacks, God will be
there with His blessing, so that

286 **L. i, 29o.29i.** On the Sunday of Judica. **W.** xm, **si6-"i9.**
287

the little shall yield abundantly and still remain. Again, whoever
scratches and scrapes and wants to misuse God's blessing for his
stinginess, God punishes him, even if he has much, so that it will run
out and he will be no different from the poorest beggar with all his
abundance. As one sees and learns that miser and usurer are poor,
miserable, well-suffering people. As sour as it gets for them until they
achieve something, as sour, yes, much sourer it gets for them until they
think how they can invest it again in the best way. If an accident
happens, as it commonly does, that the grain on the ground comes alive,
the wine in the cellar runs, or some other misfortune strikes, then they
first have heartache, know not where to turn, gnaw and eat their own
hearts out; not only can they not be happy with their enjoyment, but if
it changes a little, they have all the misfortune, worry, toil, work and
illness to pay for it.

(24) But who would not a thousand times rather have a little with
peace and gladness of heart than much with such anxious restlessness,
care and anxiety? Especially if you want to see how the devil is not far
from such a place.

The grief of the poor is so great and so foolish when the grain or the
wine fails that they go and kill themselves with grief or otherwise,
that God gives food and drink to poor people. Then eternal sorrow
follows such temporal sorrow. This is what you get when you misuse
God's blessing for stinginess. It should not be wasted, but should be
carefully and diligently saved, so that where there is a lack, we may
help other poor and needy people all the more abundantly. For the fact
that our Lord God gives more to one person than to another is not
because we abuse it solely for our own preservation or pleasure, but so
that we may all the more willingly help others who need it and save it
up for them and for ourselves.

(25) Therefore, your love has a beautiful, comforting teaching, how we
should look to our Lord Christ in adversity, keep His word, and wait for
blessings from Him. May God grant His grace that we may become more and
more godly from day to day, and may experience such blessings both in
food and in all other hardships, through Jesus Christ our Lord, amen.

**On the Sunday of Judica. *)**

**John 8:46-59.**

Which of you can accuse me of sin? But if I tell you the truth, why do
you not believe me? He who is of God hears the word of God. Therefore
you do not hear, for you are not of God. Then the Jews answered and said
unto him, Say we not rightly that thou art a Samaritan, and hast the
devil? JEsus answered: I have no devil, but I honor my Father, and ye
dishonor me. I seek not mine honor: but there is one that seeketh it,
and judgeth it. Verily, verily, I say unto you, If any man keep my word,
he shall never see death. Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that
thou hast the devil. Abraham died, and the prophets, and thou sayest, If
any man keep my word, he shall not taste death for ever. Art thou more
than our father Abraham, which died? and the prophets died. What do you
make of yourself? Jesus answered, "If I honor myself, my honor is
nothing. But it is my Father that honoureth me, whom ye say is your God:
and ye know him not, but I know him. And if I should say that I know him
not, I should be a liar, as ye are. But I know him, and keep his word.
Abraham, your father, was glad to see my day, and he saw it and
rejoiced. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old,
and hast seen Abraham? JEsus said to them: Verily, verily, I say unto
you, before Abraham was, I am. So they picked up stones to throw at him.
But JEsus hid himself, and went out into the temple, passing through the
midst of them.

*) Held in the house, 1533.

[288 **L. 1, 291-293. On the Sunday of Judica. W. XIII, "20-622.**
289]{.underline}

This is a beautiful, rich gospel, since much would be preached from it.
But it is too much in one bite. Therefore we will take only the main
part of it, namely, that Christ says: One should hear his word gladly.
Whoever hears it is from God. He who does not hear it is not of God.

(2) Christ speaks these words so simply that no one thinks that they
have such great things in them. But whoever looks at them rightly,
whoever thinks about them diligently, what it is to be of God or not to
be of God, will have to confess that it is a great and excellent thing
that Christ speaks of here. For it is true and certain that one cannot
judge a man more harshly, nor attack him more violently, than if one
says that he is not of God. That someone calls me a mischievous and
wicked man, or even stabs me in the neck, is nothing compared to this
horrible misery, which the Lord summarizes here in short words, when he
says to the Jews: "You are not of God. Therefore, it is all in this
piece that we should gladly hear God's word and diligently keep it.

In the history of the gospel it is seen everywhere that those who do not
want to hear God's word, speak evil of it and blaspheme it, they follow
the devil until he finally possesses them and they become more and more
angry. As can be seen in today's Gospel. First the Jews are angry when
Christ begins to preach; then they rebuke him, calling him a Samaritan,
and say, He has a devil. There they have already fallen ten miles deeper
into hell than before. After that they become even more nonsensical.
What do you, they say, make of yourself? In sum, the longer they go on,
the angrier they get, until at last they become murderers, pick up
stones and want to throw him to death. They fall into such an abominable
sin out of contempt for the word that they do not want to hear Christ's
sermon, but blaspheme it. This, says the Lord, is an indication that you
Jews are of the devil. For if you were of God, you would stand
differently against his word, which I preach.

4. that at present children are commonly so disobedient and wilful
against

their parents, also comes from the fact that they do not hear God's
word, do not learn it, and do not remember it. When they begin to
despise their father and mother against God's command, they do not stop
at this sin, but continue to curse their parents, and even if they do
not strike or strangle them with their hands, they still want them to be
dead, or lead such a shameful life that their parents must be grieved to
death.

(5) Thus it is that whoever does not hear God's word, or does not
want to keep it, becomes a liar, blasphemer and persecutor. As we see in
the papists that they become more and more furious the longer, and will
not stop their blaspheming and persecuting until they also become
murderers one day and cause a horrible bloodshed 2c.

Now this is the most serious thing. In other sins, if someone does
wrong, he can be made to recognize his sin and desist from it. But since
the papists (also many among us) not only do not want to hear God's
word, but also despise and blaspheme it, no one can mean or persuade
them that they are doing wrong and sinning. Yes, they think they have
good reason and do right by it. They pretend that it is not the word of
God, but the doctrine of the devil and lies; those who preach it are the
worst heretics and deceivers. Just as the Jews reviled and blasphemed
Christ, saying that he had the devil and was a Samaritan; so that they
gave enough to understand what they thought of his teaching. So the most
abominable sin wants to be the highest holiness. 2c.

(7) Therefore the wicked devil himself is where people fall into this
sin, that they do not want to hear God's word and despise it. For then
it will not fail, as we see here with the Jews, that they will throw
stones at Christ, even hang him on the cross, and still consider this to
be right, and still want to be unpunished in this greatest injustice.
Take care that you do not fall into this.

(8) Therefore it is a hard and sincere word that the Lord speaks here
to the Jews: "You do not hear the word of God, therefore you are not of
God. For he who is not of God is of the devil; so he has his fran-

**[290 L. 1, 293-296. On Sunday Judica. W. xm, 622-625.
291]{.underline}**

zoses, pestilence and all infernal plagues with heaps: more misfortune
cannot be wished for him.

(9) And it is a grievous pity that such a great and grievous sin is
still so common among all classes. For how many are there (both among
the great lords and in the lower classes) who, if you say to one, "It
is not true that you do not go to the sermon at all, or if you hear it
at once, learn nothing from it, you will not be of God," take such
things to heart, or are frightened by them? Most of them are so minded
that they would answer: What do I ask about the sermon? But if thou wilt
further persist, and say, It is no good; thou must take a different view
of the matter, if thou wilt be saved; thou shalt find that after such
admonition they will only grow angry, and reject thee with these or such
clumsy words: Thou shalt leave them satisfied, in all their names, or
they will do otherwise to the matter.

(10) This is such an abominable plague and wrath, that a Christian
heart should rightly be terrified by it, since the judgment is: He who
does not hear the word of God is not of God, but is the child of the
devil. In addition, this naughtiness strikes, as said, that such
despisers of the Word are right and want to defend such blasphemous
virtue; as the Jews do here, and say, "Do we not say rightly that you
are a Samaritan, and have the devil?" This is the worst devil, who
still wants to be a god and holy, does not want to be wrong nor to be
told so.

(11) This is one thing, that he who does not hear the word of God is
not of God, but of the devil. But this is not to be understood as if the
devil had created those who do not hear God's word, and had given them
mouth, eyes, reason and other things. No, all these things are God's
creatures and gifts. Therefore, the essence and the custom must be
distinguished. A man who lies and deceives has a good tongue from God,
but the use of the tongue is from the devil, since he misuses the tongue
to serve the devil against God. Thus God gives healthy, beautiful eyes,
but he who abuses his eyes and likes to see lewdly.

thing, that is of the devil. So when the heart thinks of fornication,
deceit, lies and the like, the heart is good in its nature and from God,
but the custom is evil and from the devil.

12 Now, to be of God is to use the ears to hear preaching, to be
punished when they are wrong, and to pray, preach, instruct, and comfort
with the tongue. Such ears and tongues are of God and good; for they
walk in a godly custom. So when the heart thinks about discipline, and
how to be useful to the neighbor and not annoying. Such a heart is a
creature of God, like ears and tongue. But it is called "of God"
because it follows God's word and does not like to think, speak or hear
what is against God. Now it may happen from time to time that we curse
when we ought to pray, or are angry when we ought to be kind; 2c. such
is wrong. But if we repent and confess that we have done wrong, and ask
for mercy, this may be called stumbling, or even falling, but it is not
called having the devil, nor being of the devil; for we repent again,
and resolve never to do it again.

013 But they are the devil's children, who put on their heads, and when
they are punished and admonished for their good, they say, like
unadvised children, What do I ask after this? So they go on as they have
begun, and are not told. Such people are of the devil, and the longer
they go on, the worse they become, for the devil will not let them rest.
At first they despise the word, then they blaspheme it, reproach and
curse. Finally they do like the Jews here, pick up stones and want to
murder. So that the true color of the devil is not to hear God's word,
but to revile and blaspheme, to harm one's neighbor and to murder. By
such color one knows the devil and his children; for he is a murderer
and liar, despising God and his word.

14 Therefore learn to beware of such sin, that you do not also despise
God's word, but gladly hear it; and diligently meditate upon it,
forming it in your hearts, and

**[292 2.1, 296-298. On the Sunday of Judica. W. XIII, 625-628.
293]{.underline}**

direct your life according to it; then you can know for certain that you
are children of God and by God.

The others are the children of the devil. Because they do not want to
hear the word, they have lost life and righteousness, and are, to speak
with leave, in the devil's ass. And do not help them if they can
already cover such sin with that they are powerful, great and rich. The
pope is in such sin up to the ears, with all his appendages. For he does
not want to suffer God's word, persecutes and murders Christians over
it: this is the devil's real color.

16. But those who gladly hear the word of God are of God. Now what is
God? He is not a murderer, but a creator, since all life flows from Him.
For the devil has never created or made alive any human being. Now as
GOD is a living GOD, so also those shall have life who are of Him and
hear His word. As he says here with an excellent, beautiful saying:
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, if any man keep my word, he shall not
see death for ever."

(17) But what does "keeping God's word" mean? Nothing else, but to
believe what Christ promises us in the Gospel about the forgiveness of
sin and eternal life, that it is true, and to hold fast to such faith
and hope. Whoever does this, says Christ, has eternal life; must not be
afraid of sin, hell and the last judgment, for there is all grace and
mercy. Death will fall upon him and choke him, but he will not feel it
as those who die in the name of the devil and without the word of God.
They die in all displeasure, struggling, thrashing about, bellowing like
oxen; for they do not want to die and yet they must die. Therefore, if
it were possible, they would run through an iron wall.

(18) Thus, says Christ, shall it not be with my Christians who hear
and keep my word. When they lie on the bed and die, they will not have
such anguish and distress, they will be satisfied in their heart toward
God and hope for a better life, and in such hope they will fall asleep.

and pass away without all trembling. For although death will choke them
bodily, the same death shall be so covered and weakened that they shall
not really feel it, but shall regard it as a gentle resting place when
they fall asleep. As is often seen in the poor people whom the
executioner strangles, that they go to death with joy, and do not make
themselves miserable, as those who do not have the comfort of the word.
For he who feels death rightly and does not have God's word rages and
rages as if he were insane and even possessed.

(19) Therefore, dear children, think what advantage you have if you
hear God's word diligently and gladly. This is the first thing, that
you know that you are of God, and have overcome the devil and hell, and
neither sin nor God's judgment shall harm you. Whatever evil you
encounter besides these things, you shall be able to escape it all. On
the other hand, the world becomes impatient and despondent even in the
slightest matter, and must finally despair.

(20) Christians must indeed suffer much, as the devil and the world
are bitter enemies to them; for this reason they must risk life and
limb, goods and honor, and put them in jeopardy. But how can they suffer
all this and be patient? By nothing else than by sticking to their word
and saying: "Let it go as it may; I am not of the world, but of God;
otherwise the world would deal with me differently. But I would much
rather it hated me and put me to all harm than that it loved me and I
was not of God. 2c. Where the heart is so minded, all manner of
temptation and adversity passes over; as the clouds in the sky above us,
or the birds in the air, which make us a little angry, fly away
afterward, and leave us unsworn.

(21) This shall be our comfort, that we may feel the power of the word
here in life; and especially when the last hour cometh, that then death
shall be as a sleep, because of the word which we believe. If someone
rides along in a thick fog and sees no murderer, he is shot or murdered
before he becomes aware of it. So it shall be here also. The

294 **L.i, 2S8-3oo. On the Sunday of Judica. W. xm, 028-031.** 295

The devil is a murderer, has sworn death to us, we know that well. But
because we have the word and hold fast to it, we shall not be quite
aware of such strangulation. For the word makes fine, gentle people and
quiet, cheerful hearts, who neither despair nor grow impatient in
anguish, but let it all pass, taking comfort only in the fact that they
have a gracious Father in heaven through Christ. They learn this in the
Word, otherwise they would not know it.

22. But tell me, should we not run to the end of the world for the sake
of daily hardship and adversity alone, according to this consolation
which the word gives us, that we may have a peaceful heart? But this is
nothing against the last and greatest calamity, death, since no
physician, counsel or help can help and save us from it, but only our
dear Lord Jesus Christ, who gives us such a remedy that we should leave
everything rather than take it.

But how is it? When he offers us such a remedy, we despise it when we
are at home and in our pants. Then we receive our deserved reward for
not being of God, and fall from one sin to another, becoming worse every
day. As I have sufficiently indicated above. When the last hour of need
comes, one knows neither consolation nor counsel. Then it is impossible
that one should not writhe, lament, howl and roar like an ox in the
slaughter.)

(24) This, then, is the main teaching of today's gospel, that we
should diligently attend to the word, gladly hearing it and accepting it
with faith. If we do this, we shall be lords over sin, the devil, death
and hell. Although death will devour us, we will not feel its sharp
teeth. For the word of Christ is our armor, through which we shall have
a secure life and a peaceful death and eternal life.

(25) But to rough, ungodly people who do not respect the word, one
cannot wish for trouble, for they are ready to have it on their hands.

*) Marginal gloss: Here he mentioned the bishop of Trier, who died in
the highest impatience.

Because they do not hear God's word, they are not of God. Just like a
wicked child who despises God's commandment and is not obedient to
father and mother, what more trouble can one wish for him than that he
is a devil's child and not a child of God? In truth, this is not a
joke. For I would rather be the executioner's or the Turk's own than
be the devil's own, who is a liar and a murderer and leads to eternal
death.

26. beware diligently of such afflictions, and learn, yea, learn, I
say, what treasure ye have in the word of our lord jesus christ: that
there is no other help nor counsel against the devil, sin, and eternal
death, but to keep the word of christ, that is, to believe his promise,
and to trust in his word.

For when Christ says, "He who keeps my word will not see death
forever," he does not mean the law given to the Jews through Moses,
which is indeed a right, good and holy teaching, but because we are
sinners and children of wrath by nature, we cannot follow such
preaching; therefore, it is enough for us to die, showing us our sin,
God's wrath and punishment, which we have earned through it. Therefore
we need another word, so that sin may be taken away from us and we may
be justified before God. This is now the word of our Lord Christ JEsu,
where he comforts: "He who believes in me will not see death forever.

This word must be taken with faith, so that there is no doubt that what
Christ promises us is true. For anyone who would ignore the word and
judge by what he feels would feel only death and not life. Therefore, in
such distress, we must judge and speak not according to what we see and
feel before our eyes, but according to what we hear in the Word: I see
that I must die, but I have the promise and word of my Lord Christ that
I shall live again through him. For the sin for which I was to suffer
death eternally has been put away and paid for through Christ, so that
God, for the sake of his dying and rising again, will be merciful to me
and will grant me life again.

296 **L. 1, 300.301.** Palm Sunday. **W. xm, 631-033.** 297

eternal life. This is what it means to keep Christ's word. But it is a
sour matter, for flesh and blood will not be persuaded, but will always
judge according to what is seen before the eyes and felt in the work. We
must fight against such naughtiness and ask God for His Holy Spirit to
strengthen our hearts through the Word and keep them in such faith.

29) But what is the cause that the word of our dear Lord Christ is so
powerful, the Lord shows at the end of this gospel, and outrages the
Jews so fiercely with it that they want to grab stones and throw him to
death. For this stood in the way of the Jews, because Christ said that
his word would save from eternal death, that they saw that Abraham,
Moses, and other holy men, who had public testimony in the Scriptures,
had died; thinking then that Christ was not like them. Therefore it
would be a forgiven glory that he praises his word so highly. But Christ
answers, "Abraham was glad that he should see my day; and he saw it,
and rejoiced." That is, if Abraham had not kept my word, he would have
remained in eternal death.

be. "I am rather than Abraham." This is both said: I am eternal,
almighty God. Whoever then shall be delivered from sins, escape from
death, and come to life, must be helped by me. Neither Moses nor other
prophets could boast of such things, for they were all men. But Christ
is God and man; therefore he can give life and salvation, and no one
else.

(30) This is very comforting and a certain proof of our faith, since
we confess that Christ is the natural and eternal Son of God. As there
are many more such testimonies in the gospel. For this reason we should
put our trust in him alone, and in no other man, and rely on his word
with certainty. For it is God's word and cannot lie. What he says shall
be true, and shall not fail for ever; neither has it failed, since by
such a word God made heaven and earth from nothing. Learn this
diligently, and give thanks to God for such teaching, and pray that He
may preserve you in the Word by His Holy Spirit, and so make you
eternally blessed through Christ, amen.

**Palm Sunday.**

**Matth. 21, 1-9.**

Now when they were come near Jerusalem to Bethphage, unto the mount of
Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples, and said unto them: Go into the
place which is before you, and soon ye shall find an ass tied, and a
colt with her; loose her, and bring her unto me. And if any man say any
thing unto you, say, The LORD hath need of her; and he will soon let her
go unto you. Now all these things came to pass, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Tell the daughter of
Zion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee meekly, riding upon an ass, and
upon a colt of the burthen of an ass. The disciples went and did as
Jesus had commanded them, and brought the ass and the colt, and laid
their garments thereon, and set him thereon. But many of the people
spread the garments on the road; the others cut branches from the trees
and scattered them on the road. And the people that went before and
followed cried out, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed be he
that cometh in the name of the LORD, Hosanna in the highest.

You have the interpretation of the Gospel on the first Sunday of Advent.

[298 L. i, 3M.302. On the day of Christ's supper. W. xni, 648-Wo.
299]{.underline}

**On the day of the Last Supper of Christ.*)**

**The first sermon.**

**1 Cor. 11, 23-26.**

I have received it from the Lord, which I have given you. For the Lord
Jesus, on the night that he was betrayed, took bread, and gave thanks,
and brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body which is broken for
you: this do in remembrance of me. The same also the cup, after supper,
saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: as often as ye drink
it, do it in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat of this bread,
and drink of this cup, ye shall proclaim the death of the Lord, until he
come.

**Of the Most Reverend Sacrament.**

1. Since, according to ancient custom, more people go to the holy
sacrament at this time than at any other time of the year, and since
necessity does not require that a certain day be set aside for preaching
about the holy sacrament or the Lord's Supper, and for teaching the
young people, we will now take before us the text of St. Paul, which you
have heard read; Let us now take before us the text of St. Paul, which
you have heard read and from which you have understood that such a
manner was not ordained nor made by man, but was appointed by the Lord
Christ Himself on the night He was betrayed, for the special high
consolation of His disciples and all Christians, that it should be His
testament, and because He was now about to depart from the world, His
last (farewell).

2 Therefore it behooves us Christians to regard such a testament as a
great treasure, and to take all joy and comfort from it, and to find it
often and gladly. In this way we do justice to the last will and
testament of our Lord Christ. For his commandment is written plainly,
that it shall be done. Those who are Christians will obey this command
until the last day, and will seek such comfort often and gladly, and
will not grow weary of it until he, the dear Lord, who has made this
testament himself, has given it to us.

*Held on Wednesday after Easter 1534 in the presence of John Ernst, the
younger prince, as he received Holy Communion with his court servants.

will come from heaven and judge the living and the dead.

3. in the past in the papacy we were deterred by the fact that Paul
says: "He who receives it unworthily receives it for judgment. For it
has not been properly taught what it is to receive unworthily. Hence the
dishonor of the holy sacrament arose, that people feared it as if it
were a poison; therefore it was no longer called a food of comfort, but
a harmful food. The false preachers have been guilty of this, and we
have earned it with our ingratitude. For because Christ meant it so
warmly, and we, on the other hand, have been so lazy, lax, and
ungrateful, it has happened to us that joy has been turned into sadness,
comfort into weeping, and help into harm. Why have we so shamefully
despised such great goods?

(4) The same thing is happening now with the sacramentalists, who have
made a dangerous noise in the church about the sacrament, and have
directed the people to it, as if there were no more than wine and bread.
Christians must be deprived of the comfort that our Lord Christ gave to
His Church in this Sacrament. Therefore, we should beware of them, lest
it happen to us as it did before in the papacy. Finally, it came to pass
that the sacrament,

[300 **1, 302-305. On the day of Christ's supper. W. xm, 65o-"s3.**
301]{.underline}

the comforting food, which everyone should have a desire and love for,
has been dealt with in the sermons in such a way that people have gone
to it with trembling and fear, and everyone has feared it more than they
have received comfort from it.

(5) For the sermon was thus, that one should first confess sin purely,
and do enough for it. Then we were pointed to an impossible thing. When
we felt that we were not pure in all things, and therefore not worthy of
such food, we feared that we would not be worthy to go. So it happened
in general that no one liked to go to it. For everyone had to fear that
he would get death there, or, as Paul calls it, eat judgment. First of
all, this is a miserable act in itself, that people have been deprived
of this comforting sacrament, and everyone has been afraid of it.

(6) But the pope went on, and made things worse, because the people
shied away from this sacrament, and he forced them by force to go at
least once a year. For whoever did not want to go to the sacrament
annually, he put under ban; and yet only gave a form (as it is called),
contrary to the expressed command of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, who not
only said to eat his testament, that is, his body and blood, with, with
or under the bread, but also to drink from the cup of his blood. But the
pope has trampled such a command underfoot, and still today condemns as
heresy whoever takes the Lord's Supper under both forms completely, as
Christ, our dear Lord, has instituted and commanded. This is a miserable
abomination and a terrible communion, since one went to it unwillingly,
and yet had to do it. And what is still more serious, such a supper must
be taken in a different way than Christ instituted and commanded it to
be taken.

(7) Then think what delight you might have in such food or drink as
one would thrust into you against your will and pour into you by force.
It is as if a sick person, who does not like the smell of wine, wanted
to pour wine over his body.

What joy or pleasure should he have in such drinking? Thus the reverend
sacrament has not been able to produce any fruit among the people under
the papacy. Because it was received with such an opinion that the hearts
had to conclude: You are not pure, you are not worthy of this food, you
cannot enjoy it properly; and yet you had to do it, or suffer the ban as
disobedient children of the church: it is easy to assume that there was
neither comfort nor joy in it.

After that the pope continued with the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ
and his will, and made it a fair for the deceased souls, so that few
masses were held for their own devotion, only for the sake of money and
prebends. That is, I think, yes, this sacrament acted beyond measure
abominably. And I think that if the papacy had remained in its dignity
longer and the dear gospel had not come, it would have been taken from
the living and used only for the dead. For we old people have well
experienced what a splendor the masses of the soul have become
everywhere.

(9) For this reason, I wanted to remember it now, so that it might be
seen how highly God has punished the ungrateful world, that he has seen
the pope leave only one figure (as they call it); and yet the same has
been so darkened that the people have gone as to a work that they do not
enjoy, but have to fear a terrible judgment and wrath of God.

10 After this, the pope made a plaster out of the mass, which was to be
put over all kinds of misfortune and illness. Let us not forget this
example, but for the sake of God, let us see to it that we do not become
such despisers, but have pleasure and love for the Lord's Supper and
receive it gladly, so that it remains in a right mind and right custom.

(11) For, tell me, is it not exceedingly kind of the Lord to pour out
his heart against his disciples in this way, and

302 **L. 1, 305-307. on the day of Christ's supper. W. xm, 653-656.**
303

Says: "Take and eat, this is my body. Take and drink of it, all of you;
this is my blood of the new testament." Do this alone, that you may
remember me, and not forget me; and do it not once alone, but often, and
until the last day. If then the dear Christ would gladly preserve his
memory, knowledge and faith by his supper and testament, so that he
would not be strangled in our hearts. Therefore institute this supper,
that it may remain forever, and that his death, by which we are purged
from sins and all eternal miseries, may be remembered forever.

(12) But this is spoken kindly, not poisonously nor angrily, yes, much
more kindly than a father can speak to his son. For it is all because of
this, he says, that you should not forget me. He would therefore gladly
form this memory in the ears, mouth and heart of all of us, so that his
holy suffering would not be forgotten, as he suffered, died and rose
again from death for our sake. He wanted this to remain in the hearts of
his Christians forever, because there are always other and young people
growing up. This requires not only that they be taught the Word, so that
they may learn to know Christ their Savior and also be saved; but that
they be kept in such outward worship, so that they may always have cause
to praise and take comfort in their Savior and Redeemer Christ. For this
is the purpose of the Lord with such an institution of his will.
Therefore we should not grow weary of such remembrance. Where good
friends come together, they can sit and talk together all night and
forget to sleep. Why should we tire of preaching and learning how much
our dear Lord Christ has bought us?

Now this sacrament or communion is not instituted for the sole purpose
of praising Christ. For he may well say: I do not need your praise, I
can well do without you, nevertheless remain the Son of God, you praise
me or not; I become neither better nor worse by your praise. But also
because we have such a testa

and the Lord's Supper, and it shall be well with us. For behold the
words. He hands the bread, saying, "Take and eat; this is my body,
which is given for you." Then he hands the cup, saying, "Drink from
it, all of you; this is my blood of the New Testament, which is poured
out for you and for many for the remission of sins."

14 First of all, let this be the greatest comfort to all Christians,
that they may hear that the body of the Lord Christ was given for them,
and that his blood was shed for their sins. For whoever believes this,
it is impossible that he should allow sin or anything else to be
impugned. Because he knows that this treasure, that his sin might be put
away, is far more and greater than his sin.

(15) But Christ does not stop at the comfort which is thus publicly
given in the word; he gives you his body to eat with the bread and his
blood to drink with the wine, as the words clearly imply, if the devil
should be sorry; so that you may receive such body and blood for your
person, that it may be yours and be your own, just as you receive it for
yourself with your mouth and not for another. For this is also the
primary reason why each one believes that Christ suffered for him and
not only for St. Peter, St. Paul and other saints. This is what Christ
wanted to assure every Christian in his testament, since each one
receives and enjoys such a testament for himself, that is, the body of
Christ and his blood.

(16) Therefore it is not unjustly said that in this sacrament one may
obtain and receive forgiveness of sins. For where Christ is, there is
forgiveness of sins. Here is his body and blood, according to his words.
Whoever then receives it, eats and drinks it, and believes that the body
of the Lord Christ was given for him and that his blood was shed for the
forgiveness of sins, should he not have forgiveness of sins? This is a
fruit, and the greatest and best that we have in this testament.

The other fruit is that it is necessary for Christianity to remain
united and to have one faith and doctrine. So that Christians may be on
the same level, they must not come together alone.

304 **L. i, 307-so. on the day of Christ's supper. W. xm, ess-6S8.**
305

in the sermon, hearing one word, thereby being called to one faith, and
all at the same time holding to one head; but they must also come home
to one table and eat and drink with one another.

(18) By listening to the sermon, it may well happen that one hears me
now who is hostile to me from the heart. Therefore, although the gospel
keeps Christians together and makes them of the same mind, the Lord's
Supper does even more (although hypocrites are also found), since every
Christian confesses publicly and for himself what he believes. There the
unbelievers *) separate themselves; and those who are equal in faith,
with one hope and heart toward the Lord, come together. This is a very
necessary thing in the church, so that they are drawn together, and
there is no division in the faith. That is why in Latin it is called
communionem, a fellowship, and those who do not want to be like the
other Christians in faith, doctrine and life, excommunicatos, as those
who are unequal in doctrine, words, mind and life, and therefore should
not be tolerated in the group that is of one mind, lest they also
separate and make division **). The holy sacrament serves to keep
Christ's house together.

(19) Hence the ancient teachers had his thoughts, saying, Christ
therefore used bread and wine for his supper, that as many grains have
each its own body and form, and are ground together, and become one
bread: so every man is a distinct person and a separate creature; but
because we are all partakers of one bread in the sacrament, we are all
one bread and body, 1 Cor. 10. For there is one faith, one confession,
one love, and one hope. So in wine there are many bunches of grapes and
many little berries, each having its own body and form; but as soon as
they are squeezed out and become wine, there is no inequality in the
wine, but it is one, fine, beautiful juice: so Christians also should
be.

*) *a b c* have: Unequal. D. Red. **) *a b c* have: columnar. D. Red.

This is how the ancients interpreted it, and it is not wrong. For this"
is the purpose of the sacrament, that it may keep Christians together in
one mind, doctrine and faith, so that each one may not be a peculiar
grain of his own, and make his own doctrine and peculiar faith.

20 As the devil does not celebrate, and would gladly tear apart such
unity and equality. For he knows well what harm will come to him if we
all believe the same thing and hold to one head. That is why he
challenges one here and another there with false faith, with despair,
with erroneous, false thoughts, that one does not believe correctly in
the sacrament and other articles, and that he could cause a separation.
Even though it will not be otherwise, there must be aversions, one
should always defend oneself, so that he does not separate us. If he or
she does not want to remain and separate from us in the doctrine of the
sacrament or other things, let us nevertheless keep together, so that,
as one is minded toward Christ in faith and hope, the other may also be
so minded. But this can never be, unless there is equality in doctrine.

This is one thing, that our dear Lord Jesus has so cordially instituted
the sacrament for the preservation of unity in doctrine, faith, and
life. Outwardly we cannot be equal, for there are unequal estates. If we
are to lead them rightly, unequal works must follow. A peasant lives
differently from a prince, and goes about with different works. A woman
of the house does different things than a maid. Such a difference must
remain in the outward life. But in Christ there is neither woman nor
man, neither ruler nor peasant, but they are all called believers in
Christ. For the same gospel, promise and faith that I have, a woman, a
prince, a peasant, a servant, a child has.

(22) This sacrament also shows such inward equality, since no one has
anything better than another. Therefore, whether it be wife or maid,
master or servant, father or son, prince or subject, they are all equal
here, having one food and promise; and if they believe,

[306 **L. 1. 309-311. On the day of Christ's supper. W. XHI. W8-661.**
307]{.underline}

they belong in One Heaven. And it does not matter whether I am here,
another Christian is in Jerusalem, and we do not know each other. For we
have only one head, so we adhere to both parts and hope to be saved by
it. So the devil is not left out, and would gladly tear apart such
unity; for, as I said, he knows what harm it does him when Christians
are united in doctrine and faith. This sacrament, which was instituted
by Christ to keep Christians together, serves against this.

(23) Then this sacrament is also necessary and useful to each one for
his own person. For though I should be weary of the sacrament, and
should not give thanks to the Lord Christ, the harm is mine; and the
longer I tarry from it, the worse it is for me. For it is ever true that
our Lord Christ does not need you to remember him for his person. But
thou needest it; for if thou wilt not think of Christ, thou must think
of the devil. But there you will have no benefit, but only harm.

(24) For thou hast a preacher with thee, which eateth and drinketh,
sleepeth and watcheth with thee, old Adam; whom thou carryest to bed
with thee, and risest up with thee, and liest down with thee; which
preacheth unto thee without ceasing, and can masterfully persuade thee,
that he may drag thee down, that thou mayest grow colder and colder, and
so slothful and lazy, that at last thou forgettest the Lord Christ and
his gospel, and askest it no more. This, I say, is done by the preacher
who hangs on your neck, yes, lies under your left teat; he blows your
ears full with his preaching, so that you think nothing but how you may
become great and rich before the world, so that today, tomorrow, the day
after tomorrow and all the days think you have no time, nor can you wait
to go to the sacrament. So it happens, if you are cold and discontented
today, you will be even colder tomorrow. This is what your preacher
does, the old rogue, who pulls you away in such a way that even though
you hear the sermon every day, you still think of other things and worry
more about other business. For, tell me, where will you find a man who
will

I am tired of avarice and disgusted by it? Yes, from day to day, the
longer, the more one is amused, the more one becomes impetuous and more
insistent on the shameful, cursed avarice and usury. It is the same with
other vices: a fornicator cannot think or talk enough about fornication,
and the longer he talks and thinks about it, the more heated he becomes
about it. This is what the old Adam does, he preaches to you until you
are even consumed in sin.

(25) Again, our dear Lord Christ would gladly have this, that as your
avarice tells you and preaches to you of money and goods, of power and
honor, so you also let yourself be drawn here and led into that life,
and remember your Redeemer, who died for you on the cross, and set your
heart on fire in such a way that you would like to be with him, and
become weary of this life here, and say, "Oh, Lord, I see that I cannot
stop sinning, I cannot grow weary of evil. Therefore I beseech thee that
I may become hostile to the world, and that I may gain pleasure and love
for thee 2c. This reminder is necessary for us daily against the harmful
preacher, our old Adam, who is in our ears day and night.

26 For this reason our dear Lord Christ instituted his supper, that we
should remember that something else would follow after this life.
Therefore he takes the bread and the cup, and tells his disciples to eat
and drink, saying, "His body and blood were given for us and poured out
for our sins, so that we might not forget them, but think of him, not
only of money and goods, as we are unfortunately wont to do. As if he
wanted to say: Pray to me in eight days, in four weeks 2c. even one day,
that you may remember me. You are in need of this; for my sake I could
well do without it.

(27) Yes, if it were money, and one gave to each not the body and
blood of Christ, but a hundred Hungarian florins, or even less, there
should be running, running and running; and it should come to pass that
blind men would venture to run through the middle of the Elbe or Rhine,
that they might get the hundred florins. We should spit on ourselves, we
hopeless people, that we run like this for the sake of a little money.

**308 8.1, 311-313. On the day of Christ's supper. W. XIII, 661-663.
309**

and run. And here are not a hundred florins, which are soon consumed;
but the body and blood of Christ JEsu, by which we are redeemed. He
gives us this treasure as our own in his will, and with it eternal life,
so that we can be sure of it, so that we can take comfort in it and
always remember it. But there one still flees from it as if it were
poison and damnation.

28, Who then makes us run after the hundred florins and not after this
precious, noble treasure? No one but the devil, who has our old Adam
before, who is lazy and indolent for the eternal good, and rather takes
care of the temporal. This ingratitude and contempt is a greater sin
than anyone can think. For everyone throws it to the winds; otherwise we
would be more diligent here, and not strive so earnestly for money and
goods, of which we are not sure for a moment. But those who do so may
see how they will fare one day.

29 Therefore the Lord wants to admonish us with his Lord's Supper not
to be so ungrateful, but to know that when we go to the reverend
sacrament and confess our faith alongside other Christians, that he is
served in this way, so that the greatest benefit is ours. Therefore we
should especially thank him and be glad that we now have a gracious
bishop in him, who not only sacrifices himself for us, but also feeds us
with his body and blood, which is sacrificed for us, yet desires nothing
more for it, than that we should remember him, so as to preserve
ourselves in the faith, and Christianity for eternity.

(30) Whoever does not want to do this is worth nothing better than to
hear a spirit of the mob preaching to him that in the Lord's Supper one
receives no more than bread and wine. In the papacy, when people did not
want to remember the Lord Christ at this supper, as he had commanded,
the trouble also had to arise from the fact that people neither knew
what the sacrament was nor why they should receive it. For everyone took
it for that,

It was not a question of obedience to the church; that was what it was;
so people fell into all kinds of idolatry and appeals to the saints.

May God help us to be more devout in the matter, because we have
received the doctrine again pure and clear, and know, when we go to the
reverend Sacrament, that it is for this reason that we first show
ourselves to be Christians and let ourselves be seen, and then take
comfort there, so that our hearts may not doubt that God is pleased with
us and will not be angry with us because of our sin; for Christ gave His
body for us and shed His blood for us. This is to proclaim the death of
the Lord aright, and to remember the Lord Christ, as he saith, "This do
in remembrance of me."

(32) Now think, my beloved, what is to be thought of those who boast
of being Christians, and go on for a whole year, two years, three years,
and even longer, and do not receive the reverend sacrament? The devil
has certainly possessed them to such an extent that they either never
pay attention to their sin, and therefore do not think about how they
can be freed from it; or they let themselves love temporal life more
than eternal life. This is terrible to hear in both parts. Therefore,
whoever wants to be a Christian, and also keep himself Christian
according to his name, should not abstain from this supper, but use it
often and much. For we are in great need of it, as is now reported.

33. But those who cannot have the whole sacrament as Christ instituted
it, whether they abstain from it and do not take it under one form, have
a different opinion. For they may keep the word and promise of Christ
until God also gives them grace to come to the places where they may
receive such a testament completely after the institution of Christ.

May God grant us His grace and the Holy Spirit through Christ, that we
may receive this comforting Sacrament to the glory of Christ and our
blessedness, Amen.

310 **L. 1.313.314. On the day of Christ's supper. W. XIII, 663-86S.**
311

**On the day of the supper of Christ.**

**The second sermon.**

**1 Cor. 11, 27-34,**

Whosoever therefore eateth unworthily of this bread, or drinketh of the
cup of the Lord, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily eateth and drinketh
judgment to himself, that he may not discern the body of the Lord. For
this reason there are also so many weak and sick among you, and a good
portion sleep. For if we judged ourselves, we would not be judged. But
when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, lest we be condemned
with the world. Therefore, my dear brethren, when ye come together to
eat, wait one for another. But if any man hunger, let him eat at home,
lest ye come together to eat. The rest I will arrange when I come.

1 This is a necessary text, which should be diligently practiced among
Christians. For as we have heard above, it has followed from the lack of
understanding of these words that people have lost the consolation that
is to be obtained from this sacrament, and have feared it as from a
poison.

Now it is true that we cannot say that Judas received the sacrament for
comfort or correction. So there were also many among the Corinthians, as
Paul reports, who received it unworthily, and therefore were punished by
God in life and limb. Therefore, this distinction must remain: that some
received the sacrament worthily and blessedly to eternal life; but some
unworthily, to the judgment that God will punish them bodily for it, and
if they do not repent through repentance and faith, they will be
eternally condemned. For this reason, everything depends on knowing what
is meant by receiving the reverend sacrament worthily or unworthily.

In the papacy, therefore, they taught that no one should go to the
sacrament unless he was well qualified and entirely pure. Such purity,
however, they placed on confession, repentance, fasting, prayer,
almsgiving, and similar works called works of penance, which the
preachers praised. And everyone thought that they were doing enough for
the sin they had committed. But let such worthiness go and despair of
it. For

It is impossible for us to be completely clean or to come to purity
because of our works. So Christ himself did not give this supper to the
disciples when they were completely clean, for he says they need him to
wash their feet: he does not speak of washing water, but of the
forgiveness of sins.

4 For this reason, we should diligently learn and observe that those who
say and confess that they are poor sinners, feel many temptations,
sometimes curse, become impatient, and are not always moderate in eating
and drinking, do not receive the reverend sacrament unworthily. These
are daily sins that cling to us because we live on earth, in one more
than in another. Therefore you should not say that you do not want to go
to the holy sacrament because of such sins. For as long as you have the
old Adam on your neck, you will certainly encounter impatience, evil
thoughts and other things that will challenge you and cause you to sin.
If then you would not receive the sacrament sooner, because you would be
freed from all sins, it would follow that you would never go to the
sacrament.

(5) But those who knowingly lie in sins, such as murderous hatred of
one's neighbor, murder, fornication, adultery, and other such public
sins, received the reverend sacrament unworthily.

**312 L. i, 314-317. on the day of Christ's supper. W. xm, sse-ssg.
313**

nevertheless do not think to desist from it. For the sacrament was
instituted by the Lord Christ, not that a man should remain in sin, but
that he should obtain forgiveness and become more devout. So Judas took
the sacrament for death and judgment, because he had decided that he
would betray and sell the Lord Jesus, and he remained in such a
forwardness and hardened evil will.

(6) Before such an example some are sometimes astonished; because they
are in hatred and enmity, or in other sins, they do not want to go to
the sacrament. They sin in two ways: first, because they do not want to
fall from wrath or cease from sin; second, because they stay so long
from the Sacrament against the command of Christ. Therefore, such people
should drop hatred and envy, stop sinning, and seek consolation and
forgiveness of sins in the Holy Sacrament. But if there is still a
glimmer of sin or temptation, they should cry out to God and ask: Oh,
Lord, give me a peaceful, kind, gentle heart toward everyone, and
cleanse me from all sins for Christ's sake; and so go to the reverend
Sacrament with all devotion, and do not be frightened by this saying of
Paul. For it is not said of those who would gladly be rid of sin, but of
those who lie in sins and yet do not want to let go of them, and even
want to be praised for them. As can be seen in the Corinthians, when
Paul writes to them, "I cannot praise you," this indicates that they,
without all repentance, also want to be praised as fine Christians.

7 In those days the Lord's supper was in a different order than it is
with us now. The Christians came together in the evening and ate with
one another in the assembly, each with what he had. Some were found
drinking to their fill, while others had nothing, and were hungry and
thirsty. This, says Paul, is wrong. Let it not be that you sin so
willfully, and then go to the sacrament, and pretend that you have not
sinned. In this way you eat and drink the supper unworthily: therefore
God punishes you with sickness and other things.

8 This is a different and greater sin,

For as the good hearts sometimes stumble, and yet return, praying and
desiring, O that God would forgive me my sin; for I have done wrong.
Christ does not expel them from this supper. For the words testify that
he does not want righteous and holy people at this table, but poor
sinners who, because of their great sin, do not know what to do with.
For thus he saith, His body is given for them, and His blood is shed for
their sin. But these must not be bad nor small sinners, for whom such an
excellent sacrifice or payment has been made. Therefore it is only up to
you to recognize yourself as a sinner from the bottom of your heart,
then find your way here, and seek comfort and help there. But he who
does not confess sin and does not want to amend himself does not belong
here.

(9) But it is commonly contrary. Those who should not fear, and to
whom God offers all grace and wants to adopt them as children, cannot
get rid of fear. Again, those who should fear and are in the highest
disgrace are the safest and do not fear their sins, but pass through
them like a can through a wooden wall. As can be seen from the papists:
they blaspheme and persecute God's word, strangle the pious Christians,
drive people to idolatry against their conscience; yet they consider
themselves pious and holy, and are therefore safe and in good spirits.
On the other hand, the other group is stupid and frightened, but has no
sin in mind. But what sins they have committed, they are heartily sorry
for, and wish they had never done them. So he who is to be comforted
cannot grasp comfort, but he who is to be afraid is safe and without
fear.

10 Therefore St. Paul says: "Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of this bread and drink of this cup. Now "to examine" means
nothing else, but to consider well how thou art skillful. If thou
findest thyself hardened, and wilt not depart from sins, and careest not
for them, thou hast cause that thou goest not thither: for thou art not
a Christian. Now the very best thing would be for thee to depart from
such ungodly living, to have repentance and sorrow over it, and

314 **2.i, 3i7.3i8. On the day of Christ's supper. W. xin, ess-sn.**
315

By right faith in God's promise, you will find your way back to the
Christians and need this supper with them. But if you do not want to do
this, then only stay away from it; for you sin and will certainly take
it to judgment. But here consider it well and make your calculation
evenly: if God should thus overtake you with his judgment, how it would
go with you afterwards in eternity. If you do this, you will be glad
that you should repent, let go of anger and other things, and reconcile
yourself with your God through this supper.

(11) Again, if thou art not thus hardened, but confessest thy sin from
the heart before God, and art heartily sorry for it, and believest that
God will forgive the same by grace for the sake of his Son Christ Jesus,
then thou art well sent, and shalt boldly say unto thy Lord Christ: O
Lord, I am a poor sinner, come therefore now to thy supper, and will eat
with thee: doubt not, thou shalt be a good and acceptable guest unto
him. For this reason you should not be afraid. For the sake of such
sorrowful and anxious hearts this table is prepared, that they may find
comfort and refreshment there. Let others be afraid, who do not feel
their sin, but continue in sins with an insolent and proud heart,
without all remorse and without all repentance or correction.

(12) This word of Paul, "Let a man examine himself," also gave cause
to the ancient teachers to say: Obvious sins, which the judge and
executioner, not the preacher, punishes, such as fornication, murder,
gluttony and the like, should prevent people from going to the
Sacrament. But this is to be understood, as said above, that whoever
persists in such sins and will not cease from them, that he should
abstain from the sacrament; for he only makes more of wrath, because he
is guilty of

The first time, the first time, the first time, the first time, the
first time, the first time, the first time.

(13) But whoever is in such sins, but remits them and becomes better
and more pious, should not let such sins hinder him, but should seek
absolution and receive the reverend sacrament, and ask God that he may
henceforth keep himself better. But whatever other daily infirmities we
may have, let them not hinder us; for we shall not be relieved of them
in this life of all things. If we did not want to go to the sacrament
sooner, because we were pure, we would wean ourselves from it and never
desire it again.

(14) I know well what it does when one abstains from the sacrament for
a time; I have also been in such a fire of the devil that the reverend
sacrament became so strange to me that the longer I went to it, the more
reluctant I became. Beware of this, and be accustomed to go to it often,
especially when you are able to do so, that is, when you find that your
heart becomes heavy and stupid for sins; so that you do not forget our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and remember his sacrifice and death, for
he desires nothing else from us.

(15) Besides that our need, because we still sin daily, requires it,
and such work serves for the unity of the Christian church, in which the
memory of our dear Lord Christ is to be preserved as the chiefest part
of our salvation, as he says, "This do in remembrance of me." Whoever
therefore goes, though he be a poor sinner, yet is he right and well
able; and as Paul saith, he eateth and drinketh the body and blood of
Christ worthily, not for judgment, but for salvation. To this end may
our dear Lord God in heaven help us with His Holy Spirit, through Christ
His Son and our Redeemer, amen.

[316 L. 1, 319. 320. On Green Thursday. W. xni, 670-674.
317]{.underline}

**Green Thursday.**

**From the foot washing.**

**John 13:1-17.**

Before the feast of Easter, when Jesus knew that his time was come to
depart out of this world unto the Father; as he had loved his own which
were in the world, so loved he them unto the end. And after supper, when
the devil had already put into the heart of Judah Simonis Iscarioth,
that he should betray him, Jesus knew that the Father had given all
things into his hands, and that he had come from God, and was going to
God: and he arose from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took an
apron, and girded himself about. Then he poured water into a basin, and
began to wash the disciples' feet, and to dry them with the apron, that
he might be girded about. Then he came to Simon Petro, and the same said
unto him, Lord, wilt thou wash my feet? Jesus answered and said unto
him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter. Then
said Peter unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him,
If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. Simon Peter saith unto
him, Lord, not the feet only, but the hands also, and the head. Jesus
saith unto him, He that is washed must not wash his feet, but is clean
altogether. And ye are clean; but not all. For he knew his betrayer
well: therefore said he, Ye are not all clean. When he had washed their
feet, he took his clothes and sat down again, and said to them again:
Know ye what I have done unto you? You call me Master and Lord, and you
say rightly, for I am also. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed
your feet, ye shall also wash one another's feet. An example have I
given you, that ye should do as I have done unto you. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord, neither the
apostle greater than he that sent him. If ye know these things, blessed
are ye that do them.

1 This history of the washing of the feet is found only in John; and it
seems as if it was not very important, because without it the other
evangelists would have forgotten it, although John would not have
reported it either. But John makes such an excellent preface about it,
that we have to believe that the Lord Christ was not only concerned with
the apostles having clean feet, but with something else and higher. As
the Lord shows with his sermon, which he preaches after such foot
washing; he wants his disciples to follow his example and not to forget
the foot washing among themselves. Therefore the Christians also
practiced such foot washing on this day. But because of the preaching of
it, it happened, as with other things in the priesthood, that only the
outward work was practiced, but the understanding, use and custom of
such foot washing was completely lost. Therefore, it is necessary that
such teaching and understanding be brought to light again.

Now the beginning that John makes in this history seems somewhat
strange. For what, may someone think, serves to wash the feet, that he
says: "When Jesus knew that his time was come to depart out of this
world unto the Father. As he loved his own who were in the world, so he
loved them to the end." How do these words rhyme with history? Very
well, if you will only pay attention to it. For he says, "Jesus knew
that the hour had come for him to go to the Father out of this world. By
this he wants to awaken in us a special diligence, so that we should pay
attention with all seriousness to this work and the sermon he is
preaching, since the Lord wanted to present this to us almost in the
last hour when he was to depart from this life. Now it is certainly true
that what our dearest friends say or do shortly before their end moves
us more and goes deeper to our hearts than anything else they said or
did during their life. For when it comes

318 **L. 1, 320-322. On Green Thursday. W. XIII, 674-677.** 319

When the death of a child comes, the dying are done with scolding and
joking, and what they say or do then is from the heart and is their real
earnestness.

(3) John said, "I will now tell you this story and this sermon, which
you should therefore listen to more carefully and remember more
diligently, because it was the last work of the Lord Jesus, and also his
last sermon, which he began over the washing of the feet and finished on
the way out to the Mount of Olives. There one may feel a special
seriousness. Because it would not have been such a necessary trade, he
would have forgotten with other great worries and anxieties of such bad
work, as we think.

(4) For this purpose John also tells us of the love the Lord had for
his disciples, so that we may learn that this foot-washing is such a
work, and hold out such a doctrine to us, by which we may feel the
special love of our dear Lord Jesus for us. So two great causes are
found together here, why we should let such history be commanded to us:
the first, that he did it shortly before his end; the other, that he
does it to prove his love. It must follow that we are very much
interested in this work and sermon. For where Christ's love and kind
heart compels a work, it cannot be bad nor small.

(5) For what purpose John shows in these words, saying, Jesus loved
his own who were in the world. As if to say, It was now time for the
Lord to depart from the world, but his disciples were to remain longer
in it; for they needed such an example and instruction, if they would
otherwise remain his true disciples, and not be deceived by the examples
of the world. For the world's diligence is plain to see; everyone
thinks how he can get there, others stay and suffer what they want, the
world cares little for them. Whoever then lives in the world and does
not want to be seduced by such astonishments, let him stay here, says
Christ, and follow this example, which I now let you see, that I am the
Lord. But I about

Do not deprive me of my dominion; I serve you and you do not serve me.
Learn this and do it, and you will be blessed and remain unchallenged
from this evil.

6 John also reports with special diligence how the devil had already
told Judas to betray Jesus. He wants to show that his apostles and
Christians will not only challenge the examples of the world, but also
the devil, and that he will drive them to his own honor, power and hope.
There is no other counsel, help or remedy against this, except that we
should model this example of Christ for ourselves and follow it with
earnestness, which the Lord, out of special love, since he was now to be
delivered into the hands of the Gentiles, did not leave behind, but
wanted to present to us.

Now, to be in the world is actually to be in the midst of the devils. It
is impossible for us to govern ourselves properly if we do not keep to
God's word, and especially to this example. For the flesh does not like
to be pressed, it always wants to be on top and nowhere on. To avoid
this temptation, the Lord has set this example before us, so that we may
remember it and follow it. For he means well, and is pure love and
burning fire toward us, that he would gladly warn and protect us from
harm and sin.

(8) Thus John makes a fine preface before he speaks of the washing of
the feet, so that we may learn what Christ intended to indicate by it,
and how faithfully he meant it with us. But thousands and thousands of
times this story of foot washing is sung and read today in monasteries
and convents, and yet no one understands it.

(9) But what is this that John says further: Jesus knew that the
Father had given all things into his hands, and that he had come from
God and was going to God? These are excellent great words, with which
John wants to indicate to us, with what thoughts the Lord Jesus had
dealt, before he now wanted to wash the feet of the disciples: that he
did not think of his suffering, nor was he grieved in spirit, as soon
follows the washing of the feet; but he had thought of his

320 **L. 1, 322-324. On Green Thursday. W. XIII, "77-679.** 321

Glory, in which he was with the Father from eternity, and to which he
should now return after his humanity and remain in it eternally. These
were high thoughts, which should have drawn him out of the world in such
a way that he would not have thought of any human being.

(10) But just now, as he is going about with such thoughts of eternal
glory, he rises quickly and unexpectedly from the table, lays aside his
cloak, takes an apron, girds himself, pours water into a basin, and
starts to wash his disciples' feet, drying them with the apron, so that
he was girded.

(11) Now rhyme his thoughts and his work together. His thoughts are: I
am God and Lord over all; it is even less to do than for one day, so the
devil has done what he can. After that he shall lie at my feet together
with all my enemies and leave my Christians satisfied. But what is the
work? He, the greatest Lord, does what servants and maids usually do in
the house, and washes the feet of his disciples.

(12) So he wants to lead us by his own example and show us that just
as he expressed his glory, forgetting it immediately, and did not abuse
it for his own glory, power and splendor, but served his servants with
it, so we should also do the same, not overburden ourselves with our
gifts, not abuse them for glory, but serve our neighbor with them with
all our will and use them for his good. For this is how the Lord himself
interprets the washing of the feet afterwards, when he says: "Do you
know what I have done to you? You call me Master and Lord, and you say
rightly, for I am also. If then I, your Master and Lord, have washed
your feet, you shall also wash one another's feet. An example have I
given you, that ye should do as I have done unto you. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord, neither is the
apostle or messenger greater than he that sent him. If ye know these
things, blessed are ye that do them." Then you see what the right
washing of the feet is, and know that for this reason the Historia is
written

is that you should learn them diligently and abide by them.

The pope with his monks and priests, kings and princes, wash the feet
also today. But all their humility is exceedingly bad humility, should
it be called humility in any other way. For many are found among them
who wash the feet of their convent, chapter and subjects with such
humility that afterwards they have to confess of the courtly conduct
they have practiced in washing the feet. For, dear one, tell me, what
kind of humility is it, or what good does it do another, if you wash his
feet?

14. This would mean that our feet would be properly washed if our
bishops would take to heart how great a pity it is that their poor
people are so deeply immersed in idolatry, have no proper preaching of
the forgiveness of sins and eternal life, and would strive for God's
word to be properly preached to them, and the idolatrous ceremonies and
services, with the mass, with the sacrifices at sea, and the calling of
the saints, would be abolished, and the people would be directed to
proper worship, so that they might fear God, have His word before their
eyes, and take comfort in the sacrifice of our dear Lord Christ. But we
see that they not only do not think of such foot-washing, but still deal
with it, how they may defile the feet of their poor subjects even more
wickedly, and keep them in idolatry and false doctrine. That is to say,
they have ever followed the command of our dear Lord Christ in an evil
way. May God have mercy on them, and ward off the wretched devil who
drives and rides the blind people in this way.

15 They themselves call the ceremonies in the papacy with a Latin name
the mandate, which in German is so much as a command or commandment. But
Christ does not mean the work. For though he says, Ye shall wash one
another's feet also, yet he interprets himself in a fine way, saying,
An example have I given you, that ye should do as I have done unto you.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, the servant is not greater than his
lord." These are clear words, that it is up to him: If you are in great
esteem for the sake of your office (as will follow), that you do not
exalt yourself,

322 **8.1, 324-326. Green Thursday. W. xm, 679-682.** 323

but to serve others with it who are inferior and do not have such a
gift. For this reason, when the Lord preaches about love at the end, the
mandate and the command are clear when he says: "I give you a new
commandment, that you love one another. But what is the nature of love?
Namely, to serve with what it can, and to prove all friendship and good
will, not to despise, not to be proud, not to do evil. This then is the
right washing of feet, since the Lord commands it here.

16 Therefore the washing of the feet, which is done with water, is not
to be done; otherwise one would have to wash the feet not only of
twelve, but of everyone; and the people would be much better served if
it were only a matter of the water and washing, that one ordered a
common bath for them, and washed not only their feet, but their whole
body. But it has not the opinion. If you want to follow Christ's
example and wash your neighbor's feet, see to it that you humble
yourself from the bottom of your heart, that you use all the gifts and
graces you have, not for your own benefit or honor, but for the good of
your neighbor, that you despise no one, and that you are glad to help
everyone in his weakness, and that you help him to improve himself.

(17) Such foot washing is not to be practiced this day only, but
throughout our lives, with all that we can and have, and toward all whom
we can serve with it. So Christ wills that we also wash one another's
feet according to his example; for this he also commanded, and not
otherwise.

18. But let those especially remember the washing of the feet and
practice it diligently who have been gifted by God with special
understanding and other gifts and have been called to head the church,
so that they do not abuse such gifts for their own honor, benefit or
power, but faithfully serve their churches with them. For if our dear
Lord Jesus Christ, who well knew that it was now time for him to go to
the Father and begin his eternal kingdom of grace, humbled himself so
deeply that for our sake he became obedient to God the Father to the
point of death, even death on the cross, how much more will this be
necessary for us poor people, whom the Lord has not given the gift of
understanding?

He especially creeps up on us day and night and lays ropes for us
everywhere, so that he may lead us into hope and make us look more to
honor and our own benefit than to our ministry. If it goes according to
his will that the church servants forget this command of Christ and seek
honor and power, he knows well that not much more harm can be done to
him with preaching.

19 As can be seen in the example of Pope. As soon as he turned the
ministry of preaching to worldly power and began to seek lands and
people, splendor and glory, the word and the proper worship fell away.
For he had so much to do with such things that he could no longer wait
for the church. And the devil has brought it about in the papacy that
not only the word and the right worship have fallen, but lies and
idolatry have been introduced into the church in heaps, since it carried
money and was useful for the preservation of the priests' splendor.

(20) There is no doubt in my mind that the Lord, when he showed such
humility by washing the feet, saw how the church government would be
especially in the last times, that the service would be forgotten and
only honor and splendor would be thought of. For the misfortune soon
began that the bishops quarreled among themselves, and each wanted to
have precedence over the others; therefore they could not remain one,
until finally the Antichrist came to Rome, and brought the matter to
such a point that he snatched the primacy to himself, and brought it to
such a point that he became powerful over emperor and king, and made
himself the sole heir to the chair of Peter and governor of Christ. That
is, I mean, to humble himself and wash his feet, as the Lord so
faithfully commands and teaches here. Yes, behind him.

021 But it is so. Judas, when the Lord washed his feet and preached such
a beautiful sermon, did the same. He did not let any of it go to his
heart, but in the meantime he plotted how he could get the thirty pieces
of silver and betray and sell Christ, but he succeeded badly. The Lord
sees this, and is

**324 L. 1, 326-328. On Green Thursday. W. XIII, 682-68S. 325**

He is grieved about it in his heart, as the evangelist reports soon
after the washing of the feet. He is not grieved for Judas alone, but he
has seen that Judas would leave behind him a large group of disciples,
all of whom would rather sell and betray Christ than lack the silver
pieces. This grieves the Lord and makes him sad in his heart that he
means so faithfully at his last end, and he allows himself to pay so
much to help the poor people in their souls. But in Judas and his
disciples all that the Lord speaks and does is lost. They do not want to
wash the feet of others, but for the sake of their church office, that
they are called pope, cardinals, bishops and the church, they want to be
such lords that emperors and kings have to wash the feet of Asia and
worship them. Before they would renounce such splendor and power, they
would rather deny, even sell and betray Christ a hundred times over;
yes, they would rather suffer that God's word be trampled underfoot and
that no man be saved. As you can see, the pope and his whole entourage
are always working so that the right doctrine is crushed to the ground,
the old idolatry is restored, and they may be preserved in their
splendor, wealth, and glory.

(22) We should let go of such disciples of Judas, and remember that we
are not preachers and church servants because we are great lords, but
because we should be meek and humble, faithful to our church, and serve
our neighbor with all the gifts we have, and thus always wash the feet
of others. In this the Lord Christ is especially honored and pleased. In
this way we cannot protect ourselves any better from the snares of the
devil.

(23) For the devil is especially directed at the preachers with this
temptation, that he may try them, whether he may also bring his own
honor and profit. If this happens, he has won. For then, as reported
before, they will be so busy with worldly affairs that they will not
respect the Lord Christ, his word, his church and the right worship, but
will even forget. The example is before our eyes and only too much in
the day.

24 No church servant should be safe from such temptation, and should
therefore think about and practice such foot-washing all the more
diligently. For as St. Paul says, "A stake was put in his flesh, the
angel of Satan, who smote him with fists, lest he exalt himself to high
revelation; how much easier it is with us poor people, whom God has
indeed placed in a great, high office in His Christendom. There is no
lack, one has these, the other those gifts. Blessed then is he who does
not exalt himself with them, but leaves the table with the Lord Christ,
unclothes himself and washes the feet of others, that is, he who serves
his neighbor, not himself, with such gifts.

(25) So this example of washing feet applies especially to those in
church offices, that they should wait diligently for their service and
not exaggerate their office, but serve others in all humility. For God
has placed them there, not for their own sake, but for the sake of His
Christians: they are to serve them faithfully, and not to complain about
any driving or work.

(26) This example and humility should then be followed by all other
Christians in general, regardless of their status. Kings and princes are
in a worldly state, as they are called; but if they want to be
Christians, they must also wash the feet of their subjects. For God has
not placed them in such a high position that they alone should lead
their splendor, seek their pleasure, and do what they desire; but with
all the gifts they have, they should serve their subjects. First of all,
that they provide their subjects with proper church servants, that
God's word be faithfully and rightly proclaimed to them, that all
idolatry be increased, and that proper worship be instituted. They owe
this to God; they will never have blessings or happiness for themselves,
but they will faithfully keep them. For how can God give happiness and
salvation to those who despise His word and force their subjects into
public idolatry and false worship?

27. after that it is also called foot washing, where one in temporal
government is diligent, serious and

**[326 L. i, 328-33i. Green Thursday. W. xm, 68s-"88.
327]{.underline}**

Where people do not indulge day and night, play and hunt, but strive to
maintain and promote unity, to pacify the country and its people, to
feed the Turks and other enemies, and to provide justice for everyone
equally. If kings and princes were to take such foot-washing seriously,
they would have enough to do, not only on Green Thursday, but throughout
the year, yes, throughout their lives, day and night, and often as soon
at night, when others are lying down and sleeping, as during the day.
For since both the church and the secular government are on their necks,
there will not be much rest who wants to order both properly, and watch
diligently and keep up with it.

28 But, as reported above about Jude and the pope, one also sees such
things here, that such foot washing is commonly left standing, and in
the meantime one deals with the mere spectacle or spectacle, since the
people are not helped by anything. For everyone can wash his own feet if
need be, or find someone else to whom he need not be so afraid as before
the great lord. But to establish peace and even justice, to keep things
right and orderly in the church with the sermon and service, this cannot
be done by everyone, but only by those who are called to such a high
office.

In the lower and lesser classes it should be the same. Master and wife
in the house then wash the feet of their children and servants, if they
do not keep themselves tyrannical, but accustom their own to God's
word, faithfully preside over them, and draw them to God's fear, that
they may become godly, and do what they are commanded to do. Thus a
Christian household may wash one another's feet daily, if one is kind
to another's infirmities, and is not always angry, cursing, and in need
of all earnestness. The servants can wash the feet of the rulers if they
are pious, faithful, obedient and diligent in their work, not grumbling
when they are punished and admonished for their good.

30 In sum, if you have a grace or gift that your fellow Christian does
not have, let it be ministered to him, whether you are a ruler or a
commoner. Be

Do not despise him who does not have such gifts. So wash his feet
properly, as Christ commanded.

(31) But you will find that such foot-washing is much more difficult
and more sour than that hypocritical foot-washing where an abbot or
prior washes the feet of his monks, a bishop of his chapter. One bends
down there, but those whose feet are washed must bend even lower. For
the world's splendor will not suffer otherwise, and yet the people are
not served by such foot washing. But here you serve the people, if you
humble yourself from the heart against everyone, and what you have more
and better than other people, use such for their benefit: since your
Adam would much rather seek his own honor or advantage, would much
rather take revenge on others, would rather oppress or dampen others.

32) After this, it means washing our feet in general, that we should
not only serve others gladly with our gifts and not overburden ourselves
with them, but that one should forgive another's shortcomings and, as
St. Paul calls it, bear one another's burdens. For there is no other
way out, so that you will not find a pure Christian in the whole world
who does not have a particular fault or infirmity. One is angry; the
other sad and strange; the third cheerful; the fourth meager and exact;
the fifth even too free and mild. In sum, as the pagans also said, each
one has his own burden and unwillingness to bear.

Thirty-three Then methinks, if such a defect were not in him, thou
wouldst rather deal with him; but hear, if thou seest such a defect in
thy lord, wife, child, servant, neighbor, or other, wash his feet, that
is, hold such infirmity against him, and see how thou canst right him,
and remember how it is in truth, that the world is nothing but a dry
place, where it is not possible for us to walk in it; we must defile the
feet. This happens to me, it happens to you, and in sum to all people.
What shall we do then? Shall we then run into the desert or the woods,
and have fellowship with no one, as the monks of old did?

328 **L.i.331-333. On Green Thursday. W. xm, 688-ssi.** 329

have? No, if you wash other people's feet, you must not live alone, but
in the midst of people, and among people who wade in the world through
an unclean, muddy place. Even if you have beautiful, clean feet, you
must bend down to help your neighbor, bring water, old rags, straw and
hay, and wash and wipe their feet until they become clean.

34 As St. Paul says, this means that one should bear another's burden,
that is, that one should warmly accept another, have compassion on him,
not despise him, but reach out to him, kindly instruct him, advise him
and help him, so that he may also be improved. If you are sensible, wise
and learned, do not despise the foolish, simple-minded person, do not
think you are better, but use your wisdom to help him and make him
wiser. So you are pious, keep yourself modest with food and drink, do
not let yourself be angry soon; another does not have such grace:
therefore do not despise him, take care of him, and improve him with
what you can, and remember thus: I, praise God, do not have such a
fault, but I have another; so I need to be patient with me and to be
helped to bear it. On the other hand, my neighbor also has some good
virtue in him, so that he can serve me again. So that unity and kindness
may be practiced and maintained everywhere.

If such foot washing were always practiced among us, think what a fine,
Christian, quiet, united life there would be among us, where one would
always help the other, where no one would harm the other, but would
speak the best of all, and always work so that others would be helped
and improved. Then we could also have the consolation that we have not
forgotten this command of Christ, but have complied with it a little; we
could also take the word that Christ says here: "Blessed are you if you
do these things. Since, on the other hand, we must always have the sting
in our conscience because we do not obey such a command, that we are
wretched people, since neither happiness nor salvation is with us.

36. but such foot washing is given to the

old Adam very sour. For he always preferred to be served than to serve
others. And it is especially painful for him when no thanks is
forthcoming. But the foot washing should always be continued, although
little or no thanks follows. Therefore, not only diligent practice is
necessary, but also constant prayer that God will give us His grace for
patience and humility.

37 This footwashing is primarily based on the teaching of a humble,
Christian, friendly life, which Christians should lead and practice
among themselves, if they want to be disciples of Christ and children of
God. Shortly before his death, the Lord wants to exhort us to such
humility and service by washing our feet. We have gifts, as great as
they can always be, so that we should not be proud, but think: If God
has given me this and that before another, then in truth it must have
been because of this that He wants me to serve others all the more, to
let myself down all the more, and to be careful that the devil does not
lead me into hopefulness and presumption. For if we come to that, it is
over; then we are not Christ's, but Judas' disciples, like the pope
and all his crowd.

In addition to this teaching, the Lord also wants to reproach us with
another and higher teaching for his person. For when Peter refuses to be
washed, Christ says to him, "If I do not wash you, you will have no
part in my kingdom. He is not speaking of washing feet, as if so much
were at stake, but of the washing that he did by his blood on the stem
of the holy cross, and that was to be distributed to believers through
the gospel and blessed baptism. Such washing is not an example for us,
because we cannot wash ourselves or others from sins, that is only for
the Son of God, who is the little lamb of God that bears the sins of the
world. Those who have been washed by Christ continue to do so. Just as
they confess that God has given and forgiven their sins by grace through
Christ, so they also forgive others from the heart, as the Lord teaches
in Matt. 18, and we in the Father

330 **L. 1, 333. 2, 1.2. Of the fruit of Christ's suffering. W. XIII,
691,742-745.** 331

Our prayer. Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass
against us.

39) There you can clearly see how such foot washing is to be practiced
during our lifetime, which our dear Lord Christ did out of special love,
because we have to live in the unclean world.

with his own example, and admonished us to do so at the end. May God
grant us His Holy Spirit through Christ His Son, so that we may never
forget this admonition and live our lives according to it, amen.

**Passion Sermons**.

**Of the fruit of the passion of Christ.*)**

**Preface to the Sermon on the Passion.**

(1) Since it is the season of the year, when the suffering of our dear
Lord Jesus Christ is sung and preached in the church, let us leave it at
that. For it is not an evil order that this useful and comforting
history should have its certain, definite time in the year, when it is
read from beginning to end, from word to word, in the church to the
common people, and spoken of what it is useful to us, and how we should
use it; because the great power of the devil is before our eyes, who,
even though it is preached daily, nevertheless resists the word so much
that hearts grow cold, do not pay much attention to the sermon, and
remain as they were before the year, when they would not otherwise grow
worse.

2 Such need should drive us to continue with the Word always, and
especially to present the history of Christ's suffering to the simple
from piece to piece, as much as we can have time. For it is not possible
to joke here. If one should not preach anything about it for one, two or
three years, it would go out purely, and vain Jews and Turks would grow
up. Those who are in the preaching ministry and always handle God's
word, experience what harm it does, where one does not stop daily with
reading and prayer; what

*) Held in the church, 1534.

Should it be so with those who do not hear a sermon in a year or two?
Raw people must be turned out like cattle.

For this reason it is necessary that this sermon is always practiced,
blown up and set on fire. For the devil does not let it go, he always
pours cold water on it and extinguishes it; otherwise it would not be
lacking, more people would have to improve on the word, since it is so
clearly presented all the time.

4 The papists now have their real week of torture; there is a lot of
singing, reading and preaching about the suffering of Christ. But what
do they improve? They have the passion of Christ on their tongue, but in
their heart they persecute it and consider it nothing. Otherwise they
would not think so highly of their own suffering and would not praise
their works so highly. So in our country, where people preach
diligently, there is the defect that most of them, as we can see from
their works and lives, throw the word to the wind.

This sermon is at the same time a high and bad sermon, a secret and
public sermon, a strong and weak sermon. Cause: You learn it, where one
says fables or fairy tales of Dietrich of Bern and the like, that one
can keep, even if one hears it only once. On the other hand, you will
find a thousand and a thousand people who hear this sermon every day,
and yet do not take it with such seriousness that they notice it and
become more pious about it. To

[332 **L.2.2-S. Of the fruit of the passion of Christ. W. XIII,
745-747.** 333]{.underline}

It goes in one ear and out the other, and will not enter the heart.

(6) After this there are others who are very glad to hear it said,
Christ has done enough for us, we can do nothing for our salvation,
Christ has done it all. But as soon as one starts and says: If you want
to be comforted by this suffering of Christ, you do not have to be so
stingy, so fussy, fornicate, indulge, be proud 2c., then the Rhine
burns, they do not want to suffer that they should be punished for their
sins, or therefore be considered unbelievers 2c.

(7) But how shall we do it? This is the way of preaching, and
especially of disciples; for the devil hinders it wherever he can, so
that it does not enter all hearts. Therefore, for the sake of God's
glory and our salvation, we must always persevere with the word, even
though most of the people do not want to hear it, lest the others also
come away from it, and thus the sacrifice that the Son of God sacrificed
for us always remain in our memory.

This sermon first began in Paradise, when Adam and Eve were promised the
seed of the woman who would crush the serpent's head. It has remained
in the church until now, and will remain until the end of the world. And
this is actually the highest service we can do, that we remember this
sacrifice in the church, in the pulpit, in the house, and everywhere,
and instruct everyone to do so.

The people of Israel were very burdened with their worship and had to
sacrifice cows and calves 2c. Under the papacy, a lot of money was spent
on the service. If such burdens and expenses were imposed on us today, I
would worry that we would keep few disciples. But our dear Lord God does
not impose more on us than this small service, that we should not forget
His unspeakable good deed, that His Son sacrificed Himself for our sin,
but should preach about it, so that the young may learn from the old.
Where there is such a service, one may give thanks to God. For it will
bring its certain fruit with it, and will not be in vain nor in vain
with all men.

10. in turkey he is gone, there is the

We have forgotten the suffering of our Lord Christ, and in his place we
have accepted the preaching of Mahomet. Among the Jews it is also gone.
In Germany, too, people are almost tired of such worship and do not pay
much attention to it. But if this service is taken away from us, the
punishment will not remain outside for long. For if you do not want to
serve God with that which costs you no more than listening to an hour of
preaching, and the preacher tells you something comforting about Christ
and his suffering, do you think you are wronged if another service is
imposed on you for it, which is in vain, and yet much more difficult?
This is one reason why we should especially love to hear and preach
about the suffering of our Lord Jesus Christ, so that we do not forget
such benefits, since Satan is hostile to the word and would so gladly
dampen or hinder it.

The other reason is that our great need requires this. For we are here
in the world and live in the flesh; this clings to us like a millstone
that pulls us forever under itself and to the world. On the right hand
there is temporal good, honor, food, drink, pleasure, house, court,
etc.; on the left hand all kinds of misfortune, sickness and
unpleasantness; these things take our thoughts away, so that it seems to
us that we do not have time to remember Christ and his suffering.
Therefore, it is necessary that we also give our Lord God a time, so
that we do not forget him. In addition to such thoughts of ours, the
devil's thoughts also beat upon us; they are first of all the real ice,
hail and snow that make the heart cold. If we do not keep on being urged
by the Word, by speaking, singing, and listening to the sermon, so that
we do not forget the Lord Christ altogether, and so that he does not go
out of our hearts altogether, it is impossible that our hearts, weighed
down with physical hardship and our own wickedness, and finally with the
devil's thoughts, should not sink and fall away from Christ. Therefore
we need it very much that such preaching is always practiced, and that
we hear and keep the word; for otherwise the Lord Christ is soon
forgotten.

12. besides that, the young people also grow here, who cannot learn
from themselves; so

334D . 2, 5-7. Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. W. XIII, 747-751.
335

Servants and maids cannot all read, and yet they are also baptized
Christians. It takes great diligence to teach such people properly, so
that they also know something about such high and necessary things.

(13) Therefore it must grieve our Lord God very much if we can have
such treasure and yet go and keep our mouths open and learn nothing of
it.

And it serves you right, because you do not want to hear God's word and
truth, and do not want to learn and realize for your own good that you
have to listen to the devil's lies for your eternal ruin, as can be
seen in the Papists, Anabaptists, Turks and Jews. Therefore, let us not
grow weary of such worship and gladly hear and often practice the
Passion sermons.

**Of the benefits of the suffering of Christ.**

**Rom. 5:8-11.**

Therefore, praise God for His love toward us, that while we were still
sinners, Christ died for us. So much more shall we be kept from wrath
through Him, having been justified by His blood. For if we have been
reconciled to God through the death of his Son while we were still
enemies, much more shall we be saved through his life, if we have now
been reconciled. Not only this, but we also boast in God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have received reconciliation.

1) Because one wants to preach about the suffering of our Lord Jesus
Christ, one must not only read the history to the people word for word,
but also admonish and teach them to remember why Christ suffered in this
way and how they should enjoy such suffering. For the way that was held
in the papacy is no good at all, since the preachers, and especially the
monks, were only concerned with how they could make it miserable and
move the people to pity and weeping. Those who could do this well were
considered the best preachers of the Passion. Therefore, one hears
nothing else in such sermons but a Jewish cry and how the Virgin Mary
wept, blessed her son and other such things. But this, like all other
divine services in the papacy, is nothing but a glaring hypocrisy
without spirit, since no real fruit nor improvement can follow from it.

But if we look at the sermons of the apostles and prophets. If we look
at the sermons of the apostles and prophets, we will find a far
different way of preaching about the passion of our Lord Christ. For
there we see that they do not say much about the history, and speak of
it very simply, badly and briefly. But how to preach such

Looking at suffering, enjoying it, and needing it, they can't talk
enough about it.

(3) If you will count it by words, it is a very short sermon which
John preaches concerning Christ, saying, "Behold, this is the Lamb of
God, which taketh away the sin of the world. But if you take them apart,
you will see that they contain a great deal, especially as far as the
benefit and use that we have of them if we believe them.

4 He calls the Lord Christ a lamb, because he was to be slain. For the
sacrifices in the Old Testament, when cows, oxen, and calves were
sacrificed, were all a model of the one, right, and eternal sacrifice of
our Lord Christ, who was to offer up his body and life for the sin of
the world, and by his blood to cleanse us completely. John is satisfied
with such a word that he shows the history of how Christ had to suffer.
That he calls him not only a lamb, but God's lamb, he wants to indicate
that he is such a sacrifice that God Himself has ordered and that God is
pleased with. By this addition "God's lamb" he wants to awaken our
faith that we should accept such a sacrifice,

336 **L. 2,7-10. Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. W. xm,
751-754.** 337

as which God, out of causeless goodness and love, has intended to help
us. So that, because God Himself has decreed such a sacrifice, we have
no doubt that it is through it that the forgiveness of sins and eternal
life are fully and completely accomplished. For thus St. John's sermon
reads: He bears the sin of the world.

What then is the sin of the world? Nothing else, but all ungodliness and
unrighteousness in which the world is drowned, in which God is
displeased and is justly moved to anger. God took all these things out
of the world by grace, says John, and put them on His Son, who paid for
them so that we might be freed from guilt and punishment.

(6) Whosoever then shall preach or commemorate the passion of our Lord
Jesus according to this saying, let him not preach only how Christ was
delivered up to the Gentiles, scourged, and scourged, and how he was
crucified. This is the mere history, which must be preached and known in
all ways, but it is not enough. You should also know and believe, as
John preaches here, that Christ suffered these things for your sins,
that God charged them to him, and that he bore them in all obedience and
paid for them; so that when you realize that you are celebrating as a
sinner and that you have angered God, you may not despair, but may take
comfort in this suffering and satisfaction of our Lord Christ. Then you
can have a taste of such suffering in your heart, so that not only, as
in a papal sermon, your eyes will pass over, but your heart will remain
dry and arid; but your heart will pass over: first, with sorrow, so that
you must confess that sin is an awful burden, because only through such
a great sacrifice can it be put away; then also with joy, because the
sacrifice has been given for you, so that you may be sure that God will
not reject or condemn you because of your sin.

(7) This is not how the Passion was preached in the papacy. They may
have said that Christ is the little lamb of God who bears and takes away
the sin of the world, but besides this, all God's sins are taken away.

In the first part of the service, it was as if every Christian carried
his sin himself, and Christ did not carry it, nor had he paid for it,
and each one had to do enough for it himself. Why else did people fast
so strictly? Why did they toil so hard in confession? Why did they spend
day and night in church, singing and praying, if they did not hope and
seek forgiveness for their sins? But this is just as much as if the
sacrifice of Christ could not be sufficient or fruitful, if you helped
it with your own works, and also suffered for your sin, as Christ
suffered.

How does this rhyme with the sermon that Christ preaches to John on the
12th about his passion, where he says, v. 23, 24: "The time has come
for the Son of Man to be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone:
but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." With these words he wants
to say that his suffering should bear much fruit. Now this fruit is not
only that, as a branch, when it remains on the vine, brings forth
grapes, so a Christian through the Spirit of God in faith brings forth
good works; but the highest, noblest and best fruit is that of which the
Lord soon after says, v. 32: "If I am lifted up from the earth, I will
draw them all to myself," that is, through me, through my sacrifice,
through my being lifted up on the cross, or dying, people shall come to
me and into eternal life.

(9) Now they that will go to heaven by their own works draw Christ
down unto themselves; if it be the other way about. For Christ must draw
us up to himself, or we are lost. For it is he alone who destroyed the
devil's kingdom, paid for our sin, and drew us out of the world, out of
death, unto life: not by our suffering or works, but by his suffering.

10 In this way Christ also preaches of His suffering, John 3 v. 14. 15:
"As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of
man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life." That is clear enough:

**[338 8.2,io-i2. Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. W. xm,
754-75". 339]{.underline}**

Whoever wants to have eternal life must believe. For here Christ does
not declare any work, does not say, whoever does this or that, fasts,
gives alms, will not be condemned 2c. For God's word and command had
already gone out beforehand through Moses in the Ten Commandments, that
one should keep them and not go against them. Whoever then goes against
them must therefore await his punishment. But he who does not go against
them, but keeps them as much as he can, does not go to heaven because of
them. For it is concluded that just as the Jews in the wilderness could
not be healed by any medicine, but by seeing the serpents of brass, so
this is the only way to salvation: to look to the Lord Christ, that is,
to take comfort in his sacrifice, and to believe that God, for the sake
of his death, will forgive and grant us our sins and make us blessed.
This fruit grows from the death of Christ alone, and not from our works,
as the papists wrongly teach.

11 There are many such sermons in the prophets. Isaiah in the 53rd says,
v. 4 ff: "Truly he bore our sickness and took upon himself our pain.
But we took him for one who was afflicted and weakened by God. But he is
wounded for our iniquity, and bruised for our sin. Punishment is upon
him that we may have peace, and by his wounds we are healed."

(12) Let this be a beautiful and truly consoling passion sermon, which
is well done in the New Testament, and is so clearly set forth and
spoken that an apostle could not speak better. For Christ is afflicted,
weakened, wounded, and crushed, because, he says, he gave himself up for
us, and took upon himself our sicknesses and our pains, that he might
give us peace, and that we might be healed. The dear prophet makes the
Lord Christ a physician and teaches us, if we want to have peace and be
healed, that we should seek this nowhere else but in the Lord Christ,
who has a medicine that is not called doing good works, giving alms,
fasting, praying; but suffering for us, being wounded for us, being
crushed for us, bearing the punishment for us.

Therefore, when you hear in history how miserably Jews and Gentiles have
gone along with your dear Lord Christ, write on each piece, "This was
done for my sake, that I might have a remedy by which I might be
delivered and healed, not from bodily disease, but from sin and eternal
death. Then you will need the histories and sufferings of Christ quite
blessedly.

14 Now the suffering of Christ is a delicious, healing remedy in two
ways. First, by such suffering one can learn better than by any other
punishment how terrible it is for sin. For since no man, angel or other
creature could pay for sin, God's Son alone must do so, we must confess
that sin is an unmistakable burden. For this reason we should be all the
more diligent in the fear of God and learn to guard against such misery.
For it is easy to fall into sin, but it is very difficult to come out of
it. Therefore, the contemplation of Christ's suffering serves first of
all as a delicious remedy against sin, so that we learn to be godly and
to guard against sin, since it is such a terrible, unmistakable burden
that no creature could have borne; God's Son Himself had to bear it and
pay for it with such a hard death.

15 Secondly, it is also a remedy against death. For whoever believes
that the Son of God died for his sin and paid for it with death, can
take a peaceful heart in God's goodness, and comfort himself against
sin and eternal death. As the prophet finely emphasizes such comfort
here, and Christ himself, as we have heard, points to it.

16 Thus preaches the prophet Zechariah, Cap. 9, 11. f.: "You let your
prisoners out of the pit by the blood of your covenant, because there is
no water in it; so now return to the fortress, where you lie imprisoned
in hope" 2c. The pit where men lie captive is sin and the punishment of
sin, namely, the devil's tyranny and eternal death. From such pit, says
Zechariah, we have not been able to come, it made

340 **L. 2.12-14. Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. W. XIII,
756-7S9.** 341

For God has made a covenant with us, not by the blood of cows or oxen,
but by the blood of the righteous and saving King. Therefore, whoever
does not have this blood covenant must remain in the pit of sin and
eternal death; but whoever has it shall come out of such a pit of God's
wrath into grace and eternal life.

17 Thus Daniel preaches, Cap. 9, 24: "Seventy weeks are determined upon
thy people, and upon thy holy city; and the transgression shall be
prevented, and sin sealed up, and iniquity atoned for, and everlasting
righteousness brought in. But how this will happen, he then indicates,
namely, that Christ will be killed.

18 This is a clear and bright saying, that one cannot come to
forgiveness of sins and righteousness in any other way than through the
death of Christ Jesus, who is the one who brings this treasure to us.
Outside of it we can never come to it. So that all the sermons of John,
of the Lord Christ himself and of the holy prophets sufficiently testify
how one should rightly preach about the suffering of Christ, namely,
that hearts should learn from it to take comfort in God's goodness and
grace. For such suffering has taken place so that through it we might
pay for our sin, be reconciled to God, and finally be saved in such
faith in our Lord and Savior Christ.

19 In this way the holy apostles also preached about the suffering of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as can be found in their writings and histories.
And since there are many such sayings everywhere, let us now conclude
with only this one, which your beloved heard at the beginning of the 5th
chapter to the Romans. This is in itself a clear saying that everyone
understands well. But nevertheless we want to wrap it up a little, so
that it may be brighter and lighter, and also more comforting for us.

(20) We all experience how deep unbelief is in our hearts, that we can
never be truly satisfied because of our sin, we always think: If you
were more pious, things would be better for you, and you would certainly
be able to hope for mercy from God. Where hearts are so doubtful,

There must be fear and discontent. Again, if we could believe firmly and
trust in God's goodness, our hearts would hold on to such comfort even
in all kinds of adversity, and be cheerful and in good spirits. But it
does not want to go anywhere. For this reason, the pope has arranged all
kinds of services, so that people may have confidence in God and the
less they may despair of God's help. Hence came the invocation of the
saints, pilgrimages, buying indulgences, mass and vigils, monastic life
and all kinds of other idolatry. Whoever could bring it there thought he
wanted to enjoy it in heaven and thereby become blessed.

21 And it is not less. A true preacher should pay no more attention and
take greater care than to bring people to the right trust in God and to
tear such unbelief out of their hearts. How to do this properly and
masterfully can be seen here from St. Paul's words, who has a sure
testimony from our Lord Christ that he is a right preacher and a chosen,
precious tool for planting the kingdom of God. Therefore, we should take
good heed of his words.

22 First, he says: "God praises his love for us. This is a very strange
and unbelievable, but, as we will hear, a precious, true and valuable
word. It is true that God is hostile to sins and wants to punish them,
as the law testifies and daily experience proves. But now we must
confess that we are all sinners. Therefore, unbelief grows, so that we
cannot believe that God loves us. But where we hear, as here, that God
loves people, we soon think of John the Baptist, Peter, Paul and others
who were more pious than we are. But we cannot consider ourselves as
such people whom God loves, but fear His wrath. Now this word of St.
Paul goes against this, that he does not only say: God loves us; but:
God magnifies His love, that is, He makes it great, and so certain and
evident that it is not possible for a man to doubt it. For is not this,
saith he, proving love, that he sendeth his Son Christ for us?

342 **D. 2, i4-i7. Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. W. xm,
7sg-762.** 343

die while we were still sinners? Hear the word, mark it, and keep it
well. All your sorrow and anguish is that you are a sinner; otherwise
you would be better able to console yourself with God's grace and
kindness. But, dear man, come to your senses, and listen to Paul here,
who says that Christ died for our sin.

Who then is Christ? He is the Son of God. What does he do? He becomes
man and dies. For what does he die? For the sake of sinners. It must
follow that God does not mean sinners ill, that he does not want them to
perish for their sins, but that he loves them and loves them so much
that he wants to help them out of sin and death. For their sake he sent
his only begotten Son to die. How could he show his love to us more
surely? That Paul ever has good reason to say, "God magnifies his love
toward us," that we must consider it a great, high, excellent love, and
that no man can doubt that God will be gracious to us and cannot be
angry with us. For who would want to be angry, since God does not spare
His only begotten Son for our sake, and gives Him up to such a shameful
death for the sake of ungodly sinners?

(24) Such words of St. Paul agree very well with Christ's sermon,
John 3, where he says, v. 16: "God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Now whoever knows this and believes that God
loves him, how can he be afraid of God? For who does not know what is
the nature and work of love? Where there is love, there is no struggling
or beating, there is no fear, but there is a firm and certain trust that
if need arises, it will find a shell and help, and it is impossible that
it will not find it.

(25) Therefore, everything depends on our forming such love firmly
within ourselves and not letting it be taken away from us or talked out
of us. For this is the main thing that the evil enemy is most concerned
about, whether he could take this love that God has for us out of our
hearts, and make us

We did not provide anything good for God, but considered him our enemy.
Where he does that, he has won. For what will protect or save us if we
have lost God? We must defend ourselves against this; and if our
conscience and sin want to take away such a hope of God's love for us,
we should keep this in mind, and take this excellent pledge of love into
our hearts, that God sent His Son to die for us while we were still
sinners. It must then follow that God does not mean evil to sinners, but
loves them and intends to help them in the best way possible.

(26) Now this is a comfort that we, as Paul teaches here, have in the
death of Christ and His suffering, and we should take comfort in it. If
our sins make us sad, and our heart wants to doubt whether God is also
merciful to us and loves us, then we should conclude and know that God
is not hostile to us, and therefore we must not be afraid of him, but he
loves us. For he gave his only begotten Son to die for us; therefore we
may be assured of his mercy and help.

(27) Yes, you say, it is true that God gave His Son to die for me; but
how often have I made myself unworthy of such grace through my sin!
Therefore, though God loved me before for the death of His Son, yet now
He has become hostile to me because of my sin. Nay, saith Paul, let not
such thoughts deceive thee; but hold fast this comfort: Christ died for
thee, while thou wast yet a sinner; mark this well.

028 And what hath his death wrought? That you were justified by his
blood. If then God loved you when you were a sinner, and dared so much
for you that He gave His Son to die for you, how much sooner and more
will He keep you from wrath, after you have been cleansed by the blood
of Christ Jesus! With these words St. Paul finely indicates how our
highest challenge is that we fear that God is angry with us. In order to
comfort us, he says: "If God was not angry with you when you were a
sinner, much more

344 **L. 2, 17-19. Of the benefits of Christ's suffering. W. XUI,
762-76S.** 345

He will be less angry now, because you have been washed from sins by the
death of his Son. This is a good sermon against the unbelief that is
found in our hearts because of sins. But this is not enough; Paul spins
a still greater and higher comfort from the death of Christ, and says:

**If then we have been reconciled to God through the death of His Son
while we were still sinners, much more shall we be saved through His
life, if we have now been reconciled.**

(29) O God, if only we could take this comfort into our hearts. It is
a great thing that Christ dies for sinners; for by such death we are
ever made free from sins. If then we so highly enjoy the death of our
Lord Christ Jesus, should we not also enjoy his life? If he died for our
sake, and his death was for our good; then in truth our dear Lord Christ
will also turn his life, in which he is now, to our good, so that we may
be preserved in grace, protected against the devil and the world, and
increase in faith from day to day. As we see then that the dear apostles
everywhere point us to the joyful resurrection of our Lord Christ, that
we should take comfort in it, and hope that he will not leave us; but
that he has ascended for this reason, that he might give us gifts, and
that he might rule and manage his Christians in all graces against all
temptation.

(30) Paul also points to this comfort here, and wants us not to let
anything make us fainthearted, since he praised his love for us while we
were still sinners, and sent his Son to die for us. Now if he dared to
do this, his highest good, to us while we were still sinners, how much
more will he dare to do it to us who have now come to grace and are
justified from sins by the death of Christ. Secondly, the life of our
Lord Christ is for our full salvation.

31 Therefore take a good heart toward God, who loved you so well when
you were still a sinner, and trust in him; he will give you the best.

For the sake of Christ his Son, I will keep you in all your temptations
and will not let you fall, but will give you eternal life. Such faith is
the highest service of God; for which reason we should ask diligently,
and hold fast and earnestly to it. Now Paul concludes such a sermon of
comfort, saying:

**We boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have
now received the atonement.**

He says that we have received reconciliation through the Lord Jesus. For
on account of our sins we were not able to provide ourselves with
anything good to God. But because the sins are gone through the death of
Christ, we know that God is no longer angry with us; he is our friend,
yes, our dear Father. What is to follow from such reconciliation?
Nothing else, except that we should rejoice in this gracious, friendly
God, who is love Himself, and praise Him, placing our trust and heart in
Him in all hardships and temptations. Now that we have God as our
friend, what can harm us? What can grieve us or frighten us? Sin is
reconciled, God is pleased with us, Christ at the right hand of His
Father, who holds on to us. And even though death comes and chokes us
for a time, we know that through Christ we shall be raised again to
eternal life. Therefore, as bad as it may be for Christians here on
earth, they must be joyful in spirit, and cannot do otherwise than
praise their Father in heaven, trust in His love and grace, and entrust
themselves to His protection. This we have only through the atonement
made by the death of Christ.

What a terrible pity it is that the pope and his crowd leave such
reconciliation behind, and refer people to their own works and human
merit, as if one should thereby come to grace and get a gracious God!

34 For this reason we may thank God from the bottom of our hearts that
we have been delivered from such error, and see through so many glorious
testimonies of the Old and New Testaments how we are to consider the
suffering of Christ and take comfort in it; so that where sin

346 **L. 2, 19.20.** Of the history at the Oelberg. **W. XIII.
765,884-886.** 347

we hold ourselves here, and say: If I were not a sinner, Christ should
not have suffered; but because he suffered, I should take comfort in his
suffering. In this way we honor God and give thanks to the Lord Christ,
for otherwise we can do nothing but accept with thanksgiving such gifts
as he has purchased for us through his death. Then this also must
follow, that we guard against sins, refrain from them, and practice
faith, love, hope and patience in all kinds of temptation, and from day
to day

increase. Such is also a fruit that flows from Christ's suffering; for
we are to regard him not as a gift, but also as an example and model to
follow, with love for our neighbor and obedience to God. But more of
that for another time. Now let us call upon God to kindle and maintain
faith in us through His Holy Spirit, and to make us eternally blessed.
May our dear Lord God grant us this through Christ Jesus, our Redeemer,
amen.

**Passion or History of the Passion of Christ our Savior.**

**The first sermon.**

From the history at the Oelberg.

**Matth. 26, 36-46.**

Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and said to his
disciples, "Sit here until I go there and pray. And took unto him Peter
and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to mourn and to tremble. Then
said JEsus unto them: My soul is troubled even unto death: tarry ye
here, and watch with me. And he went a little, and fell on his face, and
prayed, saying, My Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt. And he came to his
disciples, and found them asleep, and said unto Petro, Can ye not watch
with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. The second time he went again,
and prayed, saying, My Father, is it not possible that this cup should
pass from me, I will drink it; and thy will be done. And he came and
found her sleeping again, and her eyes were full of sleep. And he left
them, and went and prayed the third time, and spake the same words. Then
he came to his disciples and said to them: Ah, will ye now sleep and
rest? Behold, the hour is here, that the Son of man should be delivered
into the hands of sinners. Stand up, let us go; behold, he is here who
betrays me.

This is a very good history and the right beginning of the history of
the passion of our Lord Christ; and it serves not only to teach us that
we see in the Lord Christ how he held himself in anguish and distress,
but also to comfort us against sin and an evil conscience.

2. in the schools they have much disputirt of this history, and are
very sharply with

dealt with. For it is no small matter that this person, who is both
eternal God and right man, falls into such deep fear, trembling and
anxiety. But one can argue about it as long as one wants, and make it as
sharp and subtle as one can, but no one will fathom it. Yes, it will be
impossible for anyone to understand such trembling and mourning even a
little or to understand it with understanding.

348 **8.2, 20-22. Of the history at Oelberg. W. XIII, 886-889.** 349

It is all much, much too high, so that this person, who suffers such
things, is too high and above everything.

(3) Therefore we may be satisfied with the few examples we see before
our eyes where distress or fear has taken hold of a heart. As can be
seen in the poor people who are condemned to death because of their
mistreatment. Their hearts are so overwhelmed with terror, fear, anxiety
and displeasure that they neither see nor hear; they do not understand
what others say to them, or what they say to others; they are no
different from a drowsy person who does not know where he is or what he
is like.

(4) Such great anguish and distress, terror and fear, we may think,
came upon the Lord Christ here also, that he stood there before his
disciples, trembling and shaking, that the disciples looked at him, were
terrified before him, and did not know what had happened to him. As
Lucas indicates, and says: "The Lord found the disciples asleep with
sadness; and the Lord says here: "My soul is troubled even unto
death," that is, I am so afraid, I am so afraid that I would die of
fear. We must leave it here with such thoughts. For we know of no higher
and greater fear, because such fear of death is.

5 But such fear of death is not really to be compared here; for it was
much more violent and greater in the Lord Christ than it is possible for
a human heart to bear. Therefore, just as such fear and terror is an
indication that Christ is truly man, for otherwise such fear could not
have lasted, so again it is an indication that he is truly God, since he
endured and overcame such fear. For such things are not possible for our
flesh and blood; our hearts are far too weak to last in such distress.
For it was not only because the hour had come for the Lord Christ to be
betrayed. Judas betrayed him, the Jews captured him, and the Gentiles
crucified him, and he was thus

but the sins of the whole world were on his neck, so that the death he
was to suffer was a death of sin and a death of the wrath of God. For
since he took the place of us all, took our sin upon himself, and
undertook to do enough for it, both things came together here, that he
felt at the same time the sin of the whole world, and afterwards the
death which he was to suffer for the sake of such sin.

(6) Now this is the part that makes it impossible for us not only to
speak sufficiently of such suffering and fear, but also to think
sufficiently of it. It is all much, much too small compared with all
other men's fear and anxiety, since he alone has all the sin of the
world upon him, and must pay for it with his death, since each of us has
only his own sin upon him. For it is only a little, if it is counted
here, since all the sins of the world, from the first man Adam until the
last day, are on the back of the one man born of Mary the Virgin.

(7) But what shall we learn from such anguish and distress of the Lord
Christ? How are we to make use of the fact that he stands here so
miserable and fainthearted, and freely confesses that the anguish and
distress in his heart is so great that he would die of grief? Above I
reported that it serves us to notice in such a person how he is a right,
natural man, who has had right human flesh and heart, since death thus
frightens him. For such is our innate nature and the nature of the
flesh, to be afraid of death and not to die gladly. But because such
terror and fear was greater in the Lord Jesus Christ than is otherwise
possible in a man's heart, because of the cause that all men's sins
are upon him, and that he should suffer the death which all men with all
their sins have deserved, from this it is powerfully proved, because he
did not sink under such a burden, but bore it without harm, that he is
also God, and more than a man.

(8) Therefore, the very agony helps us and serves against the heretics
who teach that Christ is not a true man.

**350L . 2, 22-24. Of the history at Oelberg. W. xni, 889-892. 351**

and true God. For we must confess both that it can be seen tremendously
here: because of the hesitation, he is a true man; but that he gives
himself into God's will and triumphs in such adversity, this proves the
divine power.

(9) But apart from this custom, which serves for the teaching and
confirmation of our faith, we can still use such a death struggle in two
ways well and blessedly. We poor people are so blinded and corrupted by
sin that we cannot sufficiently recognize our own harm and lack;
otherwise we would be much more diligent in guarding and preserving
ourselves from sins; for this we experience in ourselves and other
people, that we consider sin to be a very small harm; yes, that is even
more, we have a desire and love for sin. Whoever has fallen into
avarice, it is not a difficult matter for him, when he knows how to be
usurious, that a hundred carries him twelve or fourteen, he lets himself
think that his cause would be very good, if he could only get a lot of
such usury. So where Satan has led someone into fornication, he makes
believe that it will be best for him if he can atone for his will and
lust, and strives day and night to see how he can get there. It is the
same with other sins; we are glad that we can come to it and consider it
a happiness. But such unhappiness grows from the fact that we do not
know what a terrible misery sin is. For if we knew rightly God's wrath
and judgment, which is directed at sin, we would not only have no desire
and love for it, but would also fear and guard against it, as we would
against sudden death.

10 This is the purpose of this image of the fear and dread of our dear
Lord Christ Jesus on the Mount of Olives. For if thou shalt look rightly
into this mirror, and take it up rightly before thine eyes, thou shalt
find such a painting of sins in it, that thou shalt be heartily afraid
of it. For first of all, look at the person. He is the Son of God, who
is the eternal righteousness; and though he has put on our flesh and
blood, yet he is flesh and blood without all sin. And yet because he
takes upon himself the sin of others, that

Such a foreign sin is so painful to him, it makes him so afraid and sad,
it frightens him so much that he trembles and trembles before it, and
says freely that the fear is so great that he is almost half-dead over
it.

(11) If the sin of others so terrifies the pious and innocent heart,
what do you think will happen to us when our own sins strike us, since
we have sinful, corrupt hearts and are inclined to despair? How God
sometimes lets examples go by that sin rages and rages in the heart of
others to such an extent that poor, miserable people put themselves to
death over it, so that they can only soon get rid of such torture of the
conscience: and is such a certain indication, although bodily death is
most violently opposed to our nature, that such suffering in the
conscience is far more severe and unpleasant; since the poor people
regard death as a means by which they may be freed from such fear. But
it is an unholy means. For it is against God's commandment, which says,
Thou shalt not kill. Because of this, such people only put themselves
deeper into God's wrath and into condemnation. But what the right means
are, by which one may certainly be freed from such fear, shall follow
soon after.

Therefore learn this image well, and do not forget the Mount of Olives,
as our Lord Christ mourned and prophesied over it. And especially
remember this when the evil enemy, or your own flesh and blood, or the
wicked world assails you, and you feel that you are so ready and willing
to sin. Then make your calculation thus: If sin is so powerful that it
can grieve my God and Lord Jesus Christ to the highest degree, when it
was only someone else's sin, for which he had done nothing, how much
more will it afflict and grieve me, who myself would be guilty of such
sin, if I were willing to commit it; since without it my heart is
inclined so that I cannot help being afraid and terrified? Therefore,
Satan, lift thyself, I would not follow thee. Now you make sin very easy
for me, as if it were a small thing; but in my Lord Christ I see.

352 L. 2, 24^-26. Von der Historie am Oelberg. W. XIII, 8S2-894. 353

that it is the most unmistakable, the greatest burden, because it has so
burdened his innocent heart.

(13) So you can use this history blessedly and well, so that you may
keep yourself in the fear of God and not sin. And it is certain that if
you take this image before you and then continue in prayer against
temptation, God will graciously help you through His Holy Spirit, so
that Satan will give way and your flesh will be tamed and ruled; while
others, who do not have this image before them, are led like cows by the
rope and let themselves be driven wherever the devil wants.

14 The earnest prayer that Christ makes here also serves this purpose.
For these are his words: "My Father, if it is possible, let this cup
pass from me. Now it is clear that this was not possible; he had to
sacrifice his body and die on the cross for the sake of sins. But what
else can you conclude from this, but that sin is such a great, horrible
thing that it was impossible for all creatures to do anything about it?
But if we were to be helped from it, the eternal Son of God had to
become man and suffer death on the cross for it, and thus make us free
from sin.

(15) Here again, therefore, know sin aright. If you want to follow
your heart and the devil, yes, even the world's example, it is a very
small, bad thing that you break your marriage, that you commit
fornication, that you seek your profit with usury and transgression. As
you can see, whoever comes into such temptation, he cannot become so
much of a sinner, he desires much more. But do not follow your heart,
Satan and the world; do not let the smooth cat bellows deceive you; in
truth there are such sharp, poisonous, unwholesome rattles underneath;
if they catch you, it will be over with you (where God does not help
much). For if the foreign sin can attack Christ and frighten him, who
has never been guilty of any sin; what will become of you and me, who
have been corrupted by sin before, so that we cannot do anything else
but fear, tremble and fear, and flee from God?

and run away, as Adam and Eve did in Paradise. Therefore, beware, do not
wilfully give yourself into such a journey; ask God for His Holy Spirit
to come to you, and you may defend yourself from sin; then you will have
corrected yourself of the Mount of Olives.

016 After this continue. And as thou hast used the mountain of oil to
fear God, and to keep thee from sinning; so use it further for comfort.
For so diligently will no man govern himself, yet the flesh and Satan
will at times overpower him, that he will err and fall into sin. And
especially Satan pursues the Christians without ceasing, whether he
could throw them into obvious perils; as the excellent, great saints
have examples before their eyes. David makes a very horrible case. Peter
likewise.

(17) Wherefore, when these things shall come upon thee, and after that
Satan shall come and preach sin unto thee, and torment and afflict thine
heart over it, take again this image of the mountain of oil before thee,
and speak unto thine heart, saying, O God, why doth my Lord Christ
Jesus, the Son of God, tremble? What does he want? He asks that the cup
pass from him. What kind of cup is it? It is nothing else but the bitter
death of the cross. But why does he suffer it, since he is without sin,
pious and righteous? It is because of the sins of the world that God has
placed on his back; they weigh him down and frighten him.

But what shall I take from such a thing? What am I to remember? Is it
not true that if God has laid my sin upon him, as St. John therefore
calls him a little lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world,
then am I freed from my sins? Why then would I condemn myself and my
Lord Christ Jesus? I am a sinner, that is unfortunately true; sin
terrifies me, that I unfortunately feel well, and my heart always wants
to sink; I am afraid of God and his harsh judgment. But, as I said, how
will I punish myself; yes, how will I punish my Lord Christ Jesus? He
trembles and trembles on the Mount of Olives, he is so afraid and
anxious that he sweats bloody sweat, to such a thing brings him

354 **L. 2, 26-28. Von der Historie am Oelberg. W. XIII, 894-897.** 355

my sin, which he took upon himself and bore so hard. Therefore, I will
lay it on the ground and hope that I will come before God and His
judgment when I want, so that God will not find any sin in me. Not as if
I were pious and had done no sin, but that God Himself has taken my sin
from me and cast it upon His Son.

(19) Behold, the mountain of oil is also a comfort to thee, that thou
mayest be sure that Christ hath taken thy sin upon himself, and hath
paid for it. For where else would such trembling and fear have come
from? Now if your sins are on Christ, be content in your heart; they are
in the right place where they belong. They do not lie rightly on you,
for you and all men, indeed all creatures, are too weak to bear a single
sin; you would have to go down under it. Therefore let them lie on
Christ alone, and see where he will take them. He brings them with him
to the cross, yes, he dies on it; but on the third day he lets himself
be seen as Lord over sin, death and the devil; for they have tried all
power on him, but have achieved nothing. Take comfort in this, and thank
God for such grace that he has taken from you the heavy burden that
would have thrown you into the abyss of hell, and has laid it on his
Son, our Lord Christ Jesus, who, although he is without sin and eternal
God, nevertheless carries it so heavily and hard on the Mount of Olives
that the sweat of his blood runs out over it.

20 Be comforted by this, and hold fast to it; let not sorrow take away
thy heart, but say, It is enough that my Lord Christ Jesus hath thus
mourned and travailed; with my mourning I do nothing. But with such
mourning he has made it clear to me that I should continue to be of good
cheer, that I should not be afraid of sin and death, but that I should
take comfort in his death and hope for God's grace and eternal life.

(21) If you do this, it is pleasing to God, and this is the only means
by which the poor, troubled consciences can keep themselves when their
own hearts torment and anguish them because of sins. Otherwise it is not
possible,

that one can find some righteous, certain comfort against such distress.

22 Now this history of Mount Oel is also very useful in the case that we
learn from the example of our Lord Christ how we should conduct
ourselves when there is fear, temptation and need. It was now time for
Judas to betray him, and for the Jews to catch him, and for the Gentiles
to crucify him. What does he do? He is grieved and afraid. But he does
not stop there. He goes and falls on his face and prays. Learn to do the
same, and do not let your distress go so far to your heart that you
forget to pray. For this pleases God when we are in anguish and
distress, that we do not despair, but open our hearts to him and seek
help from him. As the 91st Psalm testifies, where God speaks thus, v.
15: "He calls upon me, and I will hear him; I am with him in trouble,
and I will bring him out, and make him to glory."

(23) But such things are very grievous to us. For we think that God is
angry with us and hostile to us because He causes us to be in anguish
and distress. Therefore we think that even if we pray, such prayer will
be in vain. But against this you can comfort yourself again with the
mountain of oil and resist such thoughts. For if God meant us evil in
every way, when he lets us come into fear and distress, then it would
have to follow that he also meant his dear Son evil. But the
contradiction is found, as Solomon also says, namely, that the father
punishes every son whom he receives, and the Lord chastises those whom
he loves.

(24) Therefore, do not be deceived by such thoughts that you would
consider God an enemy for allowing you to suffer hardship; but as you
see here, He does not exalt His only begotten Son from suffering; He
must feel sin and the fear of death, and tremble and fear over it. So
you also remember. You shall be God's son, he will remain your father,
even if he lets you suffer a little. For why would he put you through
that which he did not put his only begotten Son through? Therefore
follow Christ in the other also. As thou art afraid and

356 2.2, 28-31. Of the history at the Oelberg. W. xm, 897-soo. 357

Suffer with him; so also learn to pray with him, and do not doubt that
God will graciously hear such prayer.

How then does Christ pray? This is also a very useful and necessary
teaching, which we should follow and not forget. He says, "My Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but as
thou wilt." He makes this request a third time, until an angel comes
from heaven and strengthens him, as Lucas says.

(26) Now this is the right form of prayer, which we should also make
in temptation and distress. My Father," he says, as if to say, "Even
though I am now sick to death because of fear and terror, and see
nothing but God's wrath and death before me, do not doubt that you are
my Father, that you love me, that you look upon me and watch over me.
Therefore I hope to be delivered from this distress. If it is possible,
let this cup pass from me, that is, help me and deliver me from this
suffering.

(27) Therefore, just as Christ cries out to God His Father, so shall
we also do. For although he alone is the eternal Son of God, as it is
written in another Psalm, v. 7: "You are my Son, today I have given you
birth"; yet through faith in Christ we have also become God's children
and heirs. For this reason we should not only use these words in our
prayers, but also have the heart and confidence that he, as a father,
means well with us and will leave us, as his children, in no need. For
where there is no such confidence, there can be no right prayer. And
there is certainly the thought in our hearts that God is not our Father,
that He does not want us, that He does not ask anything about us. But
such a thing is called dishonoring God and taking away His right name,
that He is not our Father.

But learn further. Our dear Lord Christ asks his Father to take the cup
from him, and, as the true adopted son, he promises all good things to
the Father. And yet he hangs up these words, "Not as I will, but as
thou wilt." So do thou also unto him. If you are in temptation and
suffering, beware that you would think that God is hostile to you;

Turn to him as a child to its father (because we believe in Christ, he
wants to accept us as sons and joint heirs of Christ), cry out to him
for help, say: Oh Father, see how I am there, how I am there; help for
the sake of your dear Son Christ JEsu, do not leave me stuck like this
2c.

29. God wants you to do this in all matters, and you should do it with
firm, certain trust, since He is our Father and has heartfelt compassion
for His children and therefore wants to help them. And yet you should
humble yourself, not press your will so hard, but strive in God's will,
whether he would leave you longer in such distress, that you would bear
and suffer it patiently; as you see that Christ does here.

But you may ask, why does Christ pray like this? and as he prays to St.
John in the 17th chapter, he does not put such words anywhere that it is
in God's will, whether God wants to give it or not. "Father," he
says, "the hour is here for you to transfigure your Son. Father,
transfigure me. Preserve them in your name that you have given me. I
pray that you preserve them from evil. Sanctify them in thy truth."
Item: "Father, I want that where I am, also those are with me whom you
have given me" 2c. This whole prayer is to the effect that he wants to
have such a request heard and unanswered. Why does he not pray like this
here?

Answer: The need that the Lord asks for here is a temporal, bodily need.
Now, in everything that concerns the body, we should place our will in
God's will; for, as Paul says, we do not know how to pray. So it is
often highly necessary for us that God leaves us under the cross and in
distress. Since God alone knows what is good and useful for us, we must
put His will first and our will second, and show obedience in patience.

But where it is not a matter of bodily things, but of eternal things,
that God may preserve us in His Word, sanctify us and forgive us sin,
and give us the Holy Spirit and eternal life (as Christ John asks for
just such things for His Christian Church on the 17th), then God's will
is

358 **L. 2, 31.32. Von der Historie am Oelberg. W. XIII, 900-903.** 359

He wants all people to be saved; he wants all people to recognize their
sin and believe that it is forgiven through Christ. Therefore, where one
asks for this, it is not necessary to place it in God's will, whether
he wants to do it or not. We are to know and believe that he wants to
give gladly and unquestioningly. For there is his word before our eyes,
which reveals his will to us in such distresses. "God," says Christ,
"so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever
believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life." See, here you
have what God's will is for your salvation. Therefore pray confidently
for such a will, as Christ asks John 17:24: "Father, I will that where
I am, there they may be also." So pray also: Father, I want you to
forgive my sin for the sake of your Son Christ Jesus, who has paid for
it and has done enough for it with his death.

In this way, however, you cannot know God's will in bodily affliction
and distress. You do not know whether God wants to rid you of your
sickness, poverty and other afflictions, whether it is good for your
salvation and for God's glory. Therefore, you should ask for help, but
leave it up to God's will whether He will help you or let you stay that
way longer. For the prayer should not be in vain, even if he does not
help; but it should serve us, so that God will strengthen the heart, and
give grace and patience, so that one may come to and finally overcome.
As the example here with Christ shows. God, his Father, would not let
the cup pass from him, but still he sent an angel to strengthen him. So
it shall be with thee also, though God forgive or fail to help. But
there you are sure that God, through Christ, will gladly forgive sins
and make you blessed; therefore, you can be happy with

ask with firm confidence and certain trust; and is sin where thou
wouldest doubt.

34 This is the third lesson of prayer in temptation. But as the example
here shows with the disciples, it continues slowly with us. They also
had their temptation before them, and for this reason the Lord
admonishes them to pray, lest they fall into temptation. For prayer is
the only and best means and remedy for this. But the flesh is too lazy
and heavy; when the need is greatest and we have the greatest need of
prayer, we slumber and sleep, that is, fear hastens us, so that we think
it is in vain and in vain. Then a fall, as with the disciples, must
follow. But the gracious, merciful God, who once promised us help and
mercy through His Son Christ Jesus, wants to give us credit for such
weakness and help us out of our temptation.

(35) Thus your love has the story of the Mount of Olives, which we
should diligently remember and make good use of, namely, that we first
learn from such an image how heavy and great a burden sin is, because it
presses and presses upon the Son of God Himself to such an extent that
He trembles and sweats bloody sweat; for this reason we should take good
care and guard against sin. Secondly, when we come into such distress
and temptation, as we cannot fail to do, that we also learn to comfort
ourselves with this mountain of oil, seeing how the Son of God has borne
our sin. Third, that in all temptation we keep to prayer, as Christ says
here: "Watch and pray, lest you fall into temptation." Whoever
considers the Mount of Olives in this way will remain in the fear of God
and right faith, and will find comfort and salvation in all kinds of
distress and temptation. May our dear Lord Christ Jesus, through His
Holy Spirit, grant this to us all, amen.

[360 **L.2, 33.34.** How Christ was caught in the garden. **W. XIII,
903-906.** 361]{.underline}

**The other sermon.**

How Christ has been caught in the garden.

**Matth. 26, 47-50.**

And while he yet spake, stand, Judas came, one of the twelve, and with
him a great multitude with swords and staves, of the chief priests and
elders of the people. And the betrayer had given them a sign, saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he; seize him. And straightway he came
to JEsu, and said, Hail, Rabbi; and kissed him. And JEsus said unto him,
Friend, why art thou come? And they came near, and laid their hands on
JEsu, and took hold of him.

This is the other part of the story that took place in the garden or on
Mount Oel. Firstly, it is reported how Judas, one of the twelve, after
he had made a deal with the Jews and sold the Lord Jesus for thirty
pieces of silver (one of which, in our coinage, makes half a Rhenish
guilder), ultimately betrayed him in the garden.

(2) Such a thing is a very grievous thing, and even now prevents many
wise and sensible men from speaking evil of the gospel, and from
thinking it a pernicious doctrine. For since Satan does not celebrate,
but is most careful to sow evil seed where he sees the good seed
sprouting, it is not new today that many Judas children, that is, bad
boys and unbelievers, are found among those who have God's word right
and true. When the world sees such things, it is soon finished with its
judgment; as we must also often hear today from our adversaries, that
they all blame such ailments on the doctrine and speak of it: If the
doctrine were good, good fruits would also follow from it; but because
so many aversions come into the world, the like of which were not heard
years ago, it must follow that the doctrine is not righteous 2c.

(3) Now we cannot deny that the rebellion followed after the gospel
came to light. So afterwards followed the sacramentalists, the
Anabaptists, and other mobs, such as no one saw or heard of before the
gospel came to us.

Doctrine is evil and such trouble is caused by the doctrine and has
arisen?

4 Here you may take the rogue Judam before you, who is neither a Gentile
nor a Turk, nor such a Jew as is hostile to the Lord Christ and has not
heard the word of God. He is one of the twelve, says Matthew, whom
Christ called to preach, to baptize in his name, to cast out devils, and
to perform all kinds of wonderful miracles. And there is no doubt that
because the Lord knew of such a case from the beginning, he would have
instructed Judam more than others, and would have always instructed him
not to give place to sin and temptation. As the evangelists report
especially about the last supper, the Lord always had a few words said
about whether Judas should be turned away from such sin. And finally he
gives him a dipped morsel, no doubt with a longing look, as if he wanted
to say: Oh you poor man, how can you be hostile to me? What do I do to
you that you take such things into your mind against me? But when
nothing would help, and he had even given himself up to the temptation,
the Lord said unto him, What thou wilt do, do quickly. As if to say, "I
see that no warning or preaching will help; go on your way, for there is
no more counsel or help.

5 What do we say to this, then, that the desperate prankster commits
such an abominable sin, and takes such a fierce, bitter heart against
his Lord and Master, in whose name he has also done miraculous works,
that he thus

[362 L. 2, 34-36. How Christ was caught in the garden. W. mi, sos-sog.
363]{.underline}

for the sake of a small amount of money, betrayed and sold the innocent,
pious, gentle, kind man, knowing full well that his life would be worth
it? Whom shall we blame? It says here that he is one of the twelve.
Shall we say, then, that the blame lies with the Lord Christ and the
teaching he heard from Christ? If Christ had taught him better, would he
have done it?

(6) Is it not true, that though such a thought occurred to thee, yet
thou wouldest heartily fear and be astonished, that thou shouldest thus
accuse the Lord Christ? For thou knowest that he is pious and righteous,
and is hostile to all iniquity; yea, all his teaching and preaching is
to the end that he may prevent and ward off sin, and keep men alive. Why
then would you lay such blame on the pious Lord? Rather, you will say
that Judas was such a wicked, evil villain that all good warning was
lost on him, and he could not keep from his wickedness; otherwise he
would have behaved differently. For although the other apostles are weak
enough, they do not fall into such horrible sin as Judas. That is why he
must be a special arch-rogue, who could neither be helped nor advised.

(7) Why then do you not judge in this way? Why do you want to cast the
blame, which is actually that of evil men and Satan, on the holy gospel,
and therefore blaspheme it? For if it comes to Christ himself, he cannot
preach so well, so earnestly, so righteously, Judas remains a
mischievous man, as he was at first: what wonder if such things also
come to us, and not everyone follows the word? The rebellion followed
after God revealed the gospel to us; we cannot and will not deny that.
But should the gospel therefore bear the blame for such arousal and
damage? Should we not rather speak thus: Satan is hostile to the gospel;
so people are devious in themselves and inclined to evil: therefore both
the devil and the wicked world have helped to cause such trouble, so
that the pure, good doctrine, the right, good seed, might be hated among
men.

This is how the sacramentalists and anabaptists came into being, of whom
no one knew before the gospel. But the gospel is innocent of this. The
devil, however, and after that the arrogance in the idle, frivolous
hearts, which let the word fall and follow their own thoughts and wit,
have fiddled this dance and caused such noticeable damage and horrible
trouble.

(8) Even today, as we can see, there is still a great deal of trouble,
because among those who pride themselves on the gospel, avarice and
usury, fornication and gluttony, and other troubles are more common than
before in the papacy. Where does this come from? Do they learn it from
the Gospel? Is it the preacher's fault? No, beware of that. For that
would be to revile and blaspheme God and His dear Word, and then the
ministry of preaching, which is the most glorious, highest gift of God.
But the fault is of the wretched devil, who sees the field finely
prepared and sown, and vexes it. For by this his kingdom is greatly
diminished. Therefore, when the father of the house sleeps, he comes
with his evil seed and makes the field full of weeds. But this does not
cause the weeds to grow. For just as Judas, one of the twelve, remains a
prankster, but the other disciples, though frail and weak, do not fall
into such abominable sin: so, though the offenses are many and very
wicked, yet much finer are found of devout Christians, who keep the word
with right earnestness, live in the fear of God, and areware of
offenses. We should be content with the same and thank God for it.
Whether one cannot be superior to Judas, one must tolerate him: that not
all are like Judas, but some disciples are better.

(9) First of all, we can use this example of the unruly child of Judah
not to blaspheme the gospel, as the papists do, but to know the real
cause of the offense: that it is the fault of the devil and of
disobedient hearts that will not believe the word nor amend themselves.

10. after that it also serves that we from

364 **L. 2, 36-38. How Christ was caught in the garden. W. xm, sv8-sn.**
365

In such an abominable case, let us learn to fear God. For as reported
above, Judas was not a bad man, but an apostle, and will undoubtedly
have had many fine, beautiful gifts; just as he also had a special
office among other disciples, and the Lord appointed him as steward or
conductor. But because this man, who is an apostle, who preaches
repentance and forgiveness of sins in the name of Jesus, baptizes, casts
out devils and performs other miraculous works, so easily falls, becomes
an enemy of Christ, sells him for a little money, betrays him and
sacrifices him to the meat bank; because, I say, such a great man meets
with such a terrible accident: we have ever cause not to be safe, but to
fear God and beware of sins, and to pray diligently that God will not
lead us into temptation; but if we fall into temptation, that he will
graciously lead us out again, and help us not to get stuck in it. For it
very soon happens that one gets into trouble and sins, if one does not
take care and diligently guard oneself with prayer.

11 This is the case with Judah. He is a stingy man, as the evangelists
repeatedly indicate, that because the Lord had appointed him as a
conductor, he had carried off and stolen much. He leaves such sin in the
bridle and hangs on to it: he lets himself be told and preached to, as
unfortunately our angry, ill-advised Christians also do; but
nevertheless he goes, steals where he can, and lets himself think that
there is no need for him, that he is an apostle as well as the others.
Such security brings him to this point, because he leaves room for sin
in such a way that the devil finally gets into him and drives him to
such horrible actions that he betrays his dear Lord and Master for the
sake of fifteen guilders. Since this concerns the devil and he has
brought Judas so far, a greater misery follows, that Judas despairs
because of such sins and hangs himself. This is the end that the devil
was after.

(12) We should diligently keep this example in mind, and, as I said
before, use it to keep ourselves in good conscience and righteousness.

Keep the fear of God, and do not cease praying that God will keep us in
His Word, and govern us by His Holy Spirit and protect us from sins. For
if one overlooks it in a small piece (as it seems), great unspeakable
harm can result from it. As our dear Lord Christ, Luke 11, also warns
and says, vv. 24-26: "When the evil spirit departs from man, it walks
through dry places, seeking rest, and does not find it, saying, 'I will
return to my house from whence I came out. When he arrives, he finds
himself adorned and adorned with possessions. Then he goes and takes
seven spirits to himself, which are worse than he, and when they come
in, they dwell there; and afterward he becomes worse with the same man
than before."

13 Thus the examples are before our eyes. Before the gospel came to
light again, the devil had everything in good peace, for he had almost
captured all men's hearts with false worship and trust in his own
works. Now, however, God has lifted him up through the Gospel, so that
we know that with the reading of masses, vigils, pilgrimages, fasting
and other things, neither God nor the devil is in control. For God's
Word teaches us another kind of worship, which is called, as the other
Psalm calls it: kissing the Son, or as God calls it from heaven: hearing
His beloved Son, and believing in Him; we know this: what happens now?
The devil would have liked to be in prison again, but his way is lost,
he cannot, God's word uncovered him and betrayed him. Then he goes and
takes seven, that is, innumerable worse spirits than he is, and goes
again into men. For there we see that most of them go into the thoughts,
even if they live in fornication, stinginess, usury, lying, deceiving,
it does not matter, they want to be good Christians.

(14) Therefore, if a loophole is opened for the devil, when it seems
to you that he can hardly pass through with his head, he has had enough
and sleeps with his whole body. Just as he did with Judah. It seemed as
if it was a small thing, if he had ten, twenty, more or less pennies.

366 **L. 2, 38-40. How Christ was caught in the garden. W. XIII,
911-914.** 367

steal. But because he is always in sin and does not want to refuse
God's word, the devil finally brings him to the point that he
sacrifices his good Lord and Master on the flesh bank for the sake of
money.

15 Therefore it is said: Fear God and beware of sins. But if thou wilt
continue in sins, and not cease them, wait how it shall come to thee at
last. For the devil does not begin it with the opinion that it should
prosper you for the best. He lets Judas be stingy until he brings him to
the rope and leads him into despair. Let this be a warning to you and
stop in time. Ask GOtt for forgiveness and better yourself. That is what
God wants; that is why he has set this terrible example with Judah, so
that we should look at it diligently and be shocked by it. For who would
believe that such an abominable sin should have such a small beginning?
Therefore do not jest, do not think: I will remain a Christian, whether
I do this or that; I will bring it back again 2c. The devil is much too
cunning for you; if he gets you into trouble, see how you get out of it.

16 This is spoken of Judah's example. But it serves us in another way
for comfort and warning. For it is certainly true that as our Lord
Christ fared here on earth, so shall his church and the dear gospel fare
to the end of the world. Judas, one of his disciples, betrayed him. So
those who sit in the church office, and are not the least but the most,
become betrayers and worst enemies of his church for the sake of the
silver pieces. As you can see in the case of the pope, he also has the
Judas bag around his neck, and lets himself love money and goods so much
that he betrays and sells the gospel over it, and does not deal with it
any differently than the Jews did with the Lord Christ before Caipha and
Pilato.

17 Therefore, just as Judas hangs on the high priests and chiefs,
servants and attendants, so the pope hangs on monks, priests, high
schools, all of whom help him to catch Christ, that is, who persecute
and condemn the gospel as the worst of heresies, until Pilate finally
comes to condemn the

secular authorities, and with the sword to eradicate the gospel.

18 This has happened a long time ago, since the pope had such power and
authority. And still today there are more and more Judas who buy money
from the Gospel and misuse it for avarice, their own honor and other
things. These may well take heed of Judas' end. For it is decided that
no one shall prosper with the money he buys or redeems from Christ and
his gospel. There should and must be an evil conscience and finally, if
one does not mend his ways, eternal damnation; no one doubts this.

If it were not for such a severe, terrible judgment, one would be
displeased with the unholy people that the pope, cardinals, bishops,
priests, monks have such good days and everything full. But dear, grant
it to them, as long as God grants it to them; the thirty pieces of
silver, for which they sell Christ daily, will still become sour enough
for them, when he will say: "Depart from me, you cursed, into the
eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels". And here
on earth the conscience should not always remain silent, but attack them
hard enough, as the examples of our times are many.

20 This is said of Judas, since the evangelists so diligently report how
he sold Christ, led the Jews into the garden, and betrayed the Lord
Jesus with a kiss. For this, says Matthew, was the lot. But this rhymes
especially with false preachers, who by impure doctrine, because they
have the ministry, deceive the poor consciences.

Here John the Evangelist remembers two special miracles that our Lord
Christ performed in the garden. The first, when they came to the Lord
Christ in the garden, he asked, "Whom are you looking for? When they
answered, "Jesus of Nazareth," and he said, "I am he." This word so
startled them that they all drew back and fell to the ground as if
thunder had struck them down.

22. such is a peculiar, divine

368 **2.2, 40-42.** How Christ was caught in the garden. **W. XIII,
914-917.** 369

This was the power that the Lord especially wanted to see at that time,
not only to frighten the Jews with it, but also to strengthen his
disciples. For from this they had to conclude that if the Lord would not
willingly give himself to death, he would be able to protect himself and
defend himself against his enemies, and would not need the help or
protection of others, as the disciples would support themselves and try
to save him by force. But the Lord did not want to, and as we will hear,
he spoke very harshly to Petro about it.

(23) So that this miraculous work serves against the great trouble in
which both the Jews and then the disciples of the Lord were almost
drowned. For because the Lord allowed himself to be caught, and the Jews
to be driven with all their might, and ultimately to be so shamefully
strangled on the cross, the disciples themselves were so vexed that they
forgot all the miracles they had seen of him, all the beautiful sermons
they had heard from him, and thought that it was now over with them,
that their hope had been in vain and in vain. The unbelieving, wicked
Jews also believed this, and were certain in their minds that if they
had brought him to the cross, there would be no more need. Now there is
this wonderful, marvelous miracle, that the great multitude of Jews,
armed with spears and swords, having received orders from the rulers,
and being willing and courageous to trade, is driven behind them by a
single man, who is defenseless and speaks to them in the friendliest
manner, with a single word, saying, "It is I," and is so terrified
that they fall to the ground as if they had been struck on the heads
with maces. The disciples see this, the Jews experience it and feel it;
and yet they both fall into the thought that it is a man, like another
man, because he so patiently surrenders himself to suffering and
furthermore does not want to use any power against his enemies.

(24) But they should have thought thus: Behold, if this man can do
this with a few words, which are not a word of reproach or a curse, but
a kind answer, that such great, strong, brave, armed men shall fall to
the ground, as if thunder had struck them down: it will surely be

It must mean something special that he surrenders so willingly and
allows himself to be caught. He could defend himself and protect
himself; but he does not, but suffers. That is why he does not want to
be protected by people. And although he hides his power now and lets
himself be handled as the Jews themselves want, it will not always
remain that way. His enemies will have to go down; but he will have to
reign. For the divine power, which he so often shows, and especially now
in the garden with a word, it will not be able to be pressed into length
nor to be dampened 2c.

The disciples should have taken this from this miraculous work. For
there is no doubt that for such a reason the Lord let his divine power
be seen here. But it was unfortunately too soon forgotten on both sides.
The Jews did all they could with him, and cared for nothing more. The
disciples, however, ran out, one here, the other there, they were
saddened and frightened, and had no more hope that they should enjoy
their Lord and Master again, or see him again. This was the hour of
darkness, as Christ is called in John, when trouble took over and the
devil exercised his power. For this reason the Lord so earnestly
exhorted the disciples to pray: "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation.

26 The other miracle is almost like this, that Christ answers the second
time, "I told you that I am he; if then ye seek me, let these go. He
alone, the pious Lord, has neither sword nor spear; but Judas, the
traitor, is there against him with a great multitude. Then, by right,
poor Jesus, who is so severely overpowered, should speak good words and
ask that the Jews remember to leave him his disciples and not to attack
any of them.

27 For it is a serious word, Sinite hos abire: "Let me go these." And
is not, as we see, a vain word. For they had no doubt gone out thinking
to lift up the nest together, master and disciple. But this word makes
that they do not reach further and satisfy his disciples.

370 L. 2.42-^4. How Christ was caught in the garden. W. xm, 917-919.
371

Peter, who took up the sword and struck into the heap, did not deserve
this.

28 Why does the Lord do this? It is not unjustly inferred that he wants
to show how he values his life less than his disciples, because he saves
them, but willingly allows himself to be caught and bound. For this very
reason the Lord calls himself a good shepherd, that he lays down his
life for his sheep, and presents his love to us as a special example,
when he says: "No one has greater love than this, that he lays down his
life for his friends. You are my friends if you do what I command you.
This is seen here very well, that he is completely silent; they do and
do with him what they want, he lets it all happen. But he wants his
disciples to let it go and not to lay a hand on them. This proves that
he cares more about them than about himself.

29 But this is also a cause: our Lord Christ does not want to have a
companion in the suffering that he now has before him. He alone, as
Isaiah says, will tread the winepress; for God alone has laid it upon
him. Yes, he alone is the one who can bear and endure it. It is true
that the disciples also had to suffer for the sake of Christ and his
word, as he says to Jacob and John: "The cup that I drink, you will
drink also. But the suffering of the Lord Christ is called suffering for
my sin and for your sin, so that God may remit them to me and to you,
not remembering them, but giving eternal life for Christ's sake. For
this reason he wants to be alone and not let anyone be caught with him
or suffer.

30 But just as the Jews must obey such a command of Christ, they must go
with him.

The pope and his entire clan are not following Christ's command. They
seek forgiveness of sins from the deceased saints, and take comfort in
their merit and give indulgences. This is just as much as if Christ had
wanted to have companions in his suffering and had not done it alone.

31 For that Pilate hanged the Lord between two murderers afterward is of
his own account. But here in the garden it is said: Sinite hos abire:
"Let these go", I alone belong to the trade, it is alone my office and
work. No one belongs to it, neither John, Peter nor Jacob, all these are
to be let go. It is I who take hold of me, catch me, bind me, crucify
me; it is laid upon me to bear the sin of the world, and all who believe
in me, that is, take comfort in my suffering and death, shall have a
merciful God and eternal life.

(32) So your love has the other part of the history of Christ that
took place in the garden: that we do not forget the terrible fall of
Judah, but keep ourselves in the fear of God, guard against sins, and
always persevere in prayer, so that God may graciously protect us from
such a fall; and secondly, that if we are true Christians, we will also
have our Judah, who will inflict all evil on us because of his avarice.
We are to suffer this, and hold on to the comfort, although Christ is
weak in us, that his power will be seen in his time, and will graciously
protect and preserve us. May the eternal Father of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, through His Holy Spirit, grant this to us all, amen.

372 **L. 2.44-46.** How Peter wants to save Christ. **W. XIII,
920-923.** 373

**The third sermon.**

How Peter wants to save Christ and draws the sword, but Christ resists
him.

**Matth. 26, 51-56.**

And, behold, one of them that were with JEsu put forth his hand, and
drew out his sword, and smote the servant of the high priest, and cut
off his ear. Then said JEsus unto him, Put up thy sword into his place:
for he that taketh the sword shall perish by the sword. Or do you think
that I cannot ask my Father to send me more than twelve legions of
angels? But how would the Scripture be fulfilled? It must go like this.
At that hour Jesus said to the multitudes: Ye went out as unto a
murderer with swords and staves to see me: for I sat daily with you, and
taught in the temple, and ye took me not. But all these things came to
pass, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all
the disciples left him and fled.

This is the third and last part of the stories about what happened in
the garden or on Mount Olivet, namely, that Peter, after the Jews had
captured the Lord Jesus, wanted to attack him with the sword and
intended to save his master by force.

(2) This history gives us, first, a necessary and useful teaching
about the sword or temporal power, who should wield it or not wield it,
and what punishment should be inflicted if someone presumes to wield the
sword and yet is not called to do so. Secondly, because in this case
Peter needs the sword to save Christ, and Christ forbids him to do so,
it is necessary to deal with the question here: whether one may or
should also defend the gospel with the sword? So that the secular
authorities may have a certain report on both sides, and not either do
something contrary to their office and profession, or do more than is
required by their office and profession. For then it would be wrong on
both sides, and certain punishment would follow.

3 As far as the first deal with Petro is concerned, it is obvious that
he is a preacher or church person to whom the sword is not due, as the
Lord says: "Worldly rulers rule, but you do not. Therefore, when he
takes up the sword and wants to fight, he does wrong, and Christ
punishes him for it. Not only because of the reason that this is such a
deal

was, since one should not need a sword, as Christ says: "Do you not
think, if it should be for fencing, that I could ask my Father to send
me twelve legions of angels? as if he wanted to say: It must now be
suffered, I do not want anyone to fence for my sake or to protect me;
but also because the sword is not due to him, as a private person. For
this reason, he not only tells Peter to put up the sword, but also adds
a very harsh word of threat: "Whoever takes the sword shall perish by
the sword.

(4) This saying we are to remember diligently. For the Lord thereby
makes a distinction between us men, and indicates that the sword is
given into the hands of some by God, that they should wield it. Now
these are all those who are called to temporal authority by ordinary and
common means, that they should govern, look after and promote the common
good, and ward off all public annoyance. To such God puts the sword in
their hands, that is, it is God's will and order that they should wield
the sword, not for their own good, but for the good of their subjects,
as Paul says: "Worldly authority is God's servant, an avenger of
punishment on the one who does evil." For since the world will not let
itself be drawn by words, so that peace and unity may be preserved in
general, and the will of courage may be strengthened, it is necessary to
be serious and to force the people from the

374 **L. 2, 46-48.** How Peter wants to save Christ. **W. XIII,
923-926.** 375

Remove the sin. If a thief does not want to stop stealing, hang him on
the light gallows and he will be pacified. If a wilful knave of his own
liking wants to harm everyone and cut and stab himself for the sake of a
word, he should be given his due on the raven stone, and then there will
be peace from him; he will neither cut nor stab anyone else, and the
executioner will be able to stop him.

5 Thus, where worldly authority cuts the sword against sin and offense,
that is serving God. For God has commanded that he will not let evil and
sin go unpunished. Now this is a committee that God makes among men,
that he gives the sword into the hands of some to help ward off evil and
to protect the subjects.

(6) But the others, who have no such command, let them by all means be
idle with the sword, and draw it no sooner than secular authority is
said to do so. But if they take the sword themselves, the verdict is
here and will certainly not lie: With the sword they shall perish. As
can be seen from time to time in all histories, one's own revenge has
never done any good, nor has it been well advised; all rebels have
finally had to stand their ground and have been put to the sword. All
the man-slayers, who have unjustly slain others, have either fallen into
the hands of the executioner, or otherwise perished, or have gone so
astray in a miserable life that it would be a hundred times better if
they had died once. This is God's order, he wants it so that all those
who take the sword and do not wait until God or the authorities put it
into their hands, shall perish by the sword. It will never be otherwise.

Therefore, everyone should take good care of himself and not let anger
take hold of him, but either suffer and overcome injustice with
patience, or seek the proper revenge permitted by God. But what this is
is sufficiently indicated. For since God has commanded worldly
authorities to ward off anger and to protect the pious with the sword,
you should seek protection there and lament the one who offends you, not
only so that you may be pacified before him, but also to

so that the trouble may be reduced and the will to anger may be
controlled, and so that the secular authorities may properly exercise
their office. For a mayor in a city, a prince in a country, cannot know
all the wrongs; and yet, for the sake of his office, he owes it to God
to defend against all the wrongs and the will to anger. If you were to
remain silent to your own detriment, and another were to remain silent
as well, the more would be the offense, and you would be the cause of
your own harm. But such is both wrong. But in this you can occur both,
if you cry out to your authorities for protection.

8. but if the authorities do not want to do anything about it at your
request and do not want to help you to your right, then it is said:
suffer it patiently, and beware of your own revenge; otherwise you would
make your right wrong before God and man 2c.

(9) Yea, sayest thou, where is it that Christ saith, If any man smite
thee on thy right cheek, let him have the other also; and if any man
will be right with thee, and take thy skirt, let him have thy coat also?
? Answer: Both of these things are meant that you should beware of your
own revenge, and rather suffer everything and wait for the judge in
heaven, who does not want to conduct his office so sleepily and
carelessly, as worldly authorities sometimes do. But if you are wronged,
do not complain about it to your authorities, but keep quiet about it;
this is not what Christ says.

010 Yea, saith thou, if I bewail him that hath hurt me, will I yet seek
vengeance? Answer: Yes, and you are right to do so. But this is not
called your own vengeance, but God's vengeance, which he has ordained
that the grievance may be increased, and that every man may be preserved
in his own. So that the sum of this Historia is: Whoever is not
commanded to use the sword, but reaches for it himself, either to avenge
himself or others with it, does wrong and falls into God's judgment and
sentence, that means: "Whoever takes the sword shall perish by the
sword.

(11) Therefore, if you or yours are wronged, beware of the unjust
means of taking the sword and killing yourself.

376 **L. 2, 48-50.** How Peter wants to save Christ. **W. XIII,
926-928.** 377

you wanted to strike. But take the right remedy, that is, bring it
before your authorities, who will protect and save you; they have orders
from God and are therefore appointed. In this way you will do right, and
you cannot do wrong. But if the same will not or cannot help, then it is
said: Suffer, and do not take the sword yourself, let God avenge it, who
will certainly do it and also punish the authorities because of their
carelessness.

(12) But if a murderer were to run me down in the woods, or a wicked
villain in the gaff, and were to try to harm me, and I had not room to
seek help from the authorities, should I allow myself to be harmed or
strangled? Answer: No; for there is the authority's permission that
every man shall protect his life and limb against iniquity and
wantonness. Therefore the authorities, if they get them, take them by
the head and put them away. And Moses, by God's command, for this and
other reasons, decreed that several free cities should be appointed,
where those who had committed an act of death could go, not deliberately
out of their own revenge or anger, but accidentally or out of urgent
need. Such a judgment is also followed by the secular laws and permits
the defense of necessity. But outside of this particular case it is
said: "He who takes the sword will perish by the sword.

(13) Just as those who are not commanded by the sword always presume
to use the sword and grab it, they do not want to seek proper revenge
and intend to avenge themselves; just so, on the other hand, it happens
that those who have been given the sword by God to wield and to strike
with it, always want to be too lenient: just as if God had given them a
fox's tail and not a cutting sword in their hands. Such is also a great
sin and grave disobedience to God, bringing with it a very severe
punishment. For where the worldly authorities do not want to use their
seriousness against public outrage, God must finally be the judge and
strike. When the same judge comes, he takes not one or two, but a whole
city, a whole country, which must be destroyed because of such sins.

As the Scriptures testify in many places, and many examples are before
hand.

(14) Therefore it is necessary that the secular authorities not be
lax, nor lenient with the punishment, but have a brave seriousness and
diligent attention, and let the punishment go wherever the trouble
arises; then they will do enough for their office and God will be
pleased with it. But, as I said, it becomes sour, one does not like to
do it; as the examples are before one's eyes. For how often does it
happen that one needs to be lenient, and punishes great, horrible
offenses shamefully? How often do people put up bars and seek
intercession so that the evil will not be punished? But should one not
rather look to God's command and commandment than to the intercession
of men? God says: "Then you have the sword from my hand, which I give
you, that you may punish all public offenses in my stead, and that you
may not regard anyone who is under the rule, whether he be friend or
foe, high, low, rich, poor, noble or ignoble: where there is offense,
strike at it, do not let it come upon you. This is what God says to all
authorities. So, on the other hand, people come, asking to be spared
here and there, or to let a merciful punishment go. What happens is that
people with their intercession do more for the authorities than God with
His harsh, strict command and commandment. But whether it is right, and
what it causes with God, think about it.

Sometimes it happens that the trouble is public and in daylight, but the
secular authorities do not want to punish it until there are plaintiffs.
Since no one complains, they let it go. This means that God's command
and your office are completely thrown to the wind. For just as a
doorkeeper or householder is placed on the tower, where fire or other
mischief wants to appear by day or night in or around the city, to
report it in time and to warn of harm: so God has placed secular
authorities high above other people, to watch everywhere, so that, where
some trouble, small or great, arises, they may quell it with the sword,
and not let it arise, God granting that one complains or does not
complain. For

**378 8.2, 50-52.** How Peter wants to save Christ. **W. XIII, 928-931.
379**

For such a cause it bears the sword, as Paul says, for the fear of evil
works, that every man may be pacified and increased in courage. And the
Lord says here: The sword shall not feast nor go idle; but it shall slay
them that take it.

16 So it is dilapidated in both parts. Those who do not have the sword
want to have it and strike at it, as Peter did here. Again, those who
have it can be made to grasp it in their hands and use it.

(17) But whoever understands and complies with this saying, if God has
not given him the sword in his hand, he will leave it and suffer and
endure everything rather than take it into his own hands. Because he
sees the command of Christ and the order of God before his eyes, and he
certainly believes that it will not be in vain. That is why he is on
guard against it, as against the executioner, the gallows and the wheel,
so that he does not go against such a command. Again, when God has given
him the sword in his hands, he lets it go confidently and fearlessly
against men, regardless of their status or wealth. When trouble comes,
he knows that he must defend himself. Therefore, he obeys God and serves
God with such earnestness. That is enough of the first part.

18 Here the question arises, which was reported above: Since private
individuals are certainly permitted to take up the sword, and Peter is
here punished by the Lord Christ for taking up the sword to save him, is
this example so far-reaching that where an authority is challenged on
account of religion, it may take up arms? Or to say it still more
plainly: Whether one may also fight on account of the gospel, and defend
it with the sword against men, if Christ does not want Peter to save him
with the sword?

19 Here we must first look at the disparity. For we must confess that it
was God's will that Christ should suffer at that time; as he himself
testifies when he asks: "Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass
from me. But from such it does not follow that it was God's will

that worldly authorities should keep quiet about it, and either approve
or tolerate that the gospel is destroyed by others and that idolatry is
caused. For in the other Psalm this command is given in clear words:
"Let yourselves therefore be instructed, ye kings, and chastened, ye
judges of the land," that is, give place to the gospel, do not
persecute it, accept it, and stand over it. Secondly, there is another
disparity here, which is well to be noticed. For Peter (as reported
above) is not only a private person, to whom the sword is not commanded
by God, but a spiritual person, who should deal with the ministry of
preaching and have nothing at all to do with the sword.

(20) In this case, however, we are not speaking of private
individuals, but of those who have the office, and to whom God has hung
the sword at their side and given it into their hands through their
proper profession. God did not set them up in such a way that they, like
a shepherd, should look only at the physical, how peace can be
maintained and how everyone can provide his food; but they should also,
and most of all, look at the spiritual, whether they keep the right
worship, punish and destroy false doctrine and idolatry, and rather do
everything before they let themselves and their subjects be forced into
idolatry and lies. Therefore the other Psalm says: "Kiss the Son",
that is, accept God's word and keep it. This is the noblest office of
worldly authorities; as one can see that God demands it in the
histories, and not only the pious kings among the Jews, Jehoshaphat,
Josias, Ezechias, but also among the Gentiles, as Nebuchadnezzar,
Darius, Cyrus, are excellently praised by the Holy Spirit for having
established the right service of God and for having sat down by force
against idolatry.

If this is the office of the temporal authorities, it follows that when
they are challenged by the ungodly (for it is impossible for them to
have the Holy Spirit if they persecute the Word of God and practice
idolatry), they should not follow them, but should protect themselves
and their own by force as long as they can. For if the secular
authorities would not do this, what would become of them? They alone
have the sword.

[380 **L, 2, 52-54.** How Peter **wants to** save Christ. **W. xm,
S3I-934.** 381]{.underline}

If it does not need it, the subjects must not need it either. What else
will follow then, but that the wicked will gain a continuance, God's
word will be erased, the right worship will be abolished and the old
idolatry will be restored? But who would or should approve of such a
thing, and take upon himself so great and grievous a sin? For the
command is already ready: "Ye kings, be instructed, kiss the Son, lest
he be angry, and ye perish in the way"; item: Flee idolatry; item: The
sword is a fear to wicked works. Because it is an evil work to commit
idolatry, it is not only permitted, but also earnestly commanded to
those who have the sword, that they should use it confidently against
such evil, and protect and save themselves and their own from it.

22 But I speak for and for those who have the sword and are in office.
But those who do not have the sword, as when the bishops urge their
subjects to one form and other public errors, although in such cases the
subjects should follow God rather than men, and God seriously interprets
such disobedience to them, they should not therefore draw the sword, but
suffer; otherwise they would draw it, as Peter did, to whom no one had
commanded it.

(23) But if any man would make a difference here, that one authority
should be reckoned higher or lower than another, there is nothing in
such a difference in such a case. For God is the greatest authority over
all, who says, "You shall hear my Son. Whether worldly authority is
unequal, it is equal to God; for he is over them all, so they are all
under him and from him. For this reason, no one should allow idolatry
and false worship to be imposed on himself and his family, but should
protect himself against it by force as long as he can. For God is to be
followed more than men.

24 Yes, you say, a Christian should suffer injustice and violence, and
not fight against it with violence. Answer: We are talking here about
secular authorities who carry the sword; they already suffer violence
and injustice enough when other authorities put them out of peace.

and attack them with war. Let it remain with this suffering and do not
impose more on the Christian authorities. But whoever imposes more on it
and wants to take the sword out of its hands, what else does he do but
agree that the enemies of the word do everything according to their will
and take away God's word? . This is what you get if you have to do it
and cannot get anything with the sword. But because there is still hope,
and the trade is in God's counsel and in His hands, we should dare to
suffer and do something about it, so that we may not be accused of
having looked to favor, peace and other things more than to God's word
and the salvation and welfare of our subjects.

The command is loud and clear: Osculamini filium. Hunc audite: "Kiss
the son, hear my son," flee idolatry 2c. Such commands impose on
worldly authorities that they should not only oppose worldly or temporal
trouble, but also false doctrine and false worship. But with what shall
they do it and oppose it? What has God given her for this? Is it not
true that it is the sword? But against whom shall they wield it? Against
those who defend false doctrine and false worship and want to force
others to do so. Christian authorities should not suffer such things.
For the most high Lord in heaven has forbidden it, and called God
honored and his word praised, where peace, favor of men, and other
things are put into motion rather than that one should approve something
against God's word.

26 So we have Peter with his sword, who fights and wants to save the
Lord Christ, but he has no command. Now there is another sermon here,
which is primarily against the Jews, who were commanded by their regular
authorities to take swords and spears and use them against the Lord
Jesus. And yet the Lord also rebukes them for it.

**You went out** (he said) **as to a murderer, with swords and with
staves to catch me; yet I sat with you daily, and taught in the temple,
and you took me not.**

**
**[382 D. 2, 54.55. How JEsus is led before Annas and Caiphas. W. XIII,
934-S36. 383]{.underline}

27 With these words the Lord punishes them for two reasons. The first is
that even though the secular authorities put the sword into the hands of
their subjects, they should not take it if the matter is evil and
unjust. The other, that they should not have taken it against him, the
Lord. For he was not a murderer; it was to be done for the sake of
doctrine. Such disputes are not to be judged and settled with fire or
sword, as the papists are wont to do, but with the Scriptures. If we are
heretics, as they accuse us, then they will judge us with the Scriptures
and leave the executioner at home, who does not belong to such
disputations.

But as the Jews began with Christ, so do the papists,

their disciples, nor. They cannot and will not argue, unless one accepts
their doctors and the Pope's decree as much as the word of God.
Therefore, because we refuse to do so, they, like the Jews against
Christ, come against us with swords and staves, so that everyone may see
what kind they are; namely, as the Lord says to the Jews, John 8:44:
"You are of the father the devil, for you seek to kill me." We see
this in all papists. But we who are like Peter, to whom the sword is not
commanded, must endure and suffer it. But God will punish such injustice
in His time, and graciously save His own against the bloodthirsty
tyrants' rampage. Amen.

**The fourth sermon.**

How the Lord brought Jesus before Annas and Caiphas, and what kind of
court order or trial the Jews held with him.

**Matth. 26, 57-68.**

And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him unto Caiphas the high
priest, where the scribes and elders were gathered together. And Peter
followed him afar off unto the palace of the high priest, and entered
in, and sat with the servants, that he might see whither he went out.
And the chief priests, and the elders, and all the council, sought false
witness against Jesus, that they might kill him, and found none. And
though many false witnesses came near, they found none. At last there
came two false witnesses, saying: He said, I can destroy the temple of
God and build it in three days. And the high priest arose, and said unto
him, Answerest thou nothing to the things which these witness against
thee? But JEsus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said
unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether
thou be the Christ, the Son of God. And JEsus said unto him, Thou sayest
it. But I say unto you, From henceforth ye shall see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.
Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, "He has blasphemed God;
what need have we of further testimony? Behold, now you have heard his
blasphemy. What do you think? They answered and said: He is guilty of
death. Then they spat in his face, and smote him with their fists. And
some of them smote him in the face, saying: Tell us, O Christ, who is it
that smote thee?

(1) So far your loved ones have heard how our Lord Christ was betrayed
by Judah in the garden and captured by the Jews. Now follows how they
brought him before Caiphas, the high priest, and there they

that they unanimously decide they have cause enough to hand him over to
Pilato and sue for his life.

2 Such history is not only described by the evangelists so diligently
that we have

384 **L. 2,ss-57. how JEsus is led before Annas and Caiphas. W. xm,
936-939.** 383

We should see and learn the holy innocence of our Lord Christ, for since
we know that he is the Son of God, conceived by the Holy Spirit and born
of virgins, we must conclude from this that he was completely pure and
without all sin: But for this purpose this act of judgment serves
especially, because it should happen to the church and the gospel in the
world in the same way as it happened to the Lord Christ, so that we do
not get angry when the same happens to us, but always look at this
example and comfort ourselves with it and send us to patience.

(3) For if it so happened to our Lord and Head, the Son of God, that
he was falsely accused, and given by the ecclesiastics into the hand of
Pilate, and to the hangman's rope, what wonder if the like should
happen to us? The servant shall not have it better than his lord; and we
shall rejoice when it comes to us that we may boast: My Lord Christ also
had it so. For then we can have hope, if we are like him in suffering,
that we will also be like him in glory; yes, even in suffering, before
the glory is revealed, we will find comfort, help and salvation. So that
such history is first of all prescribed for our consolation, that we may
become more confident and patient in suffering, because our Lord Christ
Himself was not above such things.

(4) Secondly, it also serves to counteract the common worldly anger.
For these, who are called high priests and elders among the people, are
considered by everyone to be pious, holy people because of their office,
status and nature; just as today the pope, bishops, monks and priests
are considered to be the most distinguished members of the Christian
church because of their office. But learn here, and look not at the
office, lest thou be deceived; but see how they deal with Christ, what
heart and will they bear toward him. If you find good or evil there,
judge them according to that, and you will not fail to judge. The office
is undoubtedly holy and good; but it may well be a rogue who leads the
office. For here thou seest that the chief priests are the very ones who
have made the Lord Jesus holy.

They cannot tolerate it, they put it to the test, and devise so much
that they bring it to the cross. Then you must confess that they are the
worst of the wicked.

(5) Therefore, if thou wouldest know for certain whether popes,
bishops, and such like are pious or not, let not their ministry deceive
thee; only see how they hold themselves against the gospel and the right
doctrine: and thou shalt find that they are the children of Judas, and
have as much heart against the gospel as the chief priests had against
Christ. This is the true fruit, by which the false prophets, the wolves,
can actually be recognized, even though they walk in sheep's clothing,
and have the appearance of being pious, harmless people.

Now let us take the trial before us and see how the holy people deal so
spitefully, dangerously, cunningly and poisonously with the dear Lord
Christ. John the Evangelist reports that the Jews first led the Lord
Jesus to Annas, who was not a high priest, but the high priest Caiphas'
brother-in-law. But before Caiphas this son of Annas, Eleazar, and after
Caiphas his other son, Jonathas, was high priest. From this it is easy
to assume that Annas was an excellent, respectable, forerunner man, and
the group that led Jesus captive came to him first, if perhaps in his
house, as the oldest and closest, the Jews wanted to come together and
confer. But Annas soon directed them to his son-in-law, Caiaphas, who
was the high priest that year, for there the chief priests and elders
were gathered together.

7 First of all, see how the chief priests deal unfairly with the Lord
Christ. For they are both accusers and judges. Therefore the Lord must
be in the wrong in his matters, and he may say and do as he pleases. In
worldly affairs this would be a very great dishonor, as it is forbidden
by special statutes that no one should be both plaintiff and judge. But
nothing is sinful to these holy people, they have all power; what they
desire, they may do, and despite who would do them wrong, or interpret
something evil.

[386 **L.2 , 57-59. How JEsus is led before Annas and Caiphas. W. XIII,
939-942.** 387]{.underline}

8 With our clergy, the pope and bishops, it is the same. For many years
now, the Pope has opened his mouth to us Germans one after the other,
and posed as if he wanted to abolish the discord in the matter of
religion through a concilium. Thus it has been earnestly sought by our
part at many imperial congresses and elsewhere that one might have a
free Christian concilium, and counter and abolish the discord that is
before one's eyes with holy scripture. But there one sees publicly that
the pope desires to deal with us and the holy Gospel, just as the Jews
here with Christ. He is a partisan, and he stands up for the quarrels of
his doctrine and worship, which he has caused in the church against
God's word and still keeps about it.

(9) What then shall the defendant do? If he himself is to be the
judge, he will not do wrong, and he will not do right by his opponent,
the plaintiff. That is what the pope and his crowd want in this trade,
so fine are they, honorable people. Yes, that is even more, he lets
himself be heard publicly, where a concilium is held, so we, as the
previously damned by him, shall have neither voice nor attendance in
such concilio. This is a courageous, unreasonable, burdensome act. But
here it is, the world cannot deal with Christ in any other way;
therefore we may take patience by the hand here, and bear such inequity
with the Lord Christ until his time. It will not be otherwise. Caiphas,
who sat down as a judge on the judgment seat, complains to the Lord
Christ Himself and gives Him injustice in His cause. This is the first
injustice in this trial of the clergy.

(10) Secondly, this is also very burdensome; they want to have the
Lord Christ badly killed, and yet they cannot find a sufficient cause,
but have to make do with lies and false witnesses; until finally
Caiphas, the judge, himself appears, and brings forth an accusation that
has a little standing. Among other false testimonies is this, that two
of them come forward and say: He said, I can tear down the temple of God
and build it in three days.

11. such historia, how it had happened,

For when our Lord Jesus drove out the changers and merchants with their
oxen, sheep, pigeons, and whatsoever else they had, with a scourge, in
Jerusalem at an Easter feast, and spilled the money of the changers, and
overturned the moneychangers' tables, the Jews gathered together,
saying, Thou art subduing thyself by a strange power; hast thou also
commanded to do this? What sign do you show us that you may do this? The
Lord answered, "Break down this temple, and on the third day I will
raise it up. This is what he meant by the sign of Jonah in Matthew 12.
As if to say, Ye desire a sign, and it shall be done unto you. You will
kill me, but on the third day I will raise myself from death. Whoever is
not satisfied with such a sign can no longer be helped. That is the
history. But how they turn the words so mischievously! He said, Ye shall
break him; and they say, He said, He would break him. And even if one
would let such words remain in the mind, as the Jews understand it, of
the temple at Jerusalem; should a man have been guilty of death because
of such a word?

12 In sum, whoever wants to accuse against Christ must become a shameful
liar, as we also see in our papists. What they cry out against the
gospel is a vain lie. They are not ashamed, the unholy people, they
write it in the books: "We handle the reverend Sacrament in such an
angry way that we pour the chalice, if it remains, on the walls, and
trample the blessed bread, if it remains, underfoot. Are these not
gross, palpable lies? It is not done with bad bread and wine, they are
kept nice and honest. Should it not be done here, since we confess and
teach that it is not only bread, not only wine, as the sacramentalists
teach, but the body and blood of Christ, given for us on the cross and
poured out for our sins? But do not be surprised by such lies from the
papists. He who deals in lies cannot speak the truth; and he who acts
against the truth cannot speak anything but the truth.

**[388 L. 2, s9-6i. How JEsus is led before Annas and Caiphas. W. xin,
942-945. 389]{.underline}**

We have to make do with a lie. This is what the world began with Christ,
as we see here, and must continue with Christians and the holy gospel.

013 And when the testimonies would not agree together, and were of
themselves inconclusive, Caiphas the judge, or high priest, came forth,
and, as John reported, asked Christ for his disciples and for his
doctrine, as if to say, What new doctrine bringest thou? Is Moses not
good enough for you? Must you have something special? Are you alone
learned? Are we all fools? Where are they now who regard your teaching
as right and godly? It would be so good, we would also put up with it
and accept it. But it is a vile company that thou hast attached to thee;
that which is honest and sincere would not desire thy preaching.

014 To such a question the Lord answered, I have always taught in the
synagogue, and in the temple, where all the Jews come together, and have
spoken nothing in the corner: why askest thou me therefore? Ask those
who have heard what I have said to them? Behold, these know what I have
said." The Lord does not want his teaching to be ignored, and says that
he did not shy away from the light, but preached publicly; for this
reason, he should not be called a preacher in a corner.

(15) But there is a wicked wretch who gives the Lord a hard blow in
the cheek, because he thus answers the high priest and does not
celebrate him more highly. Such priests of today are the useless
washers, jokers, cocles and the like, who want to serve, blaspheme and
desecrate the holy gospel only to gain favor with their bishops and the
idol at Rome. This must be suffered: Christ also suffered it; but yet
not to be silent about it, nor to let such iniquity go unpunished or
unreported. As Christ here harshly attacks the servant, and says that he
beat him with an unjust punishment, and yet leaves it at that.

(16) Yet the enemies of Christ have nothing to stand on. Therefore
Caiphas, the high priest, goes to the main thing. "I beseech thee," he
says, "by the living God, that thou wouldst give us

say whether you are the Christ, the Son of God? The latter can take the
matter to work and grab the throat of the Lord Christ.

17 First, notice that this is not Caiphas' opinion, that he or the
others would believe in him if he said he was Christ. No, but they want
him to make such a confession, and they think there is no need for it.
Christ understands it well, but he does not want to deny it. You say
it," he says, "that is, Yes, as you say, I am Christ. And what is
more, in a few days you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right
hand of power. That is: I shall suffer no more, but in such flesh and
blood I shall be eternal Almighty God, and shall reign over all, until I
come again in the cloud at the last day, and judge the living and the
dead. Well, there the high priest has the glorious, excellent
confession, what he should think and believe of this man, whom he and
others have ordered to be captured and killed. How does he need such a
confession?

**He tore his clothes and said, "He has blasphemed God, what more can
we testify? Behold, now that ye have heard his blasphemy, what think
ye?**

(18) Now this is the first judicial transaction before the spiritual
law, that they make Christ a heretic and blasphemer. The chief priests
are satisfied with this, and the rest is that they bring such a secular
or civil accusation before Pilate and help him to death.

19 However, because they discuss such things, each in his own way, the
innocent poor Christ has to take the blame, spit in his holy face, beat
himself with fists, be plucked here and there, pushed and mocked. For
they think they are doing the right thing, because he is recognized as a
heretic and blasphemer. When he says that he is Christ, they drive out
their mockery. One hits him in the front, the other in the back. Are you
Christ, they say. Dear, prophesy, who has beaten you?

[390 **L. 2.61-63. How Peter denies the Lord for the third time. W.
XIII, 945-948.** 391]{.underline}

(20) But see diligently whether the gospel of this day be not so? The
papists ask us and want to know our doctrine. If then we confess it most
simply and faithfully, as happened at Augsburg and elsewhere at the
Diet, the cry goes up with power: Heresy, heresy; and let no one refrain
from doing to the poor Christians whatever shame, scorn, ridicule and
harm he can inflict. Are you the evangelicals, they say, is this your
gospel? Beyte, we want

give you the Gospel. So we have played the Passion now and then with the
devout Christians in Germany, France, England, that God may have mercy.

(21) Therefore we may well and diligently take note of such processum
juris with the clergy, whether we also encounter such things, that we
may look to our Lord Christ and learn patience from him, and draw right
comfort, whether we must suffer with him because of his word, that we
may also live and be glorious with him. May God grant this to us all,
amen.

**The fifth sermon.**

How Peter denied the Lord in Caiphas' house for the third time.

**Matth. 26, 69-76.**

But Peter was outside in the palace; and a maid came to him, saying, And
thou also wast with JEsu of Galilee. But he denied before them all,
saying: I know not what thou sayest. And as he went out at the door,
another saw him, and said unto them that were there: This also was with
JEsu of Nazareth. And he denied again, and sware unto them: I know not
man. And after a little while they that stood by came and said unto
Petro, Verily thou also art one of these: for thy speech betrayeth thee.
Then he began to curse himself and to swear: I know not man. And
straightway the cock crowed. Then Peter remembered the words of Jesus,
saying unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he
went out and wept bitterly.

1 This is an excellent history, because of which the evangelists all
four give special account of it. But it serves two main purposes. First,
that we may learn to be humble and not presumptuous, since Peter so
easily falls into such a great case, who before had risked life and limb
so little for the sake of the Lord Christ. Second, that when we have
fallen into sin, we may learn how to turn again to grace. For in Petro
we will find a fine example of Christian repentance, what it actually is
and how we are to be delivered from sins. But first we will tell the
story of how it happened.

002 When JEsus was taken captive in the garden, and was led first to
Annas the brother-in-law of Caiphas, and by Annas to the high priest, he
was brought to the king.

John writes that he followed Caiphas from afar, went to Caiphas' house
(because he had a customer there), and also took Peter with him; he sat
down with the other servants inside the house by the fire and warmed
himself. A maid asked him if he was a disciple of the man who had been
captured. But he strongly denied it. And then the cock crowed for the
first time.

(3) Matthew and Mark report that Peter went out from the fire into the
courtyard, where he encountered something like this: first, another maid
said to those who were standing around Peter: This is one of the
disciples of JEsus that was taken captive. But Lucas says that it was a
man who said this about Peter.

392- **2.2,63-ks.** How Peter denied the Lord for the third time. **W.
xm. 943-950.** 393

But it is probably to be thought, since the maid began to speak of
Petro, that others also said theirs to it and have given the maid right.
Then Peter denies for the second time.

4 Third, and about an hour later, as Lucas reports, there comes one of
the high priest's servants, who, as John says, was a friend of the one
whose ear Peter cut off in the garden; he attacks Peter more severely
than the previous ones, and says publicly that he saw him in the garden
with Jesus. Peter did not want to let this happen to him, because he was
afraid of the skin and therefore began to curse himself and swear: I
know not the man of whom ye say. Soon after this denial the rooster
crowed. The Lord looked at Peter and struck his heart so hard that he
now saw what he had done. Soon he runs away from Caiphas' house and
weeps bitterly. This is roughly the story as it is written by all four
evangelists.

(5) First of all, as mentioned above, we should learn from the pious
man Petro our weakness, that we should not rely on other people or on
ourselves. For our hearts are so utterly weak and unstable that they
change every hour, as the Lord says, John 2:24, 25. Who would want to be
always provided with such unstableness and weakness in Petro? When the
Lord warns him, Luc. 22, 31, that Satan desires him and wants to sift
him like wheat, how Peter has such a strong courage! how defiant and
undaunted he is! "Lord," he says, "I will go with you to prison and
to death." But since the Lord further warns him not to be too
presumptuous; before the cock crows twice, he will have denied him three
times, one sees that Peter thinks it is a fair fable. He thinks it is
impossible, he wants to stand by him, should his life be lost. And he
proves it with action. For when the Jews were in the greatest earnest,
and caught the Lord in the garden, Peter was the first to go, and smote
into the multitude, notwithstanding that the latter were so many and
well armed, but they were but two that had weapons.

Who would believe that such a courageous man, who is so faithful to his
Lord, would so shamefully deny him? For here no one desires to do
anything to Petro or to any of his fellow disciples. The Lord had
pleased them when he said, "Let these go." And especially here in
Caiaphas' house no one desires to do them any harm. When now, without
any danger, and perhaps out of compassion, the little thormaid said to
Petro, "Were you not also with Jesus of Nazareth?" his heart and
courage failed him, and he was afraid that if he said yes, it would be
the same for him as for his Lord. Denies therefore. And when he was
asked the second and third time, he cursed himself: "God give me this
and that," he said, "if I know him or have ever seen him.

7 Let this example be a command to you, so that you may learn to
recognize yourself and other people correctly and beware of presumption.
For this can happen to Petro, who had a special heart for the Lord
Christ above all other disciples, and who was so enlightened with God's
grace that Christ himself says: "Blessed are you, Simon, flesh and
blood has not revealed these things to you, but my Father in heaven";
and he gives him the name and calls him a rock: what will it be like
with us poor people, who are much weaker in gifts, and otherwise far
weaker and more frail? Therefore beware, be not presumptuous, think not,
I am over the ditch, there is no more need. For your flesh is corrupt
and worthless. Satan does not celebrate in this way; he is watching
behind and in front, to see if he can bring us down and grieve our
hearts. Therefore it is not to be trusted, but keep thee in the fear of
God, and beware of all things.

(8) And as Christ warned Peter, Jacob and John above, saying, "Watch
and pray, lest ye fall into temptation," so do thou also, watch, do not
snore, be not sure, as if there were no more need; remember, my greatest
enemy is nearest to me, I bear him in my bosom. Therefore, if God does
not sit with me with His Holy Spirit, it is over. I cannot govern myself
for a few hours, nor can I hold on.

394 L. 2,66-67. How Peter denies the Lord for the third time. W. HII,
980-953. 395

ten. For this reason I will ask God for His Holy Spirit, so that He may
govern and guide me through it, and either protect me from temptation,
or graciously help me and not let me fall. This is the first thing that
is held out to us in this history.

(9) And this also the Lord saith of Luc. 21:34, That the heart be not
weighed down with eating and drinking. For this is our wickedness, that,
like cattle, our food stings us. He who is full and has enough soon
forgets God and His word, or does not take much notice of it. Then it is
soon done, before one dares, that one gets into the devil's yarn.
Therefore, all three things must be together, that you fear God, watch
and be sober, and pray without ceasing, and there will be no need. For
even though we cannot be completely overcome by temptation and sometimes
fall because of weakness, God will lead us out again through His Holy
Spirit so that we will not remain in it.

(10) Secondly, this history serves to comfort us, that the fruit of
the suffering of our Lord Christ can be seen finely here; and we not
only find in Petro a special example of God's grace and mercy, but also
learn that when it comes to us that we have done wrong and sinned, how
we should send ourselves and seek mercy.

(11) The fall of Petro is terrible and heavy, as he feels most of all,
and because of it he must no longer stay among the people, but hide
himself away and weep bitterly. But then it is seen that the Lord not
only told him of such a case beforehand, but afterwards accepted him
graciously and did not let such sin be repaid. For on Easter day, before
the Lord Christ was revealed, the angel who was sitting by the tomb
commanded the women to tell his disciples, and especially Petro, that
the Lord had risen. And the Lord Himself, soon after revealing Himself
to Magdalene and the other women, appears to Petro and comforts him. All
these things are comfort to us, though we are glad that we should not
let the confidence of grace depart from our hearts, but that we should
not be deceived.

as the Lord showed himself against Peter, do not doubt that he died for
our sake; his suffering should be a comfort and help to us, even though
we are poor sinners. For if sinners were not to enjoy such suffering,
his disciples, and especially Peter, would have been the first to be
rejected by him, and he would never have taken care of them, because
they had fled from him and denied him so shamefully. But the merciful
Lord does not do this: they are still dear disciples to him, although
they had behaved badly. Mark this and comfort your heart with it, for
the same will the gracious God do with you.

012 Yea, sayest thou, but how is poor Judah? There you can see that all
grace is gone. Whether we shall hear of such things hereafter, yet it is
necessary to have good instruction, which Peter hath promoted and
preserved, but Judah hath hindered and brought into despair: that we may
learn rightly from Peter, and beware of that which Judah hath met with.

(13) First of all, we must make a distinction between Peter and Judah,
also because of their sins. For although they both go against God's
will by sinning and thus incur eternal damnation, Judah's sin is still
greater than Peter's. Judas goes after his sin voluntarily and
thoughtfully, and although the Lord warns him so often and faithfully,
sin loves him more. This is not the case with Petro; it comes about, and
is not a superior will, but an accidental stupidity or weakness, that he
denies Christ. If he had been afraid that this would happen to him, he
would never have come to Caiphas' house.

14 Such a difference in sin is evident, that though they both sin, Peter
and Judas, and fall into God's judgment, yet Judas' sin is greater
than Peter's. Just as the Lord makes a distinction between Pilate and
the Jews, John 19, and says, v. 11: "He who delivered me to you has the
greater sin! Therefore Judas has a more fearful conscience and greater
suffering than Peter. For the burden that is upon him is heavier, and
makes it harder for him to bear.

[396 L. s, 67-ss. How Peter denies the Lord for the third time. W. xni.
953-987. 397]{.underline}

Peter deserved to die because of his sin, just as much as Judas. Thus
Paul says of himself: that he persecuted Christ and his believers, he
did so ignorantly; thus he also points out such a difference that his
persecution, although it was a damnable, deadly sin, was not the same as
the persecution of the chief priests and Pharisees. Such a difference is
useful to notice, and to beware of such wanton, willful sins, as of a
burden that will be hard upon us, and that we must fear to go down under
it.

(15) Although there is such a difference in sin, that one is less and
the other greater, and without doubt the greater one weighs down and
presses the conscience more, yet God's word and promise stands, that
because of sins no one should despair nor despair, but have all grace
toward God through the Lord Christ, His only begotten Son.

16 Now Judas and Peter are separated in this play. Judas has a heavier
burden on his back than Peter, as reported; therefore he falls into
despair and thinks that there is neither help nor counsel in eternity.
But why? Because he had diligently listened to God's word, despised it,
and nothing of it improved. Since he was in need of comfort and did not
have the word, it was impossible that he could have been helped. Peter
also wept bitterly, fearing and trembling because of his sins, but he
had heard the word of the Lord more diligently and had better knowledge
of it. Therefore, since the trouble is now at hand, he takes it before
him and keeps to it, comforting himself with it and hoping that God will
be merciful to him. This is the right help in such distress, which poor
Judah lacks. That this is what happened to Petro, and that he kept
God's word and grace, is testified by the Lord, Luc. 22, where he says,
v. 32: "I have prayed for you, that your faith may not cease. When he
denies Christ, there is not a speck of faith in his heart; but when
conscience comes and troubles him, faith is found again and sustains
him.

such word of Christ that he may not fall into despair.

Therefore, learn here what is the right repentance. Peter weeps
bitterly. This is the beginning of repentance, that the heart may
rightly know sin, and be sorry for it; that there may be no desire or
love for it, and that one may continue in sins, but be grieved from the
heart that one has not kept God's will and has sinned.

18 But we cannot do this of ourselves; the Lord must look upon us as he
looks upon Peter here. For our nature is such that we love sin and
continue in it with pleasure forever. As we see here with Peter: since
he has once denied Christ, he continues always and cares for nothing.
But when the cock crows and the Lord looks around for Petro, he first
strikes himself and thinks about what he has done. Now sin, according to
its nature and ours, cannot do otherwise than to frighten, to threaten
with God's wrath and to make the heart full of fear; as can be seen in
both Judah and Petro. Judah, when he realizes his sin, becomes so afraid
that he does not know where to stay. Petro is also so frightened that he
has to get away from people and cannot cry enough; his sin frightens him
so much.

(19) In such anguish and heartache, it is best that you first humble
yourself before God and freely confess your sin: O God, I am a poor
sinner, and can no more sin than you can put away from me with your
grace. After that, you should abide by God's word and promise and say:
"But be merciful to me for the sake of your Son Christ Jesus. When the
heart is thus comforted by God's word, and certainly hopes that God
will be merciful for the sake of His Son, then the fear must subside and
comfort will certainly follow. This then is a true and complete
repentance, to humble oneself because of sins and to take comfort in the
Lord Christ and His suffering.

20 Thus Peter no doubt comforted himself with the word that the Lord had
spoken to him over the table, Luc. 22:31: "The devil hath desired thee;
but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith cease not."

398 **L. 2,69.70.** How Christ is delivered to Pilato 2c. **W. XIII,
957-sss.** 399

For though his heart was full of anguish and sorrow, he did not despair
as Judas did. But because the reason for such small consolation was
God's word and promise, he increased wonderfully, and on the holy
Easter day, when he saw Christ again, he grew so great that all
displeasure disappeared, and only heartfelt humility remained, so that
he had to confess his weakness and admit his guilt as a poor sinner.
Apart from this humility and confession, sin left nothing in his heart.
Consolation, like a strong bosom of clouds, quenched and extinguished
the fire that had been burning in his heart.

(21) Therefore, since we cannot live without temptation, we should
prepare ourselves in time to hear, practice and remember God's word
diligently, so that we may have comfort like Peter.

22 Therefore this example of St. Peter is here for our instruction and
comfort, that we should learn both: first, not to be sure, but to keep
ourselves in the fear of God, because it can happen so soon that even
great saints fall so hardly; and second, whether we have fallen, that we
nevertheless keep God's word, so that it comforts us, and do not
despair because of sins, as Judas did. For just as God does not want
anyone to rise up because of his gifts; we are all to fear, watch and
pray: so also he does not want anyone to despair because of sins. For it
was to ward off such evil that the Son of God became man and died on the
cross. Therefore it is said: If you want to be a true Christian, fear
God and trust in his grace and word, and you will find comfort,
salvation and help here and there. May our dear Father in heaven,
through his Holy Spirit, grant this to us all, and for the sake of our
dear Lord and Savior Christ, amen.

**The sixth sermon.**

How Christ is delivered to Pilate, and Judas hangs himself, and the
chief priests buy a field for the burial of the pilgrims for the thirty
pieces of silver.

**Matth. 27, 1-10.**

On the morrow all the chief priests and the elders of the people held a
council against Jesus, and put him to death. And they bound him, and led
him away, and delivered him to Pontio Pilato the governor. When Judas,
who had betrayed him, saw that he was condemned to death, he repented
and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and
elders, saying: I have done evil in that I have betrayed innocent blood.
They said: What is that to us? Then you watch. And he cast the pieces of
silver into the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. But
the chief priests took the pieces of silver, saying: It is not fit that
we should put them into the treasury; for it is blood money. But they
took counsel, and bought a potter's field for it, for the burying of
the pilgrims. Therefore, the same field is called the blood field to
this day. Then is fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, They took thirty shekels of silver to pay for the sold
thing, which they bought of the children of Israel, and gave it for a
potter's field, as the LORD commanded me.

**400 .** l. 2, 70-72. like Christ Pilato

**is handed over 2c. W. xin, Wo-ses. 401**

(1) Your beloved have heard how the Lord Christ was first brought
before the spiritual authorities, and there lost his case; for those who
were plaintiffs were also judges in their own cause. Now follows how he
was brought before Pilate and what happened there.

(2) Before we come to this, however, we must first indicate where
persecution has its origin. For such a thing is here very finely
painted, and the like is still found where persecution goes against the
gospel.

(3) As soon as the high priest heard the word from the Lord saying,
"From now on you will see the Son of Man at the right hand of power,
coming in the clouds," he tore his garment and said, "He has
blasphemed God; what further testimony do we need? Now you have heard
his blasphemy. What think ye?" But all the others, who were at such a
council, said, "He is guilty of death"; and soon after began to deal
miserably with the pious Lord JEsu. There was not one man among them who
would have stood with him; all of them, in particular, were against him.

4 And yet there was still one thing in their way. The cause they
considered worthy of death they knew well, Pilate would not ask much
about it; for he was a Gentile, had no order from the Roman emperor to
strangle the Jews for their faith; otherwise he would have had to
strangle them all. Therefore, as soon as the morning dawned, they met
together, and, as Matthew says, they held council about how to kill him,
that is, they discussed what kind of accusation they would bring against
him before Pilate. For they saw that even though Christ had blasphemed
God, Pilate would not kill him. Therefore they had to think of a
worldly, respectable accusation, as if before a worldly judge. That
would not have broken Christ's neck, that they said he was a
blasphemer.

5 Here look and learn how swift and poisonous Satan is, if one needs
counsel on how to strangle Christ. The first word Pilate speaks to
Christ is to ask him, "Are you the king of the Jews?"

From such a word it is enough to assume that they have decided on this
in this council, and have indicated to the Lord Jesus before Pilate that
he desires to cause a riot and to raise himself up for the king of the
Jews. But with what can they bring this upon the Lord? Where did he ever
call himself a king? Where has he presented himself as a great lord?
They could bear witness to this if they had wanted the people to seize
him and make him king, but he would not and hid himself; item, that he
had told them to give the emperor what was his and not to withhold it.

Now we have to think about this: Pilate will not have been satisfied
with such a mere accusation, they will have had to prove such an
accusation. How did this happen? Undoubtedly in this way. They had heard
that Christ had confessed to the high priest that he was Christ. On this
they took the Scriptures as a witness, and proved from the prophets how
Christ would be a king. For thus saith Zechariah, Cap. 9:9, Behold, thy
king cometh unto thee meekly; and Hosea 3:8, They shall seek David their
king; and in many other places more. Because the Lord confesses that he
is Christ, it was also known that he was the king of the Jews. For
Christ was to be a king. Behold, the devil can search so accurately.

(7) But he is silent about the things that are against him and that
could be a disgrace to the Lord Christ, namely, that Zechariah says: He
will be miserable, that is, he will not be a worldly king, he will only
deal with consciences, comforting them against sin and God's wrath: but
with the body, with money, with goods he will have nothing to do,
because God has other kings for them, these are worldly kings. The
peelers do not say a word about such things, they put a blue haze over
Pilato's eyes and say that he has made himself a king of the Jews. Thus
they bring Pilatum into the bargain, who otherwise, if it had remained
with the first accusation of heresy or blasphemy, would not have taken
care of the matter.

402 2.2,72-74. How Christ is delivered to Pilato 2c. W. xm, 96s-966. 403

(8) It is the same today, for secular authorities have a common bad
habit of not caring much about God's kingdom and religion. When kings
and princes have their obedience, their interest and glory, they ask no
further, and so Christ would well remain before Pilato. But the high
priests and elders of the people, that is, the bloodthirsty crowd, pope,
cardinals, bishops, monks, priests, come to accuse Christ before Pilate,
they incite kings and princes against the gospel, accuse it, just as the
Jews accused Christ before Pilate: It is a rebellious doctrine; if one
lets them go and does not defend them in time, they will not keep their
obedience with the subjects for long. Indeed, if they do not seriously
oppose it, they will have neither happiness nor salvation in the
regiment. That the Turk thus breaks in, that we have no luck against
him, that there is so much misgrowth in fruits, and that misfortune is
found on all sides: all this the wretched clergy preach to the great
lords, that it is the fault of the gospel. This wakes up Pilate, who
otherwise would not ask anything about Christ and his preaching, so that
he presents him and finally calls for him to be crucified.

9 Now it is no less true that such lies and poisonous slander do
grievous harm. But for this very reason the evangelists have left this
story behind them, so that when such things happen to us, we may suffer
and speak patiently: My Lord Christ also suffered the same. The servant
is no better than his master. Pilate would have had him preach and
perform miraculous signs all his life, and would have asked nothing of
him: but the chief priests, the spiritual crowd, accomplish so much that
Pilate is joined together as a judge and Christ as an evildoer.

So it still goes; the worst enemies of the Lord Christ are: The pope,
bishops, monks and clergy. If they have decided that it is heresy, what
they do not like, or what is against them, they try to incite kings and
princes against the gospel; they must become their executioners, and
defile themselves with innocent blood on their accusation and arrest,

like Pilate. You suffer this, devout Christian. With your Lord Christ it
was played out in the same way, and thank God that you are worthy to
suffer for His name's sake, as Lucas says of the apostles, Acts 5:41.
5, 41. This is the first part of today's text.

(11) The other is the terrible example of Judah, which is therefore so
diligently painted by the evangelists, that we may know there, as in a
painting, the nature and manner of sin, and learn to beware of it. For
in Judah we see both how sin creeps in so smoothly at first, but then
causes such a terrible end.

12. your love have heard above, how a small beginning such an
abominable sin had, that Judas was stingy by nature and loved the money
to him. Therefore, now that this opportunity has passed, so that he can
get money from the Lord Jesus, he considers it a very small thing to
betray the innocent man. Again, he considers it a great gain that he can
get such a sum of money so soon.

13 Now the Lord preaches and warns him as faithfully as he wants, as he
does especially often in the last supper, and so roughly that he could
have grabbed it: but it does not help, he stays in his thoughts and
looks at the thirty pieces of silver. What an excellent, strong and
serious warning this was, when he says: "He who dips his hand into the
bowl with me will betray me. Well, the Son of Man is going, as it is
written of him; but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed.
It were better for him that the same man were never yet born." Should
Judas not have heeded such a word? Should he not have struck fine within
himself and said: Oh God forbid, what have I poor man let the devil
preach to my heart? But nothing comes of it; he still asks about such
words, whether the Lord knows what he has in mind. "Rabbi," he says,
"is it I?" And the Lord answers him: "You say it", that is: Yes, it
is you. But, as I said, it is an easy, carefree trade for him, because
he can get so much money through such a means.

404 **L. 2,74-77.** How Christ is delivered to Pilato 2c. **W. XIII,
966-969.** 405

14 Note this, for this is the first color with which one should paint
sin, if one paints it right and proper, so that it seems to be a light,
bad, harmless thing. One does not worry about God's wrath, one is not
afraid of misfortune, it does not seem to be a burden, but a light
feather, which one can weigh with one's breath and push forward.
Therefore, when it comes upon us, we are not afraid of it, we still have
desire and love for it, and we think that we could not do our thing
better, because we would be full of sin. As you may take an example from
a miserly usurer, or adulterer, or drunkard. St. Paul passes a very
harsh sentence against such, I Cor. 6:9: "Be not deceived," he says,
"neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, 2c., nor covetous,
nor drunkards, shall inherit the kingdom of God." This is written here
and is preached; those who are afflicted with such vices hear it, but
they accept it just like Judas: if they could come to a purchase, where
the hundred would be 20 or 30 to usury, if they could only atone for
their lust, if they could have companions all day, be mad and full; then
they would think they had done well, they would not worry about it nor
grieve, but be of good cheer and completely happy.

(15) Now this is Adam preaching to his son Cain, warning him against
sin, Genesis 4, when he perceives how he had taken a bitter heart
against Abel his brother. "Is it not true," he says, "that if you are
pious, you are pleasant; but if you are not pious, sin rests at the
door?" As if he wanted to say, "Get to know sin properly; for this is
its nature: when it sets upon people, it is like a wild, ravening beast
that sleeps there; one is not afraid of it; it lets itself be grasped
and stroked in its sleep, and does nothing to anyone. It also seems to
be a harmless thing around sin. It is a fine, smooth little cat that
lets itself be stroked and handled. But beware, says Adam, she sleeps
well, but will not sleep forever. Cause, she lies in the door, in a
restless place, where everyone goes in and out: therefore can she sleep.

It is very easy for it to wake up. Then it becomes a raging lion, an
angry bear that tears and bites everything it comes across.

(16) As Adam foretold Cain, so it came to pass. Adam told him to rule
over sin and not to let it rule or guide him. But Cain did not do it, he
left her the bridle, slew his brother. Sin did not lie there long, it
had soon slept off, and it so tormented Cain that he did not know where
he should stay. He was not allowed to stay with his father and mother,
and otherwise he was not sure of life or limb.

This is the other kind of sin, which notice diligently. Initially it
sleeps, and it seems to be an easy, harmless thing. But it does not
sleep long, and when it awakens, it becomes an unmistakable burden,
since it is impossible for you to bear it unless God helps you greatly.
See this in poor Judah. Since sin was still asleep, it was impossible
for him to be afraid of it; the smooth bellows deceived him, so that he
was not aware of the sharp, poisonous rattles. But she could not sleep
long; she lay before the door, and was dissolute to wake up. Before no
preaching nor warning would help, now comes a moment that frightens him
so much that he does not know where to stay.

18 For when he sees the Lord leading him to Pilate, and must now fear
that life will be his, he is filled with remorse, and first sees what he
has done. Then the sin wakes up, and according to its kind and nature it
is so fierce and horrible that he cannot tolerate it. Before, he had so
loved the money, the thirty pieces of silver, that it was a bad thing
for him to betray and sell the Lord Christ; now it is turned around: if
he had all the money and goods of the world, he would give everything
for it, only that the life of the Lord Christ might be saved.

19 But because the love of money had brought him into such trouble, and
because he had incurred such sin on account of money, he became so
hostile to money that he could have neither rest nor rest from it; he
ran after the chief priests into the temple, confessed that he had done
evil, and wanted to get rid of it.

406 **L. 2,77-79.** how Christ is delivered to Pilato 2c. **W. XIII,
989-972.** 407

He will gladly give them their money back, but they must leave Jesus
alone. And since they do not want it, he throws it at their feet, so
that he only gets his money back. Now this is the right kind of sin,
when it awakens, that it so vehemently persuades the conscience, it
starts such a terrible sermon that the heart does not know from anxiety
what it should do or not do.

20 And there is still a pity. For as little comfort as the poor man has
in himself, so little comfort does he find in other people. He
faithfully laments his misery to the chief priests. Ah, he says, I have
done evil, I have sold innocent blood. But how do they comfort him?
"What is that to us? You watch," they say. Blaming it all on his neck,
they leave such an unmistakable burden, and do not like to touch it with
a finger, that they might be comforting or advising to the poor
frightened man.

21 Then follows the third and last woe. For where sin continues to
preach to the conscience, the devil does not tarry long, he scares and
blows into the fire so that it becomes ablaze and all salvation seems to
be in vain. He drives Judas so that he walks on the footsteps in such
fear and torture and hangs himself from grief. This is the end that the
devil initially sought through sin. Whoever could think of or believe in
such an end soon in the beginning would bless and guard himself against
it. But it is hidden; sin sleeps and does not let itself be seen at the
beginning, where it ultimately wants to go. This is the story of the
wretched, poor man Judas, who sold the Lord Jesus for a small amount of
money, and not only does he not enjoy this money, but he also loses his
life, body, soul and everything.

22 Therefore learn this example diligently, and let it never depart from
your heart. For it shall serve thee, and me, and all of us, that we may
actually know sin, and learn to guard against it. We can be deceived on
both sides and be damaged by sin if we do not perceive this example well
and learn to know sin from it: first with this.

that sin has a smooth bellow like a fine kitten; it can be stroked and
patted, one has desire and love for it. But it does not last any longer
until it wakes up. Then its poisonous, sharp claws come out; when it
strikes them right, then toil, work, fear and distress are lifted up.
Learn these two things from Judah, and do not let the smooth brat
deceive you, as the world does, and neither saying nor admonishing
helps.

There are many a burgher, farmer, nobleman, who has sent himself into a
brave nourishment. If he sells something, he sees how he can get the
highest price. If he buys something, he sees how he can get it most
cheaply. If he has houses or other things that he lends, he does not
leave the old thing, increases the interest 2c. This is very right in
the world; it is pleasing to everyone: if he can bring in a hundred, two
hundred, three hundred guilders, more or less (depending on the deal),
in this way or another, and put it behind him, he has fished well. That
is why you see how everyone sends himself for food and practices all
kinds of speed. This is now the Judas sin, since he is first entered
over.

(24) But as Judas was not afraid of it, or thought it a dangerous
thing to do, so does the world to-day. Why? Sin sleeps, it does not let
itself be seen soon in the beginning, as it is; it colors and adorns
itself, puts on a beautiful young coat, so that one does not see
anything abominable about it; this makes that everyone gains pleasure
from it. But whoever could soon pull off her Schembart and wash off the
color with a sharp lye, would flee from her as from the devil. No one
would put up with usury, nor would he indulge in avarice, if he knew
what would ultimately come of it, when sin begins to preach to the
conscience and repentance comes. For there are examples before one's
eyes that such people, who stand alone according to money and goods,
cannot resist ordinary thoughts at their last. If

*) Schembart. Schemen - empty shadow image; dialectal - mask, larva. D.
Red.

408 **L. 2,7s-8i. How Christ is delivered to Pilato 2c. W. xiii,
972-974.** 409

When they are comforted with God's word, they do not want to accept it,
meanwhile they walk with their thoughts into the office, the market,
into the vaults, thinking of this, that guilt 2c. In sum, the thorns
have taken such hold of them that they cannot come out; or the
consciences are so weighed down that they cannot accept any consolation.

(25) This is to be understood not only of Judah's penny or of
avarice, but of all sins. For where sin goes to sleep, it finally
awakens and causes such misery, as we see in Judah. Especially, however,
where the right Judas pennies are, since one has acted against God's
word for the sake of money and good, persecuted the gospel and given
cause for false doctrine and idolatry, as the pope, his cardinals,
bishops, buffoons, priests, monks, doctors and the like, press and tear
themselves very hard for the Judas penny. That makes it not prickly or
pointed, it is finely smooth and gentle in attack; and seems to be a
very fine thing in the eyes of the world, who can bring his cause there,
and thus create for him good, calm, glorious days.

(26) Again, it may be regarded as a small thing whether one goes
against God's word, against confession, and against conscience in this
or that; it seems as if it is easy to justify a canon standing in the
choir, a preacher holding to himself, and not wanting to come out freely
with the truth. For he who does so can very well enjoy this with the
world and the devil. But in the truth the rebuke will not remain outside
at last, and the reward will be to you just as it was to Judah, that sin
will preach to you at your last, you will find no righteous comfort in
anyone, and the devil will bring you to despair.

Therefore, it would be good for you to consider such journeys in time,
to let go of the bishopric, the cathedral, the good life, one with the
other, and to consider being a Christian, to promote God's word, to
confess it, to keep yourself in good conscience. God would still provide
you with daily bread and not let you die of hunger, as he says: "Seek
first the kingdom of God, and all the rest will be yours.

Therefore, this is the lesson of this history: because sin sleeps at
first, but then awakens and causes all sorrow in the conscience, and
Satan thereby drives to despair; that you should beware of sin, do
nothing against your conscience, and besides ask God daily, yes, every
moment for His Holy Spirit, that He will not lead you into temptation,
but will graciously lead you out and protect you from sins. For, as I
said, because sin is not awake in the beginning, it sleeps, so that we
cannot be afraid of it, it is very easy for us to be deceived and
tempted. That is why we need to pray diligently, and also to be careful
and watchful in all places, so that it does not creep up on us.

29 Secondly, when the fall has happened and you have been deceived, and
sin, which was asleep at first, now wakes up and confronts you and
accuses you, you must also be prepared, and here you can learn from
Judas how you should prepare yourself. For you ever see what he lacks.
Satan makes such a big, high mountain out of sin that he cannot see God,
His word, promise or grace in front of it, therefore he falls into
despair. But where did such evil come from in the beginning? Is it not
true that if he had not thrown God's word to the wind, had been more
diligent in keeping it, he would have been able to comfort himself even
in such distress? But because he despised the word and listened to it
diligently, it is no wonder that now that he needs it, he cannot find it
anywhere.

30 Therefore, just as on the one hand you must guard against sleeping
sin with the fear of God and diligent prayer, lest you be deceived and
seduced; so when sin awakens, preaches to you and makes you restless,
you must defend yourself and endure with the holy gospel, which portrays
Christ to you as having suffered and paid for all the sin of the world.
God, the almighty Creator and Father, portrays it in such a way that he
does not take pleasure in the death of sinners; but he does take
pleasure in the sinner's conversion and life, that is, that he
recognizes his sin, is sorry for it, and hopes for forgiveness through
him.

[410 **L. 2,81-83.** How Christ is delivered to Pilato 2c. **W. XIII,
974-977.** 411]{.underline}

Lord Christ. Judah lacks this here and therefore despairs.

(31) Again, Peter had also fallen miserably and was like Judah. The
sin that was asleep at first (for it seemed to him to be no special
journey when he denied Christ immediately) finally woke up and tormented
his heart, so that he could not weep enough, as the evangelist says:
"Peter went out and wept bitterly. How is it, then, that Peter does not
also hang himself, as Judas did? Peter undoubtedly remembered the word
of the Lord Christ and saved himself, because the Lord first foretold
such a fall and then comforted him, as Luc. 22 says, where the Lord
speaks to him in particular, vv. 31, 32: "Simon, Simon, behold, Satan
has desired to sift you as wheat, but I have prayed for you that your
faith may not cease. And if thou be converted some day, strengthen thy
brethren."

32 Peter heard and kept this sermon. Such a word was the rod by which he
held on, so that sin could not press him to the ground; otherwise sin
would have done to him as it did to Judah. But with the word he saves
himself. Learn this diligently, and in time apply yourself to it; hear
God's word diligently, do not lie down in bed, do not get up, for you
have spoken to your heart a beautiful saying, two, three or four. As,
Matth. 9, 13. Christ says: "I have come to call sinners to repentance,
and not the pious"; Matth. 11, 28-30.: "Come unto me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me: for I am gentle and lowly in heart: and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is sweet, and my burden is
easy"; John 3:16-18: "God so loved the world that He gave His only
begotten Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have
eternal life. For God did not send His Son to judge the world, but that
the world through Him might be saved. Whoever believes in Him will not
be judged"; John 5:24: "Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears My
word and believes Him, he will be saved.

has sent me, he has eternal life, and will not come into judgment, but
has passed from death to life"; Joh. 11, 25: "I am the resurrection
and the life; he who believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live";
1 Joh. 2:1, 2: "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ, who is righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. "2c.
If you practice these and similar sayings daily and make them known to
yourself through such practice, you will have the right medicine for
your soul, since the wicked Judah lacks this.

33 There are more such examples. David commits a terrible, horrible
fall, and sins more grievously than Saul, the king, when he first began
to fall. How is it that Saul cuts his own neck, but David is saved? Saul
did not have God's word; therefore, when sin came alive and preached to
him, he could not defend himself against it; he had nothing to hold on
to. Sin also preached to David, when it awoke, so that he passed the
sentence on himself, that he was guilty of death. But in such distress
he kept the word of Nathan the prophet, who assured him that God was
merciful and would not impute such sin to him.

34 Let this be the other lesson, that you not only guard against sin,
but also, when it awakens, fight against it and protect yourself. But
you should prepare yourself for such distress throughout your life and
be ready with God's word; otherwise there will be neither help nor
counsel, as the example of Jude is before your eyes. He first rejoiced
in the thirty pieces of silver; it was, as they say, a mown meadow to
him; for sin was still asleep. But when it awoke, the thirty pieces of
silver became an unmistakable burden to him, and he hanged himself for
it, only that he should no longer bear such a conscience. But by doing
so, he caused it to be carried for eternity. Beware of this, do not let
sin creep in, keep the fear of God and a good conscience, and listen
diligently to God's word, and you will have comfort in all distress.

35. now the evangelists further report how

4122 ,83.84. Of the court trade before Pilato. ' W. xm, 977-979. 413

The chief priests held half a council about the money, did not want to
put it into the treasury, but bought a trough for it and made a burial
place for the pilgrims out of it. Such a thing seems to be nothing
special; and yet, because the evangelist prophesied it so long before in
the prophet Zechariah, such a trade must not be in vain, but have its
own interpretation. This is now without doubt this:

The citizens of Jerusalem had their own burials, the foreigners, as we
see, had none. If we now look at the right Jerusalem, the Christian
Church, the Jews are the people of God, we Gentiles are strangers and do
not belong to the Kingdom of God. But the thirty pieces of silver, when
our dear Lord Christ is sold, also bring a burial for the pilgrims.

That is, through the innocent suffering and death of Christ, we Gentiles
also come to the hope of eternal life. For this cost the Lord Christ his
blood and death, like the thirty pieces of silver.

(37) Thus the evangelists always point out to us in history that we
should not forget why the Lord was sold, suffered and died, not only
because of his people to whom he was promised, but also because of our
Gentiles, who had no burial place in the right Jerusalem. But through
the thirty pieces of silver, which Judas redeemed from Christ, we also
come to a grave of God and such a grave, where our Lord Christ will call
us out on the last day and make us eternally blessed. May our dear
Father in heaven, through his Holy Spirit, grant us this, amen.

**The seventh sermon.**

From the court case before Pilato, how Christ was accused and finally
condemned.

**Matth. 27, 11-31.**

And JEsus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying,
Art thou the king of the Jews? And JEsus said unto him, Thou sayest so.
And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered
nothing. Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how sore they
accuse thee? And he answered him not a word, so that even the governor
marvelled greatly. At the feast, the governor was in the habit of
releasing a prisoner to the people, as they wished. At that time he had
one prisoner in particular, whose name was Barabbas. And when they were
gathered together, Pilate said unto them: Which one do you want me to
release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is said to be the Christ? For he
knew well that they had delivered him up out of envy. And when he sat
upon the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou
nothing to do with this righteous man: for I have suffered much this day
in a dream on his account. But the chief priests and the elders
persuaded the people that they should ask for Barabbas and kill JEsum.
Then the governor answered and said unto them: Which of these two do you
want me to release to you? They said: Barabbam. Pilate said unto them:
What then shall I do with JEsu, who is said to be Christ? They all said,
Let him be crucified. And the governor said, What evil hath he done? But
they cried out still more, saying: Let him be crucified. But when Pilate
saw that he did nothing, but that there was a great tumult, he took
water, and washed his hands before the people, and said: I am innocent
of the blood of this righteous man; you see. Then all the people
answered and said, His blood be upon us, and upon our children. Then he
released Barabbam to them, but he scourged Jesus and delivered him to be
crucified. Then the soldiers of the governor took JEsum into the
judgment house, and gathered the whole company together against him. And
they went

[**414** L. 2,84-86. Of the court trade before Pilato. W. XIII, 979-983.
**415**]{.underline}

And they stripped him, and put a purple robe upon him, and wove a crown
of thorns, and put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and
bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying: Hail, King of the
Jews. And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote his head
therewith. *) And when they had mocked him, they stripped him of his
robe, and put on his garments, and led him away to crucify him.

In the next sermon, your beloved heard the trial that was held with our
Lord Christ before the high priest. Now follows, after they brought it
before Pilate, what happened there. But because the evangelists are
somewhat unequal in this piece and do not remember all the pieces in
order, but one indicates one thing and the other another; it is
necessary to draw the whole story together from all four, and to tell
how it all happened, one after the other.

(2) Then John the evangelist first says, When they brought Jesus from
Caiphas' house very early to the judgment house, they would not go in,
lest they should be defiled, but should eat at Easter. Because they were
considered unclean and had to separate themselves from others who were
about to enter a house where someone had died, they were afraid that the
blood would harm them, because it was judged in that house. And did not
think, the blind people, that this would be a far greater sin, shedding
innocent blood.

We also find such holiness in our papists, who consider it a much lesser
sin to persecute and strangle poor Christians for the sake of the gospel
than to eat meat on Friday or eggs during the week of martyrdom. The
latter they do lightly, as if nothing much mattered. But here, since it
is not a sin at all, but only a human commandment, they have a heavy
conscience about it.

Since the holy people do not want to enter, Pilate must go out to them
and ask them what accusation they bring against the Lord Jesus. They
answer boldly and proudly: "If this man were not an evildoer, we would
not have delivered him to you. Just as if they were so conscientious and

*Marginal gloss: "Notice how the little word Christ is always used to
testify to the Jews about them.

pious that one should not presume to them that they are doing something
wrong.

005 But Pilate met them very delicately, saying, Take him, and judge him
according to your law. As if he wanted to say, "We Romans do not have
such a custom that we strangle someone without prior knowledge. If it is
right with you Jews, you may kill him; I will not do it. So you can see
how the Jews, after they have discussed everything according to
necessity, still do not trust themselves; they are afraid that the
accusation will not hold the sting.

006 Nevertheless the Jews will not leave this unsaid, for it grieveth
them greatly: therefore they answer, We may not kill any man. As if to
say, If we had the power, it should not have reached you; but this
office is taken from us, and given to you; therefore think, and come
after it.

(7) John adds, "With this word is fulfilled the word of Jesus, which
he said when he foretold the death he would die. For he had foretold
them how he would be delivered to the Gentiles, Matth. 20, Luc. 18.

8 But that they might nevertheless have an accusation, Lucas writes,
they accused him with these words: "We find this one turning away the
people, and forbidding to give the interest to Caesar, saying, He is
Christ, a king." There now stands the bargain why they delivered him to
Pilato. But how right they did him, history sufficiently shows. With
this they could accuse Christ that they had let him in, if he wanted to
snatch something against the emperor and his power; but there he says
roundly: "Pray to God what is God's, and to the emperor what is the
emperor's." Such things do not help the Lord at all. He has to be
accused of being a rebel, of turning the people away from the emperor,
of forbidding interest, and of wanting to be king himself.

416 **8.2. 86-88. Of the court trade before Pilato. W. xm, p83-986.**
417

(9) As the pope, bishops, monks and priests are doing today with the
holy gospel, they all blame it for being a rebellious doctrine; if one
watches and does not resist, secular authorities will come into contempt
and no one will give anything to them. Do not be sorry for this; thank
God that you know that they, as the peelers, are lying, and that the
gospel has to do with other and higher things, namely: that it teaches
how you are to be freed from sins and come to eternal life, only through
faith in the Son of God. This is what the gospel teaches you; it does
not want to have anything to do with worldly things, it leaves them as
God has arranged them through worldly authority.

(10) Now when Pilate hears the accusation, he does not immediately
burst upon it, but, as John says, he goes into the judgment house, and
having brought JEsus before him, asks him, saying, "Art thou then king
of the Jews?" JEsus answers, "Do you say this of yourself, or did
others say it to you about me?" As if to say, Ah, if it were without
mine enemies, thou wouldst soon have excused me. For this I know, thou
regardest me ever for no king, nor for such a one as would stir up
sedition. Pilate answers, "Am I a Jew? Your people and the chief
priests have delivered you up to me. What have you done?" JEsus
answers, "My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this
world, my servants would fight to keep me from being delivered to the
Jews. But now my kingdom is not from hence." Then Pilate said again,
"So you are still a king?" Jesus answered, "You say that I am a king;
I was born for this purpose and came into the world to testify to the
truth. He that is of the truth heareth my voice." Pilate says, "What
is truth?"

(11) As if to say: If you are only a king who should testify to the
truth, one should not worry about you, you will do little harm to the
emperor; one cares little for the truth, it goes begging. He who can
lie, deceive, steal, comes to something.

012 Pilate, when he had sufficiently interrogated the Lord, went forth
again to the

Jews, and said, "I find no fault in him, I find no cause in this man."
But the Jews, as Lucas reports, continued, saying: He has stirred up the
people by teaching to and fro throughout all the land of Judaea,
beginning in Galilee and ending here." Pilate therefore, hearing of
Galilee, asked, Whether he were of Galilee? And when he heard that he
belonged to Herod's authority, he sent him to Herod, who was also at
Jerusalem in those days. When Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he
would have liked to see him long ago, for he had heard much about him
and hoped to see a sign from him. But he answered him nothing. The chief
priests and the scribes stopped him and accused him severely. But Herod
with his court despised and mocked him, put a white robe on him, and
sent him to Pilate again. And Pilate and Herod became friends with one
another that day, for before they were enemies.

(13) Someone might wonder why the Lord speaks to Pilate in this way
and gives good news, but will not answer a word to Herod, who was king
in Galilee. But it really happened because Herod was such a wicked man,
and yet a great hypocrite. For he had St. John the Baptist strangled the
other day, and lived in public scandal because he had his brother
Philip's wife with him, and yet pretended to be very pious. That is why
the Lord calls him a fox in the Gospel, because there is nothing good
but fur, a wicked and yet very cunning animal. Such people are not worth
dealing with; they are not serious. They are scoffers who consider the
gospel to be a jugglery and Christians to be great fools who, for the
sake of faith, burden themselves with great lords and set their own in
motion. Therefore let everyone be content with such people, and give
them neither speech nor answer, as Christ does to Herod here.

14 But just as Pilate and Herod became friends over Christ the Lord, who
were enemies before, so it is still seen today.

418 **L. 2.88-M. Of the court trade before Pilato. W. XIII, 986-889.**
419

day. Everything is put together against the gospel, which otherwise
cannot stand together. No bishop can get along with the other, no order
is friendly to the other. The princes cannot be satisfied with each
other. Each one wants to be the best, to have the advantage, and to
oppress and dampen others. But when Christ comes between them, and wants
to bring forth his gospel, then they all become one, and are the best of
friends, putting goods and blood together, as David prophesied long
before in the other psalm. When the Lord of Herod was led to Pilate
again, Pilate, says Lucas, called the chief priests and the rulers of
the people together again and said: "You have brought this man to me as
the one who turns away the people. And behold, I have questioned him
before you, and find none in the man of the things of which ye accuse
him; neither Herod. For I sent you to him, and, behold, nothing worthy
of death has been brought upon him. Therefore will I chasten him, and
let him go." For he had to release one to them according to the custom
of the feast.

15 And at that time in Frohnfesten there was a confessed murderer and
rebel, Barabbas. Pilate placed him next to Christ and gave the Jews the
choice, hoping that no one would ask for Barabbas, as he would have been
responsible for his death. But Matthew says: "The chief priests and
elders persuaded the people to ask for Barabbas. Because of this, the
whole crowd cried out and said, "Take this man away and let us have
Barabbam," who had been thrown into prison because of a riot that had
taken place in the city and because of a murder. Pilate called to them
again and wanted to release Jesus. But they cried out, saying, Crucify
him. And he said unto them the third time, What evil hath this man done?
I find no cause of death in him; therefore will I chasten him, and let
him go." But they lay before him with a great cry, and demanded that he
should be crucified.

016 Now when Pilate was sitting on the judgment seat, Matthew says that
his wife sent to him and told him: He should not do anything with

She had suffered much on his account in the dream. This was also an
excellent warning, no doubt from a good angel, who in the dream of
Pilate's wife showed what misfortune and misery Pilate would bring upon
himself and his own, where he would hang the Jew and strangle the
innocent man on her arrest. But as the warning to Judah was in vain and
in vain, so it did not help Pilate in the end. However, he saves himself
for a while. And since it did not work out to leave him alone (everyone
would allow the murderer his life, but they wanted Christ, the innocent
man, dead), Pilate tried again and took Jesus and called him to be
scourged. Then Pilate's soldiers gathered the whole crowd, took Jesus
into the judgment house, stripped him and scourged him. Then they put a
purple robe on him, wove a crown of thorns and put it on his head. They
put a reed in his right hand instead of a scepter, bowed their knees to
him, mocked him and said, "Hail, King of the Jews!"They spat in his
face, struck him on the head with the reed, and gave him cheek strokes;
in sum, the wicked countrymen did all they could against the pious Lord
Jesus, no doubt to the service of the Jews, who had thus instigated it.

(17) Now it was the custom of the Romans, before they put away the
evildoers, to behead them first; for which reason Pilate also had Christ
scourged. And yet he still has hope, and tries whether he could set him
free. He therefore brings Jesus out with him, as the soldiers had
beheaded him and dressed him in purple and with a crown of thorns, and
says, "Behold, I bring him out again, that you may know that I find no
fault in him. Behold what manner of man this is!" As if he wanted to
speak: You shall be satisfied with such punishment, because your
accusation is so utterly void and his innocence so pure. But this did
not help. The chief priests and their servants, as soon as they saw
Jesus, and perceived that Pilate was still handling how to set him free,
cried out:

**420** L. 2,W-S2. Explanation of several pieces of passio.n history. W.
xm, 929-992. **421**

"Crucify, crucify!" Pilatum was distressed by such great injustice.
For, as Matthew says, he knew well that they had delivered him up out of
envy. Therefore he answered them again bluntly, "Take ye him, and
crucify him: for I find no fault in him." The Jews answered him, "We
have a law, and by the law he shall die; for he hath made himself the
Son of GOD." When Pilate hears the word, he is still more afraid, and
enters again into the judgment house, and says to JEsu, "From whence
art thou?" But JEsus gave him no answer. Then Pilate said to him, "Do
you not speak to me? Knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee,
and to set thee free?" Then Jesus answered and said, "Thou wouldest
have no power over me, except it were given thee from above. Therefore
he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin."

This is also a strong warning. For Pilate is deeply challenged here, and
for the sake of his power he lets himself think (as worldly authorities
sin a lot with such hopefulness) that the deal is in his hands, he may
do or not do what he wants. No, says Christ, Pilate, you do too much for
him; be moderate. If thou hast power, thou hast it not from thyself; it
cometh down from above. Therefore, if you know how to answer it, you
must answer it. Pilate accepts this warning willingly and continues to
try to free him.

But the Jews would not, saying, "Let him go, and you are no friend of
Caesar. But the Jews would not at all, and cried out, saying, "If thou
let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: for he that maketh
himself king is against Caesar."

019 When Pilate heard the word, he brought Jesus forth, and sat him down
in the judgment seat, in the place which is called the high place, and
in Hebrew Gabbatha. Now it was the preparation day in the paschal days,
about the sixth hour, that is, about noon. And he said to the Jews,
"Behold, this is your king"; as if to say, You still remain on the
charge, as if he had made himself king. O God! He does not have such a
reputation! You do him wrong before God. What is there in him that
resembles a king or a rebel? But it was in vain. They shouted: "Away,
away with him! Crucify him!" Pilate says to them, "Shall I crucify
your king?" The chief priests answer, "We have no king but Caesar."
When Pilate therefore saw that he did nothing, but that there was much
tumult, he took water, and washed his hands before the people, saying,
"I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man; see ye!" Then all
the people answered and said, "Let his blood be upon us, and upon our
children"; that is, if wrong be done to him, let it be upon us, and
upon our children. Then he delivered up to them that he might be
crucified. So much was done with the Lord Christ before Pilato.

**The eighth sermon.**

Explanation of several pieces from the history of the Passion.

(1) In this part of the history of the Lord Christ there are many fine
comforting points of Christian doctrine; but because it is too much for
one sermon, and the history itself is long enough, we will take three
parts in particular: the first, that in the history the innocence of our
dear Lord Christ is so often testified to by Pilato and others.

The other is the confession that Christ makes before Pilate, which is
praised by St. Paul, 1 Tim. 6, 13; the third is about Pilate and the
Jews, how they both hold the blood of our dear Lord Christ in such low
esteem, which then becomes an unbearable and eternal burden that brings
them to all temporal and eternal misfortune.

**422** L. 2, s2-94. Explanation of some pieces from the Passion
History. W. xm, 992-995. **423**

2 From the first, your love hears through and through how Pilate always
insists that he finds no cause of death in Christ. His wife also sends
to him and tells him that he should have nothing to do with the
righteous, innocent man. And Pilate found from all the actions and after
diligent investigation that it was only hatred and envy that the chief
priests and elders had against Christ.

3) Such testimonies are found even more and more powerful after the
death of Christ, when the great, glorious miracles take place,
earthquake, eclipse and others. Therefore the chief captain freely
confesses publicly, saying: "Truly, this man was a devout man. And the
people who were standing there beat their chests as a sign that they
were sorry that the innocent man had been treated so quickly.

4 But what is the purpose of all these testimonies? Why did the
evangelists describe and depict them so diligently? Undoubtedly for the
sole purpose of pointing us to God's counsel and will, and to remind us
to consider what such suffering of the innocent, righteous Lord is
primarily for. So that, since we have so much testimony that he was
innocent and did not deserve such death, we may become all the more
certain in our faith and conclude: All that our dear Lord Christ
suffered, he suffered for our sake, and God imposed such suffering on
him and did not want to take it from him, even though he was innocent,
so that we would be freed from sin and reconciled to God.

(5) Therefore, throughout the whole history of the Passion, when we
hear how unjustly the Jews and the Gentiles treat the Lord Christ, how
they beat him before the high priest, mock him before Herod, scourge him
in the judgment hall, and mock him: when, I say, we hear these things in
the whole history, we should always have the thought in our minds:
Behold, he is innocent, for his sake he does not suffer, he does not
deserve it. But I, you and all of us have deserved it; we have deserved
death and all the misfortunes of sin.

But here comes the innocent, holy Son of God, who puts himself in my
debt and wants to pay for it, so that I may be redeemed and set free.

(6) From such thoughts must come the consolation that hearts do not
despair because of their sin, do not flee from God as from the
executioner or a tyrant, but turn to Him with heartfelt confidence,
praising and extolling His mercy, which He extols especially toward us,
as Paul says in Romans 5:8, in that He gives His only begotten Son, our
Lord and Savior, to die for us sinners. Who can or will doubt that God
does not mean well and most graciously with us? We were in God's wrath
because of our sins, under death and in Satan's kingdom; eternal life
was lost, and instead of it we inherited all temporal and eternal
misfortune. But the gracious, merciful Father takes care of us, does not
want to leave us in such misery, sends rather his only begotten Son,
lets him be born of a virgin; he throws him under the law, so that,
because flesh and blood could not do God's will, nevertheless the law
would not be given in vain, and would be fulfilled by this man for all
other men. He finally let him die on the cross and pay for our sin with
his innocent death; so that we, through him, would have eternal life and
become children of God.

(7) Accept it, be comforted by it, believe it is for your sake and too
good for you. For here you hear not once, nor twice, but often; what he
suffers, he suffers innocently. Why does God tolerate such things? Yes,
why does God decree and create it? So that you may be comforted by it.
He does not suffer for himself, but for you and for the whole world, as
John says: He is the propitiation, not only for our sin, but also for
the whole world. For this reason the Baptist gives him a name and calls
him the Lamb of God, who bears the sin of the world, that is, a
sacrifice of God, set apart to take upon himself the sin of the whole
world, and to rid the world of it and set it free.

[424 L. 2,94-96. Explanation of several pieces from the Passion History.
W. xm, 995-998. 425]{.underline}

make. That is why it must be so absurd. He is God's Son, absolutely
holy and without all sin, therefore he should be justly excused from
curse and death. We are sinners, under the curse and wrath of God,
because of which we should bear death and damnation. But God turns it
around; he who has no sin, since there is nothing but grace and, as John
says, in whom dwells the fullness of God's grace, must become a curse
and bear the torment of sin; but through him we are in grace and
children of God.

8 For this reason we should hold on to this comfort, and let such
testimonies of Christ's innocence be especially dear to us. For what
Christ suffered innocently caused our guilt and sin. Therefore we can
comfort ourselves with his innocence against sin and all misfortune. For
such innocence is an indisputable testimony that we enjoy his suffering,
and that the pious Lord and gracious Savior has suffered and paid for
us. But of such we shall have cause to speak further, when we bring him
to the cross and between the two murderers; let us now proceed to the
other point.

(9) St. Paul exhorts Timothy in the first epistle of the 6th chapter.
V. 13. 14. with these words: "I command thee before God, who quickeneth
all things, and before Christ JEsu, who testified a good confession
under Pontio Pilato, that thou keep the commandment," that is, the
doctrine, "without spot, blameless, until the appearing of our Lord
JEsu Christ."'

(10) This saying, because it clearly indicates the confession of
Christ before Pilate, and Paul thereby so nobly and seriously admonishes
Timothy, gives us cause to consider such a confession, what it is and
what it serves. Now it is clear from history what Christ confessed. For
when the Jews accused him of having made himself king, and Pilate
confronted him, he did not deny it, but confessed freely, saying to
Pilate, "My kingdom is not of this world," "My kingdom is not from
hence. When Pilate asked again, "Are you still a king?" Jesus
answered, "You say that I am a king.

King, I was born for this purpose, and to come into the world, that I
should bear witness to the truth; and he who is of the truth hears my
voice."

(11) Here you may think, What does this add to the exhortation which
Paul gives to Timothy, that he should keep the commandment, that is, the
doctrine, pure, and not counterfeit it? Answer: A great deal, yes, all
things together, depends on this one thing, that you, if you want to be
a true preacher or Christian, believe both things that Christ has
confessed, namely, that he is a king, and yet his kingdom is not of this
world, that he does nothing more in this world than bear witness to the
truth. For from this it follows that as this king is, so must his
subjects be here on earth. He has the name that he is called a king; but
whoever wants to esteem him against worldly kings, against Herodem, or
Pilatum, who was even lower than Herod, must consider him a poor beggar,
a hard-suffering, miserable man. Herod is a great lord, who is
resplendent, seeks all kinds of pleasures, has what his heart desires,
and is held glorious by all the world; likewise Pilate and others are
glorious before the world. But the pious, poor Christ is a beggar in
comparison; they mock and jeer at him according to their pleasure; they
condemn him to death, crucify him, and strangle him; therefore he well
says, "My kingdom is not of this world."

But why does he have the name of a king? Answer: He is a king, but in
another world. His kingdom is not giving money or goods, satisfying the
body and doing other things that worldly kings do, but giving the Holy
Spirit, forgiveness of sins and eternal life. He starts such a kingdom
here on earth, but only in word and faith. Apart from this, it must have
suffered and died here on earth, as our King himself suffered and died.

013 He that knoweth this manner of this King and of his kingdom giveth
himself willingly under the cross. For he not only knows that his Lord
Christ, the eternal King, also suffered in this way, but is therefore
willing and ready to suffer, because the servant

**426** L. 2, W-98. Explanation of several pieces from the Passion
History. W. xm, 998-1001. **427**

He is not better off than his Lord, but he also takes comfort in the
fact that even though he has suffered here, there will be joy and glory
there for eternity. This makes Christians courageous, even in the midst
of temptation and sorrow. Others, on the other hand, who do not know
this, have no choice when things go badly for them, but to mourn,
complain, grumble, be impatient, and ultimately even despair.

14 For their thoughts are thus: If God meant well with you, he would not
let so much misfortune come to you, or would soon help and save again.
Such thoughts are basically nothing else, as if Christ should be a king
of this world. They should, according to their office, protect life and
limb and property, and keep them from misfortune. Thus Christ, the king,
lets body and property, life and everything come in motion.

15 Thou shalt learn that it is because his kingdom is not of this world.
Here on earth thou shalt not enjoy thy Christian faith, that thou mayest
have all things, and lack nothing. For look at your King, the Lord
Jesus, how is he? Wherewith doth he glory? What good life hath he? How
glorious is he held? Is it not true that with him there is nothing but
suffering, mockery, and scorn, and a shameful death?

(16) He has one small part where he rules with very few people,
namely, with the testimony of truth, that is, with the holy gospel.
Through it he gives the Holy Spirit into the hearts, he forgives sin and
gives the hope of eternal life. But all this remains only in faith and
word, it is not seen, it is not grasped, it is not before the hand, but
in hope. But when the kingdom of the world ends and we are no longer
here on earth, then his kingdom and glory shall be revealed in us, so
that we may live with him forever and rule over all that is in heaven
and on earth.

(17) In this way the one thief recognizes the Lord on the cross,
saying, "Lord, remember me when you come into your Father's kingdom.
He saw Christ hanging there on the cross, just in the sorrow, when he
was in

was. The other thief on the left was annoyed by this, and began to mock
the Jews, saying, "You are such a good king," thinking that because
the dear Lord was so miserable and poor here on earth, there was no hope
for him. But he who is at his right hand knows him well, what kind of
king he is, namely, not a king of this world, and asks, when he comes to
his kingdom, that he will remember him, that is, that he will help him,
when he has died on the cross and has given up his spirit. So we should
also believe in Christ, then we will find certain comfort in him.

18 All Christians need this comfort, so that in all kinds of misfortune
and adversity they will always keep this confession of Christ before
Pilate, and often repeat this word to themselves: What wilt thou weep
for? What will you complain about this and that accident? Remember, what
kind of a king do you have? How does he speak before Pilato? My kingdom
is not of this world. Would you have your kingdom here? By no means; it
would not endure; but here it must be thoroughly suffered. But glory and
good life shall be found in another world. If it were found here, it
would be a short and fleeting joy. For in this world here is nothing
lasting nor eternal. But my King Christ Jesus is a King in that world,
that is, an eternal King, there we want to save our joy and glory, and
here on earth take it for good, as they do us. For we are not destined
here by our King; he will have nothing to do with the world and this
temporal life here apart from the testimony of the truth 2c. This
comfort, I say, is needed by all Christians, but especially by those who
are in the ministry and preach the word.

19 Therefore St. Paul exhorts Timothy with these very words of Christ's
confession before Pilate to hold fast to the right doctrine and not to
allow it to be falsified. For since the world and the devil cannot
tolerate the word and do all kinds of evil against it, every preacher
should and must hold to this testimony and declare Christ to be such a
king.

428 **2.2. ss-iW. Explanation of several pieces from the Passion
History. W. xm, ivvi-1004.** 429

that he may be comforted and enjoy it, but not here on earth. For thus
he saith, "My kingdom is not from hence." And again, "I am a king; I
am come into the world for a testimony of the truth." Therefore,
whoever desires to have the King Christ, let him hold fast to the truth
or to his word, and know that he will have no more of his kingdom here
on earth; indeed, he will still have to suffer all the misfortunes over
the word, as the King Christ himself suffered. But when this life is
ended, then the kingdom of the Lord Christ shall be enjoyed.

(20) The pope and the bishops have not held to this comfort; they do
not want such a king, who has nothing more than to testify to the truth;
they say with Pilate, "Oh, what is the truth? we would have to go
begging for it; therefore we want to have another king, who will give us
money, goods, honor, authority and everything enough, let this king and
the truth stay where they want. But Paul warns against such evil, and
every pious preacher should take such a warning seriously, and put it on
his mind: Here on earth we are not to be glorious; all our glory is to
bear witness to the truth. Then the world will reward us, as it did the
Lord Christ, with the gallows and the executioner. Learn to endure and
bear this, and set your heart and hope on it, that though you suffer
here, yet in the world to come such suffering will be well repaid and
recompensed by the eternal King, the Lord Christ. This is enough of the
testimony before Pilate in a nutshell.

(21) Now we must also consider the third, how Pilate and the Jews hold
the blood of our dear Lord Christ in such low esteem, but finally it
becomes an unbearable and eternal burden to them.

22 Matthew specifically reports that Pilate washed his hands before the
people and said, "I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man. He
is satisfied with this and has Christ crucified. Just as if it were
enough for him to say that he was innocent. But if he had wanted to take
warning, his wife could have told him how innocent he would be,

as reported above in the history, had suffered much the whole night,
that God had revealed to her what a severe judgment and sentence Pilate
would cause upon himself and all his own by this death.

(23) But the blood of the Lord Christ and of his Christians is always
like this. Old Herod strangled the innocent children around Bethlehem.
His son strangled Saint John the Baptist. And both of them thought they
would enjoy such murder. Pilate here also does not respect it very much
that he sentences Christ to death. As he thinks of it, so, he lets
himself think, God will also think of it and consider him innocent. But
without a doubt, God's wrath will not have remained long, so that
Pilate's house, tribe and name will be destroyed, and then body and
soul will be cast into hell and eternal fire. There he learned how
innocent he had been of this blood.

024 But the Jews are still more reckless about this murder. When Pilate
saith, "Watch ye!" they go forth without all timidity, and say, "His
blood be upon us and upon our children;" that is, if he be wronged, it
shall be upon us and upon our children. Soon it is spoken, and
afterwards it goes out to them as before, it seems as if it were spoken
into the wind; but before forty years had passed, they saw that it would
become another, and then such blood rose up so violently that shortly
Jerusalem and the whole land were laid waste, the people slain, and all
things turned back together. But this was not enough: even today, almost
fifteen hundred years later, they are still in misery, have nowhere to
live, and it is a small thing that they are so miserable according to
the times.

(25) Hearts are embittered against the Son of God, with whom they
should seek and wait for forgiveness of sins and eternal life; they have
a desire for lies and error, they seek diligently, as they obscure the
Scriptures for themselves, and cannot come to the right understanding.
If they want to think they are calling upon God, they are serving God,
they are serving the wretched devil, and God does not want to hear them.

**430 L.** 2, 100-102. How to carry out the Lord Christ. W. XIII,
1004-1007. **431**

And finally nothing is more certain, because they do not want to be
freed from sins by the Son of God, that they must die in their sins and
perish eternally. At that time they did not see such misery, they
thought it would be their best if Christ would only be seasoned soon.
Therefore, without any further thought, they said, "If he is wronged,
it will be on us and on our children. But just as Judas had a short time
of joy with his thirty pieces of silver, so it soon became different
with the Jews, that from day to day all their character decreased, until
at last they perished altogether.

(26) Therefore, the great kings and princes in particular should
consider this example, that it is such an easy, small thing for Pilate
and then the Jews to shed innocent blood, but it finally pushes them
down into the abyss of hell.

27 Our bishops with their idol, the pope, where they can become powerful
of a pious, faithful priest and pastor, they hurry to the fire and raven
stone, then let themselves think that they have founded it very well;
they have a wrestling courage for it with Pilato and the Jews. But it is
not yet the end of all days; see how it will end. For it is impossible
for God to remain silent for long. The blood cries out too loudly in his
ears that he must make himself heard and punish himself.

Pilate went down, without doubt that not one man of his name and tribe
remained behind him. The Jews still carry the blood of Christ today,
which will finally push them down into hell. The great and mighty
emperors, the mighty princes in the Roman Empire, and everywhere else
that has ever been set against the Christians, everything is miserably
corrupted and dead. So shall it be with the enemies of Christ this day,
who act so tyrannically and strangle the poor Christians for the sake of
the gospel. Only no one should worry that the punishment will not be
inflicted. If they were as powerful as Emperor Augustus, they would have
to go down with all their descendants if they tamper with innocent
Christian blood. Now they may well consider us heretics and think they
are doing the right thing by strangling us. But Pilate, and especially
the Jews, thought so too, but it did not help them. Therefore, let
everyone take care of himself and be satisfied with the blood of the
Christians. In the beginning it seems to be a bad sin and a small trade;
but in the end it turns out that everything that is defiled with
Christian blood must go to the ground, as all histories testify. May the
almighty God ward off all tyrants, but graciously pacify His Church, and
graciously preserve us in His Word and make us eternally blessed. Amen.

**The ninth sermon.**

How one carries out the Lord Christ, Simon carries the cross after him,
and the women who go with him weep.

**Luc. 23, 26-31.**

And as they led him away, they took hold of one, Simon of Cyrene, who
came from the field, and laid the cross upon him, that he might bear the
cross after Jesus. And there followed him a great company of people and
women, mourning and weeping over him. But JEsus turned to them and said:
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and
for your children. For behold, the time is coming when it will be said:
Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that have not borne, and the
breasts that have not suckled. Then they will begin to say to the
mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills: Cover us. For if this be done
to the green wood, what shall become of the dry?

[432 **8.2, 102-104.** How to carry out the Lord Christ. **W. xm.
1007-1010.** 433]{.underline}

1 These two stories took place when the Lord Christ was led out of
Pilate to be judged. And all four evangelists commemorate Simon of
Cyrene at the same time, no doubt because it was not a harmless trade,
as it is seen, but was ordered by God out of special counsel, so that at
the very time when Christ was to go to his suffering, such an example
would be presented to all Christians, by which they would learn how they
should fare here on earth, so that they would have to help the Lord
Christ carry the cross, as Simon did here.

2 The good, pious man knows nothing of the trade that the Jews have in
the city, but goes, according to his need and opportunity, into the
city, there to carry out what he needs. As the Lord and the other two
murderers were led to meet him, and the Lord, because of his weakness,
could not leave with the cross that had been placed on him and was
undoubtedly quite heavy (since a grown strong man was supposed to be
nailed to it), the soldiers ran in and forced poor Simon to take the
cross or the tree where Christ was to be commemorated and carry it to
the place of election.

This seems to be a harmless trade, but, as I said, it is an image of all
Christians, which God wanted to present to His Church at that time, when
the Son of God Himself suffered, so that the common offense, which
deceives us all, would be reduced. For as soon as God comes with the
cross, attacking you in the body, in the goods, with evil children or
otherwise, our hearts fall away, so that we conclude that God does not
mean well with us; if He loved us, He would probably deal with us more
kindly; but because He lets us be so pressed, afflicted and battered, we
fear that it is an indication that He is angry with us and does not want
to be merciful to us. This image stands here against such annoyance,
that first of all the Son of God himself carries his cross, and carries
it so heavily that he almost falls to the ground under it and can go
away badly. Notice this well. For the calculation is soon to be made, as
will follow hereafter: if this happens to the green, fruitful tree, it
will happen to the dry and unfertile tree.

fruitful tree shall not nor can fare otherwise.

4 Secondly, you see how the good Simon comes to this from other
people's debts; if he had not come to this just when Christ had to
carry his cross, he would not have carried a cross all his life. But
then he must repay the Lord Christ; because Christ carries the cross, he
must also bear it. Notice this. It will never be any different with the
Christians here in this world; they must bear with Simon and carry
Christ's cross.

5 Now it is no less true that even if God allows the wicked a time, and
lets everything happen to them that they desire and love, the punishment
is not always absent; they also have to endure here on earth, and suffer
that now here, now there is a bump, and does not always want to go on
with them; as the 32nd Psalm says v. 10: "The wicked has much trouble,
but he who hopes in the Lord will receive goodness. As we see in
examples such mightily. The godless Pharaoh with his Egyptians had to
suffer fiercely and hard. So the Jews in the desert and afterwards in
the land of Canaan, how many misfortunes, tribulations and sorrows they
had to endure, until finally the ten tribes were completely devastated
by the Assyrians, and for a while afterwards the tribe of Judah also had
to suffer, and the whole country was conquered by the Babylonians. But
it is unnecessary to introduce many examples. Just consider what you
have experienced and learned for yourself and for others. For it is
inevitable that where one does not fear God and lives contrary to His
word and will, it is impossible that punishment, fear, misery and
hardship will not eventually follow.

(6) But you must learn to make a distinction here with this Simon
between the Holy Cross and the well-deserved punishment and plague of
the wicked. It is no wonder that wicked men have it bad; they would
rather not have it. If a thief would stop stealing, he would be safe
from the gallows and the executioner. If a man or a woman let go of
their fornication, they should remain in good, honor and health. But
because one does not want to be unburdened and continue in sins, he
punishes them.

434 D. 2, 101-106. How to carry out the Lord Christ. W. XIII, 1010-1012.
435

God with poverty of goods, with shame, with Frenchmen and all
misfortune. The wicked people do not want it, they do not want it
better, through their sin and unrepentant life they give cause to all
their misfortunes and promote them, yes, they force and drive God, who
would like to be merciful and give everything good, that he must be
angry, strike into the heap and ward off sin. Therefore Peter, 1 Petr.
4, 15. says: "Let no one among you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or
an evildoer, or one who takes hold of another's office." Make this
distinction, then, so that not all suffering is called and is a cross;
for what the wicked suffer is a punishment and deserved reward and not a
cross.

7 For the cross is called, when the Christians come to it, as here
Simon: he does not carry his cross, but the cross of the Lord Christ,
and must pay for the Lord Christ; he comes to it from other people's
debts and undeserved. If it had not happened immediately that he had
come to meet the Lord Christ, he would have been left alone; but he must
pay for it, because he comes just now, when Christ is to be crucified.
So should the suffering and cross of Christians be, that they suffer, as
Peter says, not as thieves and murderers, but as Christians, that is,
for the sake of the Lord Christ, his word and confession. For although
all Christians must recognize themselves as poor sinners, and know that
through sin they have earned all misfortune, and more than God sends
them here on earth, yes, they alone recognize their daily failings,
weakness and transgression (for the punishment proper to sins is not
this or that temporal misfortune, but eternal death), nevertheless their
suffering is not called a punishment for sin, but a right holy cross.

(8) For the evil enemy and the world are not hostile to them because
they are sinners, stumbling and falling here and there. Nay, both the
devil and the world would well suffer and be content with them; but for
the word and faith that they set their hope in the Son of God, take
comfort in His death and resurrection, fear God, and desire to live
according to His will;

They desire that through their confession others may also come to faith
and the knowledge of Christ; neither the devil nor the world can suffer
this. For this reason, Satan afflicts Christians everywhere with
sickness in the body, as St. Paul himself complains: Satan's angel
beats him with fists and spears him; in the conscience and in the heart
with sadness, melancholy, terror and the like, yes, sometimes also with
damage to property, through weather, hail, fire, as can be seen in Job.
But what the world does to this is evident, especially in our own day,
when poor Christians are treated so miserably and wretchedly.

(9) That is, to bear the cross of the Lord Christ, as Simon did. No
doubt he was also a poor sinner, but what is that to the soldiers? With
them he does not pay for it, but he must pay for the fact that Christ is
there and cannot leave with his cross; he must have someone to help him
carry it. So, even though you are a poor sinner, you recognize how you
have acted against God here and there; nevertheless, because you believe
in Christ, all crosses and suffering do not come from such sins in the
first place; the devil and the world do not punish you for them. It
would be their pleasure and joy if you were even with them, and not with
God and His Word. The Lord Christ, his word and your faith must be
repaid first and foremost and you must suffer for it.

(10) This is the first thing we are to learn here, that Simon bears
the cross of the Lord Christ. It serves primarily as a consolation, and
makes the hope of salvation and help finely certain, and inspires us to
prayer. For those who only want to see, when they are lying under the
cross and in misfortune, that they are sinners and well deserve such
punishment, such thoughts will make them cold and lazy for prayer. For
sin always causes hearts to be frightened, anxious and fearful, and to
be unable to provide anything good for God or to comfort themselves. But
whoever looks at the real main cause, why the devil and the world are so
bitterly hostile to us and heap all misfortune upon us, will have to
confess it because of our sin.

4362 , 106-108. How to carry out the Lord Christ. W. xm, 1012-1015. 437

They are not hostile to us because of this; they would like to, they
deal with it for and for, whether they could bring us into all sin and
disgrace; that would be their air and joy. But this moves them against
us, therefore they are primarily hostile to us, and do harm where they
can, so that we have God's word before our eyes, confess the Lord
Jesus, put our trust in God's goodness and grace, and desire to live
according to His will and in His fear. This is the reason and origin of
such hatred and envy.

(11) Therefore know this, and do not deny that you are a poor sinner,
and that you have earned all misfortune. For God is wont to punish sin
even in His own; as Peter says, "Judgment sings at the house of God."
Therefore, say, Satan and the world are not hostile to me; they would
suffer me to be in sins without all repentance, like a sow in dung. What
then is the matter? For the sake of the man who bears the cross here,
that I believe and confess him for my God and Savior.

If this is true, what should I do now? Should I despair? Certainly not.
I shall have certain hope: though I am a poor sinner, yet this I am sure
of, that I must suffer for the Lord Christ's sake, that he will not
leave me stranded; he will graciously help me. And as I suffer for his
sake, so he wills that I should come to grace and be glorified for his
sake. But that I may open my mouth confidently, and cry out, saying,
Lord, I am a poor sinner, and have deserved far more in my disobedience
to thee than I now suffer: but behold the opinion of the wicked enemy.
He is hostile to you and your name; therefore, because I had the same, I
take comfort in your word, I hope for mercy because of your merit and
death, he is also hostile to me. Dear Lord JEsu Christ, avenge your name
on him, and help me for your name's sake 2c. With such thoughts the
heart is finely quickened, and to pray confidently and courageously.
That is why the holy prophets also prayed in such a way and always
insisted on the name of God; as David says in the 44th Psalm, v. 23:
"We will pray for the name of God.

strangled daily for your sake, and are esteemed like sheep for
slaughter."

013 Now therefore let this be said of him, that Simon must repay the
Lord Christ with the soldiers, and bear his cross; that thou mayest know
the difference between the cross of Christians, and the punishment of
sins of unbelievers.

14 Second, notice that Simon does not bear the cross of the Lord Christ
alone, but he is compelled to do so. For if it had been up to him, he
would have gone his own way and would have asked little about where
Christ was staying with his cross. But the soldiers seize him and force
him against his will to carry it.

15 This is also a fine little piece, where one can learn what is a cross
or not a cross. Monks and nuns (who are serious about it) lead a hard
life, and let it get very sour. But such is not called Christ's cross,
which Simon carries. Cause, they put it on themselves, without God's
command, by their own choice. The Anabaptists almost do the same; but as
the saying goes, "What one likes to do comes easily. So one can also
say of such suffering: Because they put it on themselves and could well
do it, it cannot be particularly painful. But where one has to do it and
does not like to do it, it comes on sourly and heavily; as the Lord
Christ also says to Petro, John 21:18: "When thou wast younger, thou
girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou wouldest: but when thou shalt
be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and lead thee where thou wouldest not." For as perfect as Christians
always want to be, flesh and blood cannot do otherwise than shrink back
from the cross, fear it, and flee from it.

(16) That is why this one has the name Simon, which in his language
means one who lets himself be told and follows. For this is a right
obedience, where one would gladly be overridden by this or that, and yet
willingly gives himself up to it; one follows and allows himself to be
led, because one sees that God wills it so. All true Christians have
such a name, that they are called Simon. For although flesh and blood
would like to have peace and

438 L. 2, 108-110. How to carry out the Lord Christ. W. XIII. 101S-1018.
439

If they would gladly be subjected to suffering, they still follow, they
let themselves be told, and they give themselves into God's will, and
help the Lord Christ to carry his cross.

(17) Thirdly, we must learn to distinguish between Simon and the Lord
Christ. Simon carries the cross of the Lord Christ to the place of
election, then he goes away; but Christ hangs on the cross and dies on
it.

18 This is the real difference between the suffering of the Lord Christ
and our suffering. We do not earn forgiveness of sins with our
suffering; only the suffering of our Lord Christ belongs to this; he
alone is the right sacrifice and God's little lamb, who pays for all
the sin of the world and does enough, therefore he hangs on the cross.
But Simon alone walks under the cross, that is, the cross we bear serves
to weigh down the old Adam and to increase sin. But that sins may be
forgiven, this alone is the work and merit of our Lord Christ.

(19) So see, your love, how this Simon is an example of all Christians
who must bear the cross of the Lord Christ, but because of such bearing
their sins are not forgiven them. The old Adam is fed with it, so that
he does not become too wanton. But if the cross is to help to forgive
sins, it must not be carried by Simon, but Christ must hang on it and
die on it. And this is the reason that Simon goes out unharmed. For
through Christ's death we are set free from death and come to eternal
life. As this is shown in detail in the other history, which we will now
discuss.

020 Lucas saith, When the LORD was carried out at Jerusalem, certain
women followed him, mourning and weeping over him. But the Lord turned
and said that they should not weep over him, but over themselves and
over their children; for the time will come when they will say that this
is a blessed woman who has no child, and will go, as Hosea says, that
they will wish the mountains to fall upon them and cover them. But the
cause of such an accident is: If one deals with the green, fruitful tree
in such a way, one will be destroyed with the

The way we deal with the scrawny, barren tree is even worse.

(21) Such a sermon, though it is preached to the Jews as it was, is
primarily intended to teach us the proper use of the suffering of our
dear Lord Christ, and first of all to recognize sin as a terrible
burden, since the Son of God Himself must die for our sins, and then to
comfort ourselves against sin through such suffering, since the Son of
God paid for it on the cross and has done enough.

First of all, the Lord makes a distinction between Himself and the Jews,
and is well pleased with such a distinction. He compares himself to a
beautiful, young, fruitful tree that should be bought into a garden, not
to mention that it should be cut down and thrown into the fire. And yet
this happens. God has him cut down, that is, he now has him led to the
gallows, where he shall be judged as another transgressor, and yet he is
a good, juicy, beautiful, fruitful tree. He is without all sin, he walks
along perfectly in obedience to God, and what he speaks and does is
noble, delicious fruit; all pleases God well, all benefits us. In sum,
it is all grace, life and blessedness that is in the Lord Jesus. In
contrast, he compares the Jews to an old, rotten, barren, unfruitful
tree, which does no more than wander in the garden, and is good for
nothing, except to be cut down and thrown into the fire. and throw it
into the fire. For they did not heed the word of God. John preached, but
without fruit; they said he had a devil. Christ, the Son of God himself,
preached with his apostles, but they did not want him either, calling
him a winebibber and saying he had a devil. They therefore seized upon
him with such bitter hatred and envy that they could not rest until they
brought him from life to death. And nevertheless they went away thinking
that they had Moses, the law and the outward service of God in Jerusalem
in the temple, as if they were vain living saints and sat in the bosom
of God.

23. now the bill is soon to be made.

440 L. 2, 110-112. How to carry out the Lord Christ. W. XIII, 1018-1020.
441

If the Son of God, who is like a beautiful, fruitful tree, suffers such
a harsh judgment, it will be far, far worse for the barren trees, the
horrible, great sinners. The Lord wanted the Jews to recognize this now,
not to continue in such sins, but to learn from him, who suffered
innocently, to fear God's wrath and to escape from it through righteous
repentance. But such a warning was of little avail; the dry tree could
no longer bear fruit, and must therefore be burned in the fire; as
history testifies, that an excellent, severe judgment on the Jews
followed safely in forty years after Christ's death, and the whole
country was devastated by the Romans because of such sin. Therefore they
should have wept over themselves and not over Christ, recognized their
sin and repented, as the Lord warns and admonishes them here.

(24) But let this admonition also be told us. For we must all confess
together that because of sin we are all like a barren, dry tree, where
no good thing is, nor can come forth. What then is fitting that we
should do? Nothing else, but weeping and crying for forgiveness against
God, and resisting the evil, sinful nature and disorderly lusts with
earnestness and not letting go of the bridle. For there is the verdict:
because the fruitful tree is in such bad shape and God allows such hard
suffering to come upon His dear Son, that we should not be safe, but
recognize sin, fear God's wrath and ask for mercy and forgiveness. We
are not to laugh, walk in leaps and bounds, and be without all care, as
the world is wont to do, when it neither sees nor knows such judgment of
God. We should weep and grieve from the bottom of our hearts that we
have been so corrupted by sin and have become a barren tree.

(25) This is the first thing we should do, and especially learn from
the passion of Christ, that we should fear God and His wrath for sins,
and not let sin take hold of us. We should do this for our own sakes,
for we are barren, dry wood, good for nothing in itself but the fire.

26 But the Lord teaches us one more thing here. We should weep for
ourselves and for our children, but we should not weep for him, but
laugh and be merry and of good cheer. For why does he suffer? He is a
right, good, fruitful tree and does not deserve such harsh judgment, but
he suffers for our sake. And now, on this journey, it is his duty to
carry out his priestly office, and not only to pray for sinners, but
also to offer up his body and life at the altar of the cross, so that
God may be satisfied by such a sacrifice, and the poor sinners may be
released from God's wrath and become heirs of eternal life. Therefore,
it grieves the Lord, because His suffering is so that we should weep for
it; He wants us to be joyful, to praise God, to give thanks to His
grace, to praise Him, to glorify Him, and to confess Him, because
through such a course we come to the grace of God, are freed from sins
and death, and have become God's dear children.

(27) But the one is as little in us as the other. We follow the ways
of the world more than the warning and admonition of our Lord Christ.
For our part, we should weep that we have been so corrupted by sin, and
that we have such a heavy judgment and sentence before us. But no one's
eyes are wet, and the deeper people are in the mud of sins, the more
they are sure and happy; and as said above several times, their joy, air
and life is that they have much cause to sin. A miser cannot get enough
of miserliness; the more he can have accesses and advantages, the
happier he becomes, and makes himself think that he has then done well.
The same thing happens with other sins, with anger, fornication, envy,
pride: no one worries about it, nor weeps; everyone has desire and love
for it, and can be found willing. But how such things are advised to the
Jews is plain to see. Then we should let go of such naughtiness, and on
our account, as the Lord so faithfully warns now in his last, be
sorrowful and unhappy. For sin must finally be punished with eternal
death if one is not delivered from it.

28. equal now as we did in the first not

[442 **L. 2, 112,113.** How Christ is nailed to the cross. **W. XIII,
1020-1023.** 443]{.underline}

No one weeps, no one laments because of his sins; so because of the Lord
Christ no one wants to rejoice with all his heart. Money, goods, honor,
and the like are pleasing to the heart, however little and insignificant
they may be; and here, where there is nothing but grace, life, and
blessedness, our hearts are almost dead, we have no longing, no desire,
no heartfelt longing for them.

(29) Therefore, this sermon is easy and small for those who will
listen to the words, but it is very difficult and impossible if we look
at our hearts and sinful nature. For it is inborn in us that we turn
back. When we should weep for our sins, we laugh; when we should laugh
and rejoice with all our hearts that Christ died for us, and purchased
eternal life for us, we weep. For either we pay no attention to such
joy, before other worldly joy, which loves us more; or, where sin and
God's wrath strike us right in the heart, we will and can

not let us be comforted. It does not enter our hearts that Christ says
here, "Do not weep over me." We weep, lament, tremble, as if Christ
had not died, as if he had not paid for our sin, had not satisfied
God's wrath, and had not delivered us from the devil.

(30) For this reason, both parts require prayer. First, that God,
through His Holy Spirit, may stir our hearts, disgust us with sin, draw
us away from it, and ward off all certainty. Secondly, that He may
kindle comfort against sin in our hearts and strengthen our trust in the
Lord Christ's sacrifice and satisfaction; so that we may render God His
right service, fear Him as poor sinners and stand in constant
repentance, and trust in His goodness from the bottom of our hearts, as
He does not mean us any harm, since He gave His only begotten Son to
death and let Him die on the Cross as payment for our sin. May our dear
Lord Christ grant this to us all, Amen.

**The tenth sermon.**

How Christ was crucified and what he did, suffered and said on it until
he passed away.

**Matth. 27, 33-56.**

And when they came to the place called Golgotha, that is, the place of
the skull, they gave him vinegar to drink mixed with gall: and when he
tasted it, he would not drink. And when they had crucified him, they
parted his garments, and cast lots thereon, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophet: They have divided my garments among
them, and upon my vesture they have cast the lot. And they sat there
tending his. And at the top of his head they wrote the cause of his
death, saying, This is Jesus king of the Jews. And there were two
murderers crucified with him, one on the right hand, and the other on
the left. And they that passed by blasphemed him, and shook their heads,
saying: Thou that breakest down the temple of God, and buildest it in
three days, help thyself. If you are the Son of God, come down from the
cross. Likewise also the chief priests mocked him, with the scribes and
elders, saying: He has helped others, and cannot help himself. If he is
the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross, and we will
believe him. He has trusted in God, who will now deliver him, let him be
longed for; for he has said, I am the Son of God. In the same way the
murderers who were crucified with him reviled him. And from the sixth
hour there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour. And
about the ninth hour cried JEsus aloud, saying, Eli, Eli, lama
asabthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And some
of them, when they heard it, said: He calls to Elijah. And straightway
one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and

[**
444** L. 2,nL-ii5. How Christ is crucified. W. xm, 1023-1026.
**445**]{.underline}

put him on a reed and watered him. But the others said-. Stop, let us
see if Elijah will come and help him. But JEsus cried out again with a
loud voice and died. And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in
twain from the top to the bottom. And the earth shook, and the rocks
were rent, and the sepulchers were opened, and many bodies of the saints
that slept arose, and came out of the sepulchers after his resurrection,
and entered into the holy city, and appeared unto many. But the
centurion, and they that were with him, and kept JEsum, when they saw
the earthquake, and the things that were done, were sore afraid, and
said: Truly this was the Son of God. And there were many women watching
afar off, which had followed JEsu out of Galilee, and ministered unto
him. Among them were Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Jacob and
Joses, and the mother of the children of Zebedee.

(1) What happened at the cross is written by all four evangelists, but
in such a way that sometimes one reports what the others have omitted.
Therefore, before we come to the teaching that is presented to us here,
we will first tell the story in this sermon, one after the other, as it
happened.

2 When the soldiers brought the Lord to the place of the skull, where
public evildoers were to be judged, they gave him vinegar mixed with
gall to drink, as Matthew reports. But the word "gall" does not mean
gall from living cattle, but a bitter and poisonous herb. With such a
drink they forgave the people, as some think, that they died the sooner.
But the Lord would not drink it; for he gave himself willingly to such
death. So the word "gall" is written in Deut. 29, 18. Ps. 69, 22. Jer.
8, 14. and more.

(3) Then the soldiers immediately crucified him, and two malefactors
with him, one on the right hand, and the other on the left.

4 But the Lord Christ, as the right priest, who should now perform his
office, prayed for those who crucified him and for all poor sinners,
saying: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. This
prayer, and the fruits it produced, we will hear from the thief. For
this prayer was his gospel and sermon, from which he learned to
recognize the Lord Christ, that he was the Son of God, and therefore
hung on the cross, that he might pay for all the sin of the world, and
after his bodily death with God,

*) forgive - poison. D. Red.

his Father, will live and reign forever.

5 Now the evangelists report that Pilate had an inscription made on the
heads of the Lord Christ in three languages, "Jesus of Nazareth, King
of the Jews. Although this was done according to custom, so that
everyone would know why people had been brought from life to death, and
others would have been offended by it, it was in the special opinion of
the Lord Christ to admonish the Jews, even then, when he was hanging so
miserably on the cross, that they should not be offended by such a
death, but should accept him as their king. But it was in vain.
Therefore such an overwriting outraged them, that they addressed Pilatum
about it: He should not write, the king of the Jews; but that he had
said: He is the king of the Jews. But Pilate was displeased with them,
and would not change the writing, for a perpetual testimony against the
Jews, that they would not rest until they had brought their king to the
cross.

6th After this act the soldiers of the Lord took Christ's garments, and
divided them into four parts; for there were four of them. But the
skirt, because it was unstitched, but knitted, they would not divide it,
but loosed it. And John says that this was foretold in the Scriptures;
he wants to give the impression that it did not happen by chance, but
out of the special counsel of God and as an example to the church. For
both are shown here, how first of all the world does not allow itself to
be satisfied by the fact that it strangles Christians; it divides itself
into its goods, as little as they are, and plunders them. As we see not
only in the ancient histories, where Julianus and other despots and
tyrants robbed the poor Christians of their goods.

[446 **L. 2, iis-117. How Christ is crucified. W. xm, 1026-1028.**
447]{.underline}

But the examples are also before our eyes today, how tyrants and bishops
may well suffer that their subjects, against their prohibition, eat
meat, hear Lutheran (as they call it) preaching, receive the sacrament
in both forms 2c.; for then they have cause to force them, to sell what
is theirs, or to invade the goods, or they treasure according to their
pleasure. But as they get rich or increase with such money, it is also
evident that such unreasonable, exorbitant money eats up all that they
have, and neither blessing nor happiness is left with them.

(7) But that the soldiers cast lots for the Lord's garment is
undoubtedly due to the mobs and heretics. For the holy Scriptures are
the garment which our Lord Christ put on, and in which he is seen and
found. Such a garment is thoroughly woven and bound together in such a
way that it cannot be cut or divided. But the soldiers who crucify
Christ, that is, the heretics and the mobs, take advantage of it; they
especially have this bad habit of wanting to have the whole garment, and
persuade everyone that the whole Scripture agrees with them and is of
their opinion. As we see today especially in the case of the devotees of
the sacraments, who regard the words, "This is my body, this is my
blood," as small words: It is only a single saying. On the other hand,
they boast that the whole Scripture is full of sayings that Christ is no
longer on earth but in heaven.

(8) This is the way of all the mobs: they form a special opinion
without and apart from the Word; this opinion is always fluttering
before their eyes, like a blue glass; what they see afterwards seems to
them to be all blue and their opinion. But they are rogues, as Paul
calls it, Eph. 4, where he admonishes, v. 14, that they should not let
themselves be carried away by every wind of doctrine, by the roguishness
of men. In Greek, the word "mischievousness" means to play with dice
or to be crafty. For just as the rogues master the dice, it must bear
them what they will: so also do the mobs and the fanciers with the
Scriptures.

Everyone wants to have them whole, and need the cube for this. Now we
have to go back to history.

009 And the Lord, hanging on the cross, seeth his mother, and his
mother's sister, and John with them, and saith unto his mother, Woman,
behold thy son. And to the disciple, "Behold, this is thy mother." At
this there is great mockery from all ranks. The chiefs say: "He has
helped others, now help himself, he is Christ, the chosen one of God".
With such sharp, poisonous words they not only want to mock the Lord,
but also to turn the people away from him, so that they will think
nothing of him and will throw to the wind and despise all the miracles
and sermons they have heard and seen, and consider him a blasphemer. The
soldiers, when they were Gentiles and asked nothing of God, mocked him
in another way, giving him vinegar as a drink of rennet, saying, "If
you are the king of the Jews, help yourself." Finally, the one wicked
man comes and blasphemes also, saying, "If thou art Christ, help
thyself and us."

010 But the other thief punisheth him for this word. Well, he says,
there is no fear of God in you! Thou shalt be in prison; thou shalt not
be in heaven till two or three hours have passed. So you have been a bad
boy all your life, even as I, and well deserved such punishment; would
it not be time for you to consider yourself and your blessedness, and to
leave such clumsy words idle? Beginning at such admonition, he turns to
the Lord and says, "Lord, remember me when you come into your
kingdom." And Jesus answers him, "Verily I say unto thee, this day
shalt thou be with me in paradise."

11. But a terrible darkness comes, which was altogether unnatural and
terrible; and the fear of death drives the Lord so that he cries out,
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Such things the Jews well
understood; but so bitter and venomous were they, that they perverted
such words unto him, saying, "Behold, now he calleth upon Elias; stop,
let us see if Elias will come and help him!"

012 When Jesus therefore knew that almost all things were

**448 2, 117-119. How Christ is crucified. W. xm, 1028-1031. 449**

When the scripture had been fulfilled, he said, "I thirst. Soon the
soldiers took a sponge filled with vinegar and put it around a Ysophen
and held it to his mouth.

13 When Jesus had taken the vinegar, he said, "All is finished," as if
to say, "The world and the devil have done as much as they were able; I
have suffered as much as was necessary for the redemption of all men and
as was prophesied in the Scriptures through the prophets; now it is
finished. And cried with a loud voice, "Father, I commend my spirit
into thy hands!" And when he had said this, he passed away.

14 Soon the curtain of the temple was torn in two, from top to bottom,
as a testimony that the right sacrifice had now been made to God, and
that the law and the sacrifices of the law, which had only been a model
for this sacrifice, were to come to an end. For the temple was built in
such a way that first of all the people stood there to hear God's word
and to sing and pray. After that, there was a difference, like the choir
in our churches, where only the priests went in and arranged the
service, with sacrifices and other things. This part was called the
sacred, so that no one but the holy priests were allowed to enter. After
that there was another difference, because the mercy seat was inside;
this was called the holy of holies; such a chamber was distinguished
from the holy with a curtain, into which no one was allowed to go,
except only the high priest, and the same in the year only once, and
sacrificed there for his and the people's sin. Now the evangelists say
of this curtain that it was torn, as a testimony that such worship
should all be over and come to an end; because now the true priest, the
Son of God, offered up not the blood of cows or calves, but his own body
and blood to God his Father for the sins of the whole world.

15) Such a rupture of the curtain happened in a great earthquake, in
which the rocks were torn apart and many saints' graves were opened,
from which many saints' bodies rose after the resurrection of Christ
and appeared to many in Jerusalem.

and have undoubtedly preached about Christ and given testimony that he
is the Christ and the true Messiah. These have gone to heaven with the
Lord Christ into eternal life, just as Enoch before him, and Moses and
Elijah after the flood. For God has always wanted to preserve such hope
of resurrection from death in His Church. But here, with the Lord
Christ, it has happened in greater numbers.

016 Now the centurion that stood by the cross, and others, when they saw
the earthquake, and other strange things, were afraid, saying, Verily
this is the Son of God. And all the people who were present and
watching, when they saw what was happening, they beat their breasts and
turned back.

The gospel writers tell us that so much happened on the cross until the
Lord died. But there is too much to be told in one sermon. Therefore,
for this time, we will take no more than these two pieces before us: the
first, why the evangelists include more Scripture than usual in the
history of Christ's suffering; and the second, from the cross, why God
inflicted such death on His Son.

(18) First of all, the fact that the evangelists have written so much
about the whole history of Christ's suffering is because they want to
counteract the annoyance that such suffering entails and that the
disciples were particularly tempted by. For behold, not only the
unbelieving Jews, but also the disciples of Christ themselves, are
greatly vexed by the fact that Christ dies so shamefully and miserably.
Both of their thoughts were: If he were Christ, he would again help up
the decayed, miserable, troubled kingdom. As you can see, such thoughts
remain in the disciples even after the resurrection, since Christ now
wanted to go to heaven and leave this life on earth here. For just then
at the Mount of Olives they asked him: "Will you at this time again
establish the kingdom of Israel?

19When the Lord came into the hands of his enemies and was strangled on
the cross, the hope they had for his glory fell.

450 **8.2,ii9-i2i. How Christ is crucified. W. xm, 1031-1034.** 451

have even gone away. As the two disciples who went to Emmaus freely
confessed and said, "We hoped he would redeem Israel," as if to say,
"It is finished; we hoped far otherwise than we now meet. The Jews fell
even deeper into such distress. Because the Lord died so shamefully and
would not save himself, neither miracles nor preaching helped; they
considered him a deceiver and defied him: If he were the Son of God, if
he should come down from the cross, they would believe in him. In sum,
they both, the disciples and the Jews, although they were of different
minds toward the Lord (the Jews were bitterly hostile to him, the
disciples loved him dearly; the Jews rejoiced in his misfortune, the
disciples were sorry and displeased about it); yet they both thought
that it was now over with him, that he was not the true Messiah.

(20) But where did such a judgment and angry thought come from?
Elsewhere (nowhere), because they had left the Scriptures out of sight
and had not diligently meditated on the prophets. For it is written in
the prophets that Messiah shall die and suffer, Isa. 53; it is written
that he shall be counted as one of the transgressors, Isa. 53; it is
written that his table companion shall betray him and sell him for
thirty pieces of silver, Ps. 41, Zech. 11. It is written that the
soldiers shall divide his garments and cast lots for his skirt, Ps. 22.
It is written that when he complains of thirst, they shall give him
vinegar to drink, Ps. 69. It is written that none of his legs shall be
broken, but that his body shall be opened with a spear, Ex. 12, Zech.
12, 2c. If the disciples and Jews of the prophets had taken the
scriptures before them and studied them diligently, they would not only
have been unhappy about such suffering and death, but they would also
have taken comfort from them and decided: Because this man is so, as the
Holy Spirit prophesied beforehand through the prophets and in the
Psalms, that he cannot lie nor be lacking, he must be the true Messiah.
But since they leave the Scriptures out of their sight, they cannot help
being astonished; it sweeps them away like a flood, so that they lose
Christ altogether.

. Because the dear apostles have learned from their own experience what
harm it has brought them that they have left the Scriptures and have not
followed them, they therefore always refer to the Scriptures in history.
As if they wanted to say: It seems ridiculous that this Son of God and
the true Messiah should be the one who hangs so miserably on the cross,
with whom the soldiers deal so mercilessly and do so much evil. But do
not fret about it. See what the Holy Spirit has prophesied about Messiah
through the prophets so long ago, and you will find in the work that
this Jesus is the true Messiah, and that Messiah should not have had it
any other way here on earth. For it is certainly true that he who does
not abide by the word will not be able to resist even the slightest
distress. The word alone must sustain us; otherwise it is absolutely
lost with us.

(22) For this reason, everyone should flee these groups and
enthusiasts as the devil himself, who lead us away from the Word and the
Scriptures out of human thoughts, as the pope, the sacramental
enthusiasts and others do. For this is called being led away from the
rock onto a quicksand: the more one desires to stand there, the deeper
one sinks, and it is impossible that one could finally resist falling.
For God's word alone is the right, stable rock, on which one can
certainly stand. Whoever then wants to go right, let him see that he has
God's word. Therefore, when Christ speaks:. "This is my body, this is
my blood," believe, and do not follow the deceivers who say: It is only
bread, it is only wine. When Christ says, "He who believes in me shall
never see death"; believe this, and do not follow the pope who directs
you to the sacrifice of the Mass, to holy intercession, and to your
works; then you can be sure of your cause, and you will be free from
trouble.

Now we will also say a little about the other part, that the Son of God,
our dear Lord and Savior, by God's special counsel, had to die on the
cross, which was considered by the Jews to be the most annoying and
ignominious death, and far, far more detestable than the gallows or the
wheel with us. For this reason that,

[452 **L. 2, 121-iW. How Christ is crucified. W. xm, 1034-1036.**
453]{.underline}

in the fifth book of Moses, v. 22, 23, 21: "If anyone has committed a
sin worthy of death, and is thus put to death by being hanged on a tree,
his body shall not remain overnight on the tree, but you shall bury him
that day; for a hanged man is accursed by God, lest you defile the land
which the LORD your God is giving you for an inheritance."

(24) Whether God pronounces such a severe judgment on the hanged
because of the future fall, that His Son Himself should be so seasoned;
or because of the past accident, that man fell in disobedience to God in
Paradise and ate of the forbidden tree, there is nothing special about
the latter. This is the greatest and most necessary thing, that we
should learn and realize that God curses all those who die on the wood.
Because Christ also dies on the wood, it follows that he also became a
curse and is called cursed. How then the devil and the world especially
impose such a death on him, which is called a cursed death by God
himself. But how this is to be understood, and whether we are to be
comforted or angered by it, we will hear from St. Paul; for he acts on
this very saying of Moses, Galatians 3, and says thus, vv. 13, 14:
"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he became a curse
for us. For it is written: Cursed is every one that hangeth on wood:
that the blessing of Abraha might come upon the Gentiles in Christ
Jesus, and that we might receive the promised spirit through faith.

(25) Let us diligently consider this saying. Paul contrasts the two
words, "curse" and "blessing," and leads us behind him to the
promise made to Abraham, when God said, "Through your seed I will bless
all the families of the world. For there we must conclude: If all the
generations of the world are to be blessed through Abraham's seed, then
all the generations of the world must be under the curse; otherwise what
need have they of the promise of blessing? Again, such seed, through
which the blessing is to come, must be the blessed seed alone, since God
is not angry with it, but since there is only grace in it, and since God
is not angry with it.

Now it is certain who this Abrahamic seed is. Now it is certain who this
seed of Abraham is, namely, Jesus Christ, born of Mary the Virgin, the
only begotten Son of the Father; he alone is full of grace and truth.
All other people, from the first Adam to the last, are full of disgrace
because of their nature, God is angry with them, he is hostile to them,
there is no blessing but a curse with them. Cause, they are all sinners.

(26) But how is it to be done? The blessed seed of Abraha is hung on
the wood, because God has said about it: Cursed are all those who hang
on the wood; therefore it is no longer called the blessed seed, but the
cursed seed. As Paul says these things, "He has become a curse. Why is
that?

We, because of our sin, are a curse and in God's disgrace. Christ, the
only begotten, is full of grace and truth. Now how does he get the wood?
Why does he throw himself under the curse of God? Why does he allow
himself to be crucified? For our sake, says Paul; he became a curse for
us, he bore God's wrath, and wanted to pay for our sin, so that we
might come to blessing, that is, receive the Holy Spirit, be freed from
sin and become children of God. For here it is as with a poor beggar who
owes much and cannot pay; but another who is able takes him on, and
becomes guarantor and debtor himself; he must pay what the poor man
owes. As Paul very finely says, Rom. 8, 3.It was impossible for the law
to help us from sin and death; therefore God helped us in such a way: He
sends His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh (that is, God's Son
became man, taking our flesh and blood), and God condemned sin in the
flesh, through sin (that is, God absolved us from sins through His only
begotten Son, who became a sin offering, and was to pay for sin, and
thus bring the blessing of Abraha upon us who were under the curse); as
Paul finely interprets himself, 2 Cor. 5, 21: "GOD made him who knew of
no sin to be sin for us, that we might become in him the righteousness
that is before GOD."

**[454 L. 2, 123-128. how Christ is crucified. W. XIII, 1036-1039.
455]{.underline}**

28, So both are upon Christ: that he should become a curse, and after
that a sin, that is, a sin offering, since all men's sin, and
consequently the wrath of God and shameful death, lie upon him, for our
salvation, that we may thereby be redeemed and set free. As John the
Baptist therefore calls him a little lamb, that is, a lamb for slaughter
and sacrifice, appointed by God to take away the sins of the whole
world. And the Lord Himself says, John 12:32, "If I am lifted up, I
will draw all things to Myself"; and John 3:14, 15: "As Moses lifted
up the serpent in the wilderness, even so shall the Son of Man be lifted
up; that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have
everlasting life." And Paul says: He knows nothing, nor wants to know
anything, except Christ crucified. For he was crucified for this cause,
that he might sanctify, redeem, and justify us, who through sins, death,
and the tyranny of the devil, should have abode and perished for ever.

29 Who then will resent the cross? Who will consider such death
shameful? Who will not thank God from the bottom of his heart that his
Son hangs on the wood and takes upon himself the curse that belongs to
us because of our sins? He hangs there like a cursed man, to whom God is
hostile, whom God puts to shame, distress and fear. This is done, says
Paul, for my sake and yours, so that we may come to blessing. For if the
curse were to remain on us, we would be deprived of blessing; but here
comes the blessed Seed, and takes away from us the curse that is upon
us, and the blessing that he has, he casts upon us. Because he wanted to
become a curse for our sake, no other death was due to him than this
death on the wood, since God's word preaches that it is a cursed death.

(30) Learn these distinctions well, so that you do not judge according
to what you see with your eyes, but according to what the word of God
tells you. According to outward appearance, the death of the Lord Christ
is an ignominious death and, as God Himself calls such death, a cursed
death; the wood in which He dies is a cursed, accursed wood. Why

but? Because all our sins are attached to it. For sin and curse, or
God's wrath, and all misfortune belong together. Then Isaiah says:
"Many will be angry with him, for his form is uglier than other
people's, and his appearance than the children of men"; item: "We saw
him, but there was no form that we could have desired him. He was the
most despised and unworthy, full of heaviness and sickness. He was so
despised that people hid their faces from him. Therefore we esteemed him
nothing." Behold, this is the outward appearance, and it is impossible
for reason to judge otherwise, because God calls him cursed who dies on
the wood. The wood is cursed; he who hangs on it is cursed. The reason
why he hangs on it is also cursed. For the curse belongs to sin; and the
more sins there are on the Lord, the greater the curse.

(31) But what follows from this, that Christ, the blessed seed, should
die an accursed death, and become a curse to us? Paul says in very good
words that it happened because of this that the blessing of Abraha came
to the Gentiles, and that we thus received the Holy Spirit. There is
something else, because we can see with physical eyes. The eyes resent
such a shameful death, cursed by God, but it is a blessed death for us,
which takes the curse from us and brings God's blessing upon us. The
wood, which in itself is a cursed wood, is a blessed wood to us, a
noble, delicious altar, since the Son of God offers Himself to God His
Father for our sin, and lets Himself be seen as the right, eternal
priest, who therefore comes to the cursed wood and makes it a blessed
altar for Himself, so that we may be freed from sin, come to God's
grace and become His children.

That is why the ancient teachers had such fine thoughts about the cross
and the cursed wood. There in paradise, they say, a beautiful tree
caused us to fall into sin and death; here is an old, withered tree,
yes, a cursed wood; but it causes us to be delivered from sin and come
to eternal life. For there hangs the Son of God

[**456** L. 2.128-127. Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. XIII,
1039-1041.726-72S. **457**]{.underline}

with outstretched arms as a testimony that he does not reject anyone,
but gladly accepts everyone and, as he says in John 12:32, wants to draw
all things to himself. His head stretches toward heaven and shows us the
way to eternal life. His feet hang down below him and toward the earth;
for he treads on the head of the old serpent that creeps on the earth,
the devil, and takes away all his power. Because he, the dear Lord
Christ, hangs there, and pays for our sin with his death and does
enough; he becomes a curse for us: thus the devil loses his power.

walt, who has been given power over us for the sake of sin.

Therefore, let us learn here to know and praise the gracious will and
heart of our Father in heaven toward us, who did not spare His Son, but
gave Him up to death, and to the death of the cross, and made Him a
curse, so that we might receive blessings, be freed from sins, receive
the Holy Spirit, and through Him become the children of God and be
eternally saved. May God grant this to us all, Amen.

**The eleventh sermon.**

From the prayer of Christ on the cross and the thief to the right hand.

**Luc. 23:32-43.**

And there were also brought two other malefactors, that they might be
taken away with him. And when they were come to the place which is
called the place of the skull, there they crucified him, and the
malefactors with him, one on the right hand, and one on the left. And
Jesus said, Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do. And
they parted his garments, and cast lots thereon. And the people stood
and watched, and the rulers with them mocked him, saying: He has helped
others, he helps himself, he is a Christian, the chosen one of God. The
soldiers also mocked him and came to him, bringing him vinegar and
saying: If you are the king of the Jews, help yourself. The inscription
was also written above him in Greek, Latin, and Ezraic letters: This is
the king of the Jews. But one of the malefactors who were hanged
blasphemed him and said, "If you are Christ, help yourself and us. And
the other answered and rebuked him, saying, And thou fearest not God,
who art in like condemnation? And we are justified in this, because we
have received what our deeds are worth; but this man has done nothing
unjustly. And said unto JEsu, Lord, remember me when thou comest into
thy kingdom. And JEsu said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, This day
shalt thou be with me in paradise.

The holy evangelist Lucas reports here two pieces that are excellently
comforting. Therefore, although Matthew and the others have omitted
them, we will include them, so that we may have the history of the
passion of Christ in its entirety. The first is that Christ, when he was
nailed to the cross and the cross was raised with him, begins to pray
immediately and above all things, saying, "Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do." The other of the thief, who heard such
prayer, and learned so much from it, that this JEsus of GOD

Son and the true Christian, therefore desires that he will not forget
him when he enters his kingdom. Let us now take these two things before
us, for they are very comforting and can never be sufficiently
considered or explained by us. So it is necessary that we not only look
at the works this man does and at his suffering, but also listen
diligently to the words he preaches. For by this he explains his doings
and sufferings, why he is there, and what he does.

2. but above all we must do this

458 **L. 2, 127-129. Of Christ's Prayer on the Cross 2c. W. XIII,
728-730.** 459

Suffering is distinguished from all other people's suffering. Not only
because of the person that Jesus Christ is the eternal God, through whom
heaven and earth were created and all things were made, but also because
of the cause of his suffering, and because of the benefit or fruit that
follows from such suffering, and otherwise from the suffering of no man,
angel, or other creature. For he suffers (as you have heard next) not
for his sake, but for ours, that we through it might be delivered and
set free from sin and death. We also hear this here in his words, which
every Christian should take note of and keep in his heart as the highest
treasure and consolation.

(3) For that he saith there upon the cross, Father, forgive them; for
they know not what they do; such words clearly testify, as he dwelleth
in the air upon the cross, that he is in his right priestly office, and
doeth his work, wherefore he came upon earth, not only with his
suffering, that he offereth himself, but also with prayer. For both are
priestly works, sacrifice and prayer. The sacrifice actually means that,
as He said in John 17:19, He wanted to sanctify Himself for us, so that
we would be sanctified in truth and right; item, John 10:12, that He
would lay down His life for His sheep. You will find many more such
sayings, all of which testify that His suffering is called suffering for
us, not for Himself or for His own sake. He performs this work and
sacrifice with such earnestness that he also asks the Father to forgive
those who crucify him, not to punish sin but to remit it, so that
everyone may see why he came to the cross and be comforted by it.

4 Therefore you should first learn from this prayer that our dear Lord
Jesus is a priest, and that he performed his priestly office on the
cross. For to pray for sinners belongs to the priesthood. If then thou
askest what priestly adornment or garment or altar he had (since Aaron
in the law had his special priestly adornment, which was an adornment
for splendor), thou mayest look here at the cross; there he hangs naked
and bare, full of wounds, and has

not a thread on his body. And nevertheless he directs his priestly
office to the very best and most diligent, that he also prays for his
enemies. Whether this is unpriestly, do not be offended. Because it has
with this priest absolutely another opinion, as with the Mosespriests.

5 Thus you see how above his head is the inscription that he is the king
of the Jews, as he himself publicly and clearly confessed before Pilate.
Such a title also rhymes badly with the outward appearance. For instead
of purple, his whole body is bloody and full of wounds and welts, and
instead of a golden crown, he wears thorns smitten into his head. You
find such a priest and king on the cross, of which the world is ashamed,
despises him, does not want to think of him as king or priest; as Isaiah
says: "We saw him, but there was no form that we could have desired
him. He was the most despised and unworthy, full of pain and sickness.
He was so despised that people hid their faces from him; therefore we
regarded him as nothing." But let it be seen in the sight of the world
and with carnal eyes, as one pleases, yet let it be to us the dearest,
most beautiful, most blessed ornament, that this priest offered up his
own body and blood there on the cross, in a dishonest, even in an
unconsecrated and accursed place. For the oxen, cows, calves, which were
offered in the temple, were offered on a consecrated altar. But Christ
sacrifices Himself on an unconsecrated and cursed altar. Just as gallows
and raven stones are still abominable, dishonorable oerters. For thus it
is written in Moses, "Cursed be he that dieth on the wood."

(6) It is blasphemous and dishonest in the sight of the world that
this priest should not be allowed the place for his sacrifice that cows
and calves had. But it is all done for our sake and for our good, that
we may learn that he has made a full and sufficient atonement for our
sins, as also reported in the next sermon. For just as our sins could
not be atoned for nor paid for except through this priest, who was the
eternal Son of God, so this priest did not make any atonement for our
sins.

[460 **L. 2.129-131. Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. xm,
730-734.** 461]{.underline}

ner honest altar nor more delicious ornament can have.

7 But this does not hinder his ministry. He not only sacrifices his life
and limb, but also prays for poor, ignorant sinners. Therefore we should
take hearty comfort in this priest and his ministry. For just as he
suffers, so he also prays, not only for those who were present at that
time and laid their hands on him and nailed him to the cross (such would
be interpreting Christ's prayer much too narrowly), but also for us.

(8) For they were servants and bondservants only to our sins. If your
sins and mine had not nailed Christ to the cross, they would have had to
leave him satisfied. But because Christ is here as the true priest and
the little lamb of God, to pay for the whole world's sin with his
sacrifice or death, this makes it possible for Jews and Gentiles to do
violence against him. Therefore, when he prays for those who crucify
him, he prays for all of us, who with our sins give cause for his cross
and death.

(9) For this reason we should not look upon the gallows and the cross
on which Christ suffered as anything other than an altar, where Christ
offered up his life and carried out his priestly ministry by praying
that we might be freed from sin and eternal death. For he that taketh
away sin taketh away death also. Cause, death has no more power, where
sin is gone; so also hell. This is what Christ, our only and eternal
priest, accomplished on the cross, reconciling us to God without our
works, through his own suffering, becoming a curse for us, dying on the
cross for our sins, and finally interceding for sinners. Remember that
you also thank him from the bottom of your heart.

10 In the papacy they also preach this. But regardless of the fact that
the text is so clear and the story so true, that Christ sacrificed
himself on the cross and suffered for us, they preach that we ourselves
should be priests, that we should sacrifice ourselves, and that we
should acquire eternal life by our own works. But our doctrine, that we
teach that Christ, the one, right

Priests, have redeemed us from sins and earned eternal life, they curse
and condemn as heresy.

(11) But is not this a pitiful bargain? Is this not an abominable
wrath, blindness and punishment upon the ungrateful world, that the
papists preach that Christ sacrificed himself for us on the cross, and
yet they rage against us and shed innocent blood, because we teach such
doctrine and point people to such comfort? This is called (as Isaiah
threatens the despisers of the word of God) being blind with seeing eyes
and not hearing with open ears, and having an obdurate, incomprehensible
heart. Otherwise, how could it be possible that they should pay so
little attention to this sacrifice, and besides that, take comfort in
their own works, in indulgences, in a lousy monk's cap? Why do they not
take comfort in the fact that Christ sacrifices his life and limb and
prays for us, saying: "Father, here I am, a mediator between you and
poor sinners; I die for them, I sacrifice myself for them, be merciful
to them?

12 Our adversaries hear and see these things, and yet they still cry and
rage against them, and condemn us as heretics. Well then, it is a
terrible wrath of God, so may God mercifully protect us from it. But if
he will ever let us fall, let us fall into such sin as we feel and
confess, and not into that which is contrary to grace, and yet is
adorned and praised for holiness.

(13) Therefore let us open our hearts, and look upon our priest Christ
in his proper adornment. You will find no ornament in him under the
eyes, for you can see how miserable and wretched he hangs there. But
look into his heart, and there you will find such adornment and treasure
that you will never be able to thank him enough.

14 For first of all, he is adorned with great, heartfelt obedience to
his Father, so that in his honor he allows himself to be spit upon,
scourged, and bruised. Such adornment is impossible for us to see here
even in this life; but still, so much we can see that all the pearls,

462 **L. 2, 131-133. Of Christ's Prayer on the Cross 2c. W. XIII,
734-736.** 463

all the velvet and golden piece is nothing against it.

The other ornament is the great love for us, that the Lord takes so
little notice of our life and suffering, and almost does not think of
it, because our cause and need are so dear to him, and he prays for us
rather than for himself. Who can sufficiently understand or grasp such
love, that the Lord has such a heart towards us, so full of fire, that
in his greatest suffering, torture and shame he stands as if he sees or
feels nothing; but he only thinks, sees and cares about your and my
misery, distress and heartache? This can ever be a great, serious love,
that he lets himself be commanded to such an extent that he even forgets
about his ride, harm and suffering. Just as it happens with children
that father and mother run through a fire to save them. There the love
is so great that the heart does not think of its own need, and only
cares how the child is helped. In the same way, let us see, our dear
Lord Christ's heart burns, so that through suffering, as through a
fire, he tears through and saves us in all love and mercy.

(16) Now this is the proper adornment, since our high and eternal
priest is adorned with it. Outwardly such adornment is not seen, but
inwardly it is seen, as his words sufficiently testify.

(17) Therefore, in all things pertaining to suffering, we should look
to the chief article, grasping it firmly, and not be deprived of the
fact that Christ sacrificed himself for us, and has nothing so warmly in
mind as that he should save us, reach out to us, and run after us
through all suffering, as through a fire. We need this article not only
to comfort us, but also to strengthen us against the devil's poison,
which the pope pours into people and wants to bring them to heaven
through their own righteousness, works and merit. But if we could have
accomplished this with our works, why should Christ, the Son of God,
have suffered? But now he stands here, offering his sacrifice, his own
body and life, in all obedience and patience, and in addition asks his
Father to be merciful.

and forgive. This is enough to show that we can do nothing of the kind
by our works, for the forgiveness of sins is not so easy a matter as the
papists think. It soon happens that you put on a cap, watch a lot, fast,
sing, all this is still easy to do: but to receive forgiveness of sins,
there belongs a far different and greater thing than your own works; God
will hear you slowly because of your fasting, watching, praying; but so
it is, as Isaiah says: "For our iniquity he was wounded, and for our
sins he was bruised. He has borne the sickness of us all."

18 Now the papists themselves must confess that the suffering and death
of the Lord Christ is something else than my prayer, my good works, my
suffering, my almsgiving, and my fasting. Whoever then wants to put such
things to sin, will achieve nothing. It takes another man, other works
and merit, as Isaiah clearly says. But he that will exalt his own merit,
and use it against sin, blasphemeth the death, sacrifice, and prayer of
Christ: for he thinketh as much of his own sacrifice and prayer, as of
the sacrifice and prayer of Christ. One should diligently guard against
such abominations.

Nineteen Now the Lord does not pray evil in the multitude, but sets
apart them for whom he prayeth, saying, Father, forgive them; for they
know not what they do. Will thus indicate two kinds of sinners. Some
know that they do wrong, and yet they do it without any shame. This is
called sinning against the Holy Spirit, when one persists in such
knowing sin, does not confess it, does not desist from it, nor ask
forgiveness for it; as our junk lords, the papists, are doing now. They
know that our doctrine is right, that Christ has commanded the Sacrament
to be received in its entirety, has not forbidden marriage, has not
commanded anything about the Sacrifice of the Mass; and yet, for the
sake of such things, they condemn us as heretics, and punish their
subjects when they know that they need our doctrine and Sacrament.

20 These do not sin ignorantly. The-

[464 **L. 2, 133-135. of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. xm,
736-739.** 465]{.underline}

he nature of such sins is such that they cannot be forgiven, for they go
directly against the forgiveness of sins, since one does not want to
desist from them and confess them. For forgiveness of sins wants both,
that one confesses the wrong and desists from it.

(21) The rest are sinners who sin ignorantly. Not as if David did not
know that it would be sinful to take Uriah's wife and have him slain.
He knows it very well. But sin and the devil drive and chase him so
violently that he falls into such sin before he really thinks about what
he is doing. Afterwards, however, he confesses, is sorry, would that he
had not done it, and desires mercy.

(22) We all carry such sin on our necks, that we are easily and
unawares carried away, and fall sometimes through fear, as Peter did,
sometimes through imprudence and weakness, sometimes through
presumption. Christ carried such sins with him to the cross and asked
for them, because they are naked, mere sins that are not against grace,
since one recognizes and confesses them and asks for forgiveness. Thus
it is seen that often harlots and knaves, murderers and other wicked
people come to grace; for they know that they have done wrong, and will
not answer for it. Such confessed sins have the sacrifice of Christ
between them and God; therefore God will not impute them to us. But
those who knowingly and willingly do not want to do otherwise and still
defend their sin, sin against the Holy Spirit and deny the grace of God.
Christ does not pray for them here, but for those who do not know what
they are doing and fall because of weakness. They should take comfort in
this sacrifice and prayer, and know that their sins are forgiven. For
this is what Christ asked for here, and it has certainly been heard; so
we should not doubt it, but take comfort and rejoice in it.

(23) Let this be said briefly of the prayer of Christ on the cross,
that he might show why he suffered, that these sinners, who sin
ignorantly and are sorry, may have a gracious God for the Lord Christ's
sake, who will forgive their sin.

Now let us look at the story of the right-handed thief. This is such a
splendid example, the like of which cannot be found anywhere. For first
of all, it is to be wondered at: the poor man cannot deny his sin; he
knows that he has sinned and that he must suffer death because of his
sins. For this reason he cannot boast of any good work or merit against
God; as he says to his journeyman when he speaks evil of the Lord
Christ: "We," he says, "are justified in such punishment, for we
receive what our deeds are worth. This one, however, has done nothing
unskilful." Here you hear what he confesses about himself, that he well
deserved such an ignominious death. This is one thing to wonder at, that
he has cause to fear God because of his sins; and yet, as we shall hear,
he conceives the thought that he will yet enter God's kingdom.

(25) Secondly, it is also a great wonder that this one man does not
allow himself to be challenged by the great offense that the whole
council of Jerusalem, secular and spiritual, mocks the Lord Christ and
blasphemes him. The rulers of the spiritual government said: "He has
helped others, let him help himself, if he is Christ, the chosen one of
God. The soldiers also said: "If you are the king of the Jews, help
yourself. For the superscription was written over his head, "Jesus
Nazarene, King of the Jews. So the one murderer who was crucified with
him also said, "If thou art Christ, help thyself and us also." He did
not say this because he wanted help, but because he wanted to mock
Christ and thus ridicule him. In sum, all the world resents Christ
hanging on the cross and thinks nothing of him. For the disciples
themselves, though they stood by the cross for part of the time, had no
more hope.

(26) But the poor murderer on the right hand tears through the trouble
and is allowed to call Christ, who hangs next to him on the cross, a
Lord and King. For this reason, he tells lies to the whole world, does
not consider what other people think or say about him, and proclaims him
to be an eternal king. For so

466 2.2, 135-138. of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. xin, 73s-741.
467

his words are: "Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom". He
calls him a "Lord", and says that he has a "kingdom"; and desires,
when he shall be in the same kingdom, that he should remember him. Now
it was ever about the time that no one could reach the evening with his
life. Therefore he believes that Christ is the Lord of another and
eternal life. Let this be to me a great, excellent faith and a glorious
confession, since otherwise all the world rejects Christ and thinks
nothing of him.

27 Here you may think to yourself, "Where did this murderer get such
abundant and clear knowledge that he recognizes and proclaims Christ as
the Lord of eternal life, and from whom did he learn this? But there is
no doubt that he learned it only from the prayer that the Lord made on
the cross. In the prophet Isaiah, in the 53rd chapter, it is both
indicated that the Messiah will suffer and be counted like the
transgressors, and will bear many sins and pray for the transgressors.
When such a thing is found on the cross, the pious Lord, who had done
nothing wrong, hangs there between two murderers and begins to pray,
saying, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. For
people do not speak to God in this way; Christ alone is able to speak to
God in this way, and he has taught us to do so. Therefore, the thief
concludes that he is the Son of God. And because he prays for sinners,
he recognizes him as the true Christian. And no doubt these sayings of
Jesus and other similar prophecies, which he may have heard in the
church but did not understand, will have come to him here. He now sums
them up, and the Holy Spirit makes such prophecies light and clear in
his heart, so that he cannot hold on to them any longer; he must come
out and confess with his mouth what he believes in his heart, saying:
"Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom. As if to say, "You
are the Son of God; here on earth you suffer for our sins and must die
for our sins; but afterward you will rise again into an eternal kingdom,
and be Lord over all. O Lord, remember

mine. I will gladly suffer death now, for I have well deserved it: only
do not leave me when you come into your kingdom. Behold, such a rich
knowledge of the Lord Christ this man draws from the short prayer of the
Lord; this is the sermon in which he learns this art. Just as this
murderer on the cross recognizes and confesses Christ, God wants to
preserve His Christian church even today. Even if all emperors, kings,
popes and bishops were to fall, God still wants to preserve a small
group that will have His Spirit and confess Him before the world. If the
disciples, along with others who are related to the Lord Christ, do not
confess or believe, but deny out of fear and run away, then a murderer
must come forth, confess this Christ, preach about him, and teach other
people what to think of him and what to comfort themselves with; for our
Lord God does not want to leave Christ without people, even if it is
only a thief on the gallows or a murderer on the wheel.

28 Therefore this is a comforting history, since we first see what kind
of people Christ has who come to him and to whom he wants to show all
grace, namely, those who are sinners and confess their sin and ask for
mercy; they will find grace and mercy. For just as he asked before, so
he proves here by deed that he is there and wants to forgive sins. And
now this is his first work, that he redeems and saves a scoundrel and
murderer from sins and eternal death, so that one may be sure and not
doubt, because he sacrificed himself on the cross, that this is not done
for the sake of the saints and the pious, but for the sake of sinners.
For it was for their sake that he came to call them to repentance and
not for the sake of the righteous, as he himself tells us, Matth. 9, 13.

29 Therefore whosoever thinketh that he shall go to heaven a holy man,
without all sin, is deceived. For he who does not want to be a sinner
has no need of the Lord Christ, for he did not die for his own sake but
for the sake of sinners.

30 Therefore, this history is to be taken as an example, since Christ
with the deed

[468 **L. 2, 138.139.** Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. **W. XIII,
741-743,726.** 469]{.underline}

proves what he sought and obtained with his suffering, because he makes
a murderer a saint on the gallows, and does not want him to remain in
sins or to perish. But he does not do this because he is pleased with
sins, or that we should remain and continue in sins. No, because he
suffers for sinners, he does not want them to remain so, but to be pious
and holy and to convert. As is seen here in the case of the thief, he
turns back and accuses himself of his sins, but hopes that he will enjoy
the Lord's mercy, so that his sins will not harm him in eternal life.

Thus he becomes a different man, and his death, which he deserved
shamefully, now becomes a service to God, so that he no longer suffers
as a murderer, but as a true saint. For he dies in true confession and
heartfelt trust in the grace of God through Christ, and is heartily
sorry for his sin; and if God left him longer on earth, he would never
do what he did before. Such faith in Christ not only makes him a saint,
but also brings him to paradise and eternal life; as the Lord Christ
promises him: "Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in
paradise.

(32) We are to follow this example, and not think, as crude, ungodly
people do: I will sin, that Christ may save me, and prove his grace upon
me. No, not at all, but think: I was born in sins, I am full of filth
and evil desires, therefore I must not begin to sin at all, so that I
may boast that I am a sinner; I am a sinner before, I am ready for sins
and death. For this reason, I will hold on to Him who paid for sinners
through His suffering, and through His innocent death redeemed me from
the well-deserved death I had long since been guilty of and reconciled
me to God.

But whoever abuses such a sermon of grace, does not refrain from sins,
does not confess them, nor does not want to be sorry, let him look at
the other murderer on the left, the rulers of the Jews and the soldiers,
and consider how they have been advised to do this and what they have
earned with the unrepentant life. For if you want to enjoy the Lord
Christ and his suffering and prayer, you have to follow the way of the
other sewer, who confesses his sin, asks for mercy, and confesses the
Lord Christ, that he is a Lord and King of eternal life. May our dear
Lord Christ grant us this, amen.

**Good Friday. *)**

From the prayer of Christ on the cross and thief to the right hand.

**Luc. 23:32-43.**

And there were also brought two other malefactors, that they might be
taken away with him. And when they were come to the place which is
called the place of the skull, there they crucified him, and the
malefactors with him, one on the right hand, and one on the left. And
Jesus said, Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do. And
they parted his garments, and cast lots thereon. And the people stood
and watched, and the rulers with them mocked him, saying: He has helped
others, he helps himself, he is a Christian, the chosen one of God. The
soldiers also mocked him and came to him, bringing him vinegar and
saying: If you are the king of the Jews, help yourself. There

*The preceding eleventh sermon is in the Nuremberg and Wittenberg
editions of 1544 with various changes. It may follow here in its
[entirety]{.underline} for the sake of more convenient reading. D. Red.

[**470** D. 2, i39-i4i. Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. xm,
726-730. **471**]{.underline}

The inscription was also written above it in Greek, Latin, and Ezraic
letters: This is the king of the Jews. But one of the malefactors that
were hanged blasphemed him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and
us. And the other answered and rebuked him, and said, Neither art thou
afraid of God, who art in like condemnation? And we are justified in
this, because we have received what our deeds are worth; but this man
has done nothing unjustly. And said unto JEsu, Lord, remember me when
thou comest into thy kingdom. And JEsu said unto him, Verily I say unto
thee, This day shalt thou be with me in paradise.

Since the history of Christ's suffering is so rich that it cannot be
fully described in a day or a week, we will therefore stick to these two
pieces today, and first speak of Christ's prayer on the cross for his
enemies, and then of the example of the pious thief. For one should not
only look at the works that the man does, but also listen to his words
that he preaches. For with them he explains his actions and suffering,
why he is there and what he is doing.

(2) For this is to be above all things, that this suffering may be
distinguished from all other men's sufferings. Not only because of the
person that Jesus Christ is eternal God, through whom heaven and earth
were created and all things were made, but also because of the cause of
his suffering, and because of the benefit or fruit that follows from
such suffering, which fruit no other suffering can produce. For he
suffers, as you have just heard, not for his sake, but for ours, that we
might thereby be delivered from sin and death. We see this also here in
his words, which every Christian should rightly remember and include in
his heart as the highest treasure and comfort.

3 For thus says Lucas: When Christ was crucified, and the evildoers with
him, he said thus: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do. These are short words, but very comforting. For we must look at
Christ hanging in the air on the cross, that he may be in his right
priestly office, and spend his work, for which he came on earth, also in
prayer. For this is why He came, as He said in John 17:19, that He might
sanctify Himself for us, that we might be sanctified in truth and right;
item John 10:12, that He might lay down His life for His sheep. Such

You will find many more sayings, all of which testify that his suffering
should be called suffering for us, not for himself or for his own sake.
He performs this work and sacrifice with such earnestness that he also
asks the Father to forgive those who crucify him, not to punish sin but
to remit it, so that everyone may see why he came here to the cross and
take comfort in this.

4 Now this is the proper priestly adornment of our dear Lord Christ,
that he not only suffers, but also intercedes for sinners. Aaron in the
law also had his priestly ornament, which was an ornament for splendor.
But this priest's adornment is that he hangs there and has not a thread
in his body. And yet he does his priestly work to the best of his
ability and diligently, so that he may minister even to his enemies. 
He prays even for his enemies.

005 So there was a title above his head, saying, He is the king of the
Jews. But whoever wants to know what kind of king he is, let him look at
him diligently, and he will find that instead of purple his whole body
is bloody and full of wounds and welts, and instead of a crown he wears
thorns smitten into his head. We find such a priest and king on the
cross, of which the world is ashamed, despises him, does not want to
think of him as king or priest; as Isaiah says: "We saw him, but there
was no form that we could have desired him. He was the most despised and
unworthy, full of pain and sickness. He was so despised that they hid
their faces from him; therefore we esteemed him nothing." But let it be
seen in the sight of the world and with carnal eyes, as one pleases, yet
let it be to us the dearest, most beautiful, most blessed ornament, that
this priest offered up his own body and blood there on the cross, in a
dishonest, even in an unconsecrated and accursed place. For the oxen,
cows, calves,

472 **8.2.I41.142. Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. xm,
730-733.** 473

sacrificed in the temple were offered on a -consecrated altar. But
Christ sacrifices himself on an unconsecrated and cursed altar. Just as
gallows and raven stones are abominable, dishonorable altars. For thus
it is written in Moses, "Cursed be he that dieth for wood."

(6) It is blasphemous and dishonest in the sight of the world that
this priest should not be allowed the place for his sacrifice which cows
and calves had. But it is all done for our sake and for our good, that
we may learn that he has made a full and satisfactory sacrifice for our
sin. Otherwise, at least people should have had compassion on him, as
one sees when condemned people are executed: if someone can help a
little with refreshment, with a friendly promise, then everyone is
willing. But with Christ no one has such compassion: when he desires
drink, they give him vinegar and myrrh; when he cries out to God for
help, they pervert his words and mock him, saying, "He calls on
Eliam"; so evil and unjust is he held.

(7) So should this priest's sacrifice be, that he should be
considered the worst, most wicked man, and judged like other thieves and
murderers, and yet the people are still so bitter that there is no pity
nor mercy. In sum, all curses were to go upon him, and he was to be
executed as never an evildoer, and to make his sacrifice in the most
shameful place. For our sake all this happened, because our sins
deserved it.

(8) Therefore, since he is in such distress and torment, he is more
concerned about our distress than about his suffering. For you hear that
he prays for us sinners rather than for himself, that God may be
merciful to us and forgive our sin. Of such prayer, the epistle to the
Hebrews reports in chapter 5, v. 7, that Christ offered up prayer and
supplication in the day of his flesh, with strong cries and tears, to
Him who was able to save him from death, and was also heard, because he
honored God.

(9) We should take comfort in this suffering and prayer. For as he
suffers, so

He also prays, not only for those who were present at that time and laid
hands on him and crucified him, but also for us. For those were only
servants and slaves of our sins. For if your sins and mine had not
nailed Christ to the cross, they would have had to leave him satisfied.
But because Christ, as the true priest and lamb of God, is here to pay
for the sins of the whole world with his sacrifice or death, Jews and
Gentiles have power over him. Therefore, when he prays for those who
crucify him, he prays for all of us, who with our sins give cause for
his cross and death.

(10) For this reason we should not look upon the gallows and the cross
on which Christ suffered as anything other than an altar, where Christ
offered up his life and carried out his priestly ministry by praying
that we might be freed from sin and eternal death. For he that taketh
away sin taketh away death also. Cause, death has no more power, where
sin is gone; so also hell. This is what Christ, our only and eternal
priest, accomplished on the cross, reconciling us to God without our
works, through his own suffering, becoming a curse for us, dying on the
cross for our sins, and finally interceding for sinners. Remember that
you also thank him from the bottom of your heart.

11 In the papacy they also preach this. But regardless of the fact that
the text is so clear and the story so true, that Christ sacrificed
himself on the cross and suffered for us, they preach that we ourselves
should be priests, should sacrifice ourselves, and by our own works earn
eternal life. But our teaching that Christ, the only true priest, has
redeemed us from sins and earned eternal life, they curse and condemn as
heresy.

12. But is not this a miserable bargain? Is it not an abominable wrath,
blindness and punishment upon the ungrateful world, that the papists
preach that Christ sacrificed Himself for us on the cross, and yet they
rage against us, and shed un-.

474 **D.2, 142. Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. XIII, 733-73S.**
475

guilty blood, because we teach such doctrine and point people to such
comfort? This means (as Isaiah threatens the despisers of the word of
God) to be blind with seeing eyes and not to hear with open ears, and to
have an obdurate, incomprehensible heart. Otherwise, how could it be
possible that they pay so little attention to this sacrifice, and
besides that, they should take comfort in their own works, in
indulgences, in a lousy monk's cap? Why do they not take comfort in the
fact that Christ sacrifices his life and limb and prays for us, saying:
"Father, here I am, a mediator between you and poor sinners; I die for
them, I sacrifice myself for them, be merciful to them?

13 Our adversaries hear and see these things, and yet they still cry out
and rage against them, and condemn us as heretics. Well, it is a
terrible wrath of God, so may God mercifully protect us from it. But if
he will ever let us fall, let us fall into such sin as we feel and
confess, and not into that which is contrary to grace, and yet is
adorned and praised for holiness.

14 Therefore let us open our hearts, and look upon our priest Christ in
his proper adornment. You will find no ornament in him under the eyes,
for you can see how miserable and wretched he hangs there. But look into
his heart, and there you will find such adornment and treasure that you
will never be able to thank him enough.

(15) For first of all, he is adorned with great, heartfelt obedience
to his Father, so that in his honor he allows himself to be spit upon,
scourged, and bruised. Such adornment is impossible for us to see here
even in this life; but still, so much we can see that all pearls, all
precious stones, and precious stones are nothing compared to it.

The other decoration is the great love for us, that the Lord takes so
little care of his life and suffering, and almost does not think of it,
because our cause and need is so dear to him, and he rather asks for us
than for himself. Who can sufficiently understand such love, or who can
sufficiently

How can it be that the Lord has such a heart toward us, so full of fire,
that in his greatest suffering, torture and shame he stands as if he
sees or feels nothing; but he thinks, looks and cares only for your and
my misery, distress and heartache? This can ever be a great, serious
love, that he lets himself be commanded to such an extent that he even
forgets about his ride, harm and suffering. Just as it happens with
children that father and mother run through a fire to save them. There
the love is so great that the heart does not think of its own need, and
only cares how the child is helped. In the same way, let us see, our
dear Lord Christ's heart burns, so that through suffering, as through a
fire, he tears through and saves us in all love and mercy.

(17) Now this is the proper adornment, since our high and eternal
priest is adorned with it. Such adornment is not seen outwardly, but
inwardly it is seen, as his words sufficiently testify.

(18) Therefore, in all things pertaining to suffering, we should look
to the chief article, grasping it firmly, and not be deprived of the
fact that Christ sacrificed himself for us, and has nothing so warmly in
mind as that he should save us, reach out to us, and run after us
through all suffering, as through a fire. We need this article not only
to comfort us, but also to strengthen us against the devil's poison,
which the pope pours into people and wants to bring them to heaven
through their own righteousness, works and merit. But if we could have
accomplished this with our works, why should Christ, the Son of God,
have suffered? But now he stands here, offering his sacrifice, his own
body and life, in all obedience and patience, and in addition asks his
Father to be merciful and to forgive. This is enough of an indication
that we can do nothing of the kind with our works, for the forgiveness
of sins is not as easy a bargain as the papists think. It soon happens
that you put on a cap, watch a lot, fast, sing, all this is still easy
to do: but forgiveness of sins, there belongs a far different and
greater and more difficult trade.

476 **D. 2, 142. Of Christ's prayer on the cross 2c. W. XIII,
735-739.** 477

God is slow to hear you because of your fasting, watchfulness, and
prayer; but as Isaiah says, "He is wounded for our iniquity, and
bruised for our sins. He has borne the sickness of us all."

19 Now the papists themselves must confess that the suffering and death
of the Lord Christ is something else than my prayer, my good works, my
suffering, my almsgiving, my fasting. Whoever then wants to put such
things to sin, will achieve nothing. It takes another man, other works
and merit, as Isaiah clearly says. But he that will exalt his own merit,
and use it against sin, blasphemeth the death, sacrifice, and prayer of
Christ; because he thinketh as much of his own sacrifice and prayer, as
of the sacrifice and prayer of Christ. One should diligently guard
against such abominations.

020 Now the Lord prayeth not evil in the multitude, but setteth a
difference between them for whom he prayeth, saying, Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they do. Will thus indicate two kinds of
sinners. Some know that they do wrong, and yet they do it without any
shame. This is called sinning against the Holy Spirit, when one persists
in such knowing sin, does not confess it, does not desist from it, nor
ask forgiveness for it; as our junk lords, the papists, are doing now.
They know that our doctrine is right, that Christ has commanded the
Sacrament to be received in its entirety, has not forbidden marriage,
has not commanded anything about the Sacrifice of the Mass; and yet, for
the sake of such things, they condemn us as heretics, and punish their
subjects when they know that they need our doctrine and Sacrament.

21 These do not sin ignorantly. Therefore the nature of such sins is
such that they cannot be forgiven, for they are contrary to the
forgiveness of sins, since one will not desist from them and confess
them. For forgiveness of sins wants both, that one confesses the wrong
and desists from it.

22 The others are sinners who sin ignorantly. Not as if David did not
know,

that it would be a sin to take Uriah's wife and have him slain. He
knows it very well. But sin and the devil drive and chase him so
violently that he falls into such sin before he really thinks about what
he is doing. But afterwards he confesses, is sorry, wishes he had not
done it, and desires mercy.

(23) We all carry such sins by the neck, that we are easily and
unawares carried away, and fall sometimes through fear, as Peter did,
sometimes through imprudence and weakness, sometimes through
presumption. Christ carried such sins with him to the cross and asked
for them, because they are naked, mere sins that are not against grace,
since one recognizes and confesses them and asks for forgiveness. Thus
it is seen that often harlots and knaves, murderers and other wicked
people come to grace; for they know that they have done wrong, and will
not answer for it. Such confessed sins have the sacrifice of Christ
between them and God; therefore God will not impute them to us. But
those who knowingly and willingly do not want to do otherwise and still
defend their sin, sin against the Holy Spirit and deny the grace of God.
Christ does not pray for them here, but for those who do not know what
they are doing and fall because of weakness. They should take comfort in
this sacrifice and prayer, and know that their sins are forgiven. For
this is what Christ asked for here, and it has certainly been heard; so
we should not doubt it, but take comfort and rejoice in it.

(24) Let this be said briefly of the prayer of Christ on the cross,
that he might show why he suffered, that these sinners, who sin
ignorantly and are sorry, may have a gracious God for the Lord Christ's
sake, who will forgive their sin.

Now let us look at the story of the thief on the right hand. This is
such a splendid example, the like of which cannot be found anywhere. For
first of all, it is to be wondered at: the poor man cannot deny his sin;
he knows that he has sinned and that he must suffer death because of his
sins. For this reason, he cannot do any good work against God.

478 L- 2.142. Of Christ's prayer on the cross re. W. xm, 73A-74l. 479

nor boast of merit; as he says to his journeyman, when he speaks evil of
the Lord Christ: "We," he says, "are just in such punishment; for we
receive what our deeds are worth. This one, however, has done nothing
unskilful." Here you hear what he confesses about himself, that he well
deserved such an ignominious death. This is one thing to wonder at, that
he has cause to fear God because of his sins; and yet, as we shall hear,
he conceives the thought that he will yet enter God's kingdom.

26 Secondly, it is also a great miracle that this one man does not allow
himself to be challenged by the great offense, that the whole council of
Jerusalem, secular and spiritual, mocks the Lord Christ and blasphemes
him. The rulers of the spiritual government said: "He has helped
others, let him help himself, if he is Christ, the chosen one of God.
The soldiers also did the same: "If you are the king of the Jews, help
yourself. For the superscription was written over his head, "Jesus
Nazarene, King of the Jews. So the one murderer who was crucified with
him also said, "If thou art Christ, help thyself and us also." He did
not say this because he wanted help, but because he wanted to mock
Christ and thus ridicule him. In sum, all the world resents Christ
hanging on the cross and thinks nothing of him. For the disciples
themselves, though they stood by the cross for part of the time, had no
more hope.

(27) But the poor murderer on the right hand tears through the trouble
and is allowed to call Christ, who hangs next to him on the cross, a
Lord and King. For this reason, he tells lies to the whole world, does
not consider what other people think or say about him, and proclaims him
to be an eternal king. For thus his words are, "Lord, remember me when
thou comest into thy kingdom." He calls him a "Lord," and says he has
a "kingdom;" and desires, when he shall be in the same kingdom, that
he may remember him. Now it was ever about the time that no one could
reach the evening with his life. Therefore he believes that Christ is
the Lord of another and eternal life. Let me have a big one,

The first thing must be a good faith and a glorious confession,
otherwise the whole world will despair of Christ and think nothing of
him.

Thus, God wants to preserve His Christian Church this very day. Even if
all the emperors, kings, popes and bishops were to fall, God still wants
to preserve a small group that will have His Spirit and confess Him
before the world. If the disciples, along with others who are related to
the Lord Christ, do not confess or believe, but deny out of fear and run
away, then a murderer must come forth, confess this Christ, preach about
him, and teach other people what to think of him and what to comfort
themselves with; for our Lord God does not want to leave Christ without
people, even if it is only a thief on the gallows or a murderer on the
wheel.

29 Therefore this is a comforting history, since we first see what kind
of people Christ has who come to him and to whom he wants to prove all
grace, namely, those who are sinners and confess their sin and ask for
mercy; they shall find grace and mercy. For just as he asked before, so
he proves here by deed that he is there and wants to forgive sins. And
now this is his first work, that he redeems and saves a scoundrel and
murderer from sins and eternal death, so that one may be sure and not
doubt, because he sacrificed himself on the cross, that this is not done
for the sake of the saints and the pious, but for the sake of sinners.
For it was for their sake that he came to call them to repentance and
not for the sake of the righteous, as he himself tells us, Matth. 9, 13.

030 Therefore whosoever thinketh that he shall go to heaven a holy man,
without all sin, is deceived. For he who does not want to be a sinner
has no need of the Lord Christ, for he did not die for his own sake but
for the sake of sinners.

3l. Therefore, this history is to be considered an example, since Christ
proves by deed what he sought and obtained with his suffering, since he
makes a murderer a saint on the gallows, and does not want him to remain
in sins or to perish.

[480 **L. 2, 142.** how Christ commands Johanni his mother 2c. **W.
XIII, 741-743.1040.** 481]{.underline}

But he does not do this as if he were pleased with sins, or that we
should remain and continue in sins. No, because he suffers for sinners,
he does not want them to remain so, but to be pious and holy and to
convert. As is seen here in the case of the thief, who turns back and
accuses himself of his sins, but hopes that he will enjoy the Lord
Christ, so that his sins will not harm him in eternal life.

Thus he becomes a different man, and his death, which he deserved
shamefully, now becomes a service to God, so that he no longer suffers
as a murderer, but as a true saint. For he dies in true confession and
heartfelt trust in the grace of God through Christ, and is heartily
sorry for his sin; and if God left him longer on earth, he would never
do what he did before. Such faith in Christ not only makes him a saint,
but also brings him to paradise and eternal life; as the Lord Christ
promises him: "Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in
paradise.

(33) We should follow this example and not think about it as crude and
ungodly people do.

sins: I will sin, that Christ may redeem me, and shew forth his grace in
me. No, not at all, but remember: I was born in sins, I am full of filth
and evil desires, therefore I must not begin to sin at all, so that I
may boast that I am a sinner; I am a sinner before, I am ready for sins
and death. Therefore, I will hold on to Him who paid for sinners through
His suffering, and through His innocent death redeemed me from the
well-deserved and long-suffering death and reconciled me to God.

But whoever abuses such a sermon of grace, does not refrain from sins,
does not confess them, nor does not want to be sorry, let him look at
the other murderer on the left, the rulers of the Jews and the soldiers,
and consider how they have been advised to do this and what they have
earned with the unrepentant life. For if you want to enjoy the Lord
Christ and his suffering and prayer, you have to follow the way of the
other sewer, who confesses his sin, asks for mercy, and confesses the
Lord Christ, that he is a Lord and King of eternal life. May our dear
Lord Christ grant us this. Amen.

**The twelfth sermon.**

How the Lord Christ John commanded his mother, and the soldiers did not
break the legs of the Lord Christ, but opened his side with a spear, and
at the same time blood and water flowed out.

**John 19:25-37.**

And by the cross stood Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister Mary,
Cleophas' wife, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his
mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he saith unto his
mother, Woman, behold thy son. Afterward he saith unto the disciple,
Behold, this is thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her
unto him. After this, when Jesus knew that all things were finished,
that the scripture should be fulfilled, he said, I thirst. There was a
vessel full of vinegar. And they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put
it about hyssop, and held it to his mouth. When Jesus had taken the
vinegar, he said, "It is finished," and bowed his head and died. But
the Jews, because it was the preparation day, lest the dead bodies
should remain on the cross through the sabbath (for the sabbath day was
great),

[482 2, 142-144. how Christus Johanni commands his mother 2c. W. XIII,
1041-1045. 483]{.underline}

They asked Pilate to break their legs and take them off. Then came the
soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other that was
crossed with him. But when they came to Jesus, seeing that he was
already dead, they did not break his legs, but one of the soldiers
opened his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.
And he that saw it hath borne witness, and his testimony is true; and he
knoweth that he speaketh the truth, that ye also may believe. For these
things have come to pass, that the scripture might be fulfilled: You
shall not break his leg. And again another scripture saith, They shall
see in whom they have bruised.

1. St. John reports three pieces at the end of the Passion, since the
other evangelists do not write anything about them, and yet they are
particularly useful for teaching and comfort. Therefore, so that we may
have this history in its entirety, let us also take it with us.

The first is that the Lord on the cross commanded his mother to John,
and again John to his mother, that they, as mother and child, should be
minded toward one another, love one another, and show all goodness. As
John says, he took the mother of the Lord into his care and kept her as
his mother.

(3) Such history is commonly referred to the fourth commandment, which
says: "You shall honor your father and mother, and God will grant you
long life and happiness. As John, who is praised here for this good
work, lived longer than other apostles, namely sixty-eight years after
the resurrection of Christ. Although this is not wrongly interpreted, it
is much too narrow. For what the Lord does and says here on the cross is
not to be reduced to a few or individual persons. With his work and
words he covers the whole world, but especially his Christian church.

(4) Therefore, although Christ speaks this word to Mary and John
alone, we must also let it be a common command to all Christians and the
whole church, that we should all be like mother and son to one another
(because Christ hangs on the cross and redeems us all from sin and death
through his death), who love one another dearly, and help and counsel
one another in whatever way they can. So that it is the same with what
the Lord repeated very often in the last supper: "This is my
commandment, that you love one another, even as I love you.

A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have
loved you." For you will not find a more heartfelt and higher love than
that which exists between mother and children.

5 But especially because the Lord uses the little word "mother" and
"son", he looks at the church government, that is, at both parts.
First, to those who speak the word, and then to the hearers. For just as
a mother nurtures a child and waits with all her diligence until it
grows strong, so do righteous preachers, taking pains and labor until
they teach the people and make fine Christians out of them. That is why
Paul calls his disciples children, whom he raised with toil and labor
like a mother. Where things are right in the church, those who lead the
preaching ministry should have a mother's heart toward the church. For
where such a heart is not there, one becomes slothful and discontented,
and especially unwilling to suffer; as the Lord very finely shows in
John 21, when he makes Peter a preacher, and first asks him three times,
"Simon Johanna, do you love me?" As if to say, "Unless your heart is
toward the sheep, as a mother's heart is toward her children, running
through a fire, only that she may save her children, you will not be fit
for any preacher: toil, labor, ingratitude, hatred, envy, and all manner
of suffering will meet you in such a ministry; where then the mother's
heart, the great love, is not there to drive the preachers, there the
sheep will be in for a bad time.

(6) On the other hand, those who do not have the ministry of
preaching, but need to be taught and instructed, should be sons and let
themselves be instructed, guided, nourished, and otherwise cared for,
and especially treated like a godly child toward its mother. Love is
well known in children.

**484 V. 2,i44-i46. As Christ commands John his mother 2c. W. xm,
1045-1048. 485**

Although love is not so great in relation to the mother, as the saying
goes: Amor descendit, non ascendit, love is a herb that grows more under
itself than over itself; yet nature drives pious children to have their
parents in honor, to serve them gladly again, and to please them in
everything that is dear and useful to them. So it is fine between mother
and son, preacher and church.

But where there is a lack of one, that either the church servants do not
have the motherly heart, or the listeners do not perform childlike
faithfulness, it is not possible that it can go right, or God can have a
pleasure in it. As we unfortunately experience with the pope, bishops
and the whole bunch of them; they lack a motherly heart. They let
themselves think that they have the office only because they are great
lords and should have good days. For this reason, not only are the sheep
badly cared for, but they also oppress them and slaughter them for their
own pleasure in body, goods and soul, as is unfortunately evident.
Again, there is also often a lack of listeners, that they, as unborn
children, treat their pastors badly; as can be seen in our peasants,
burghers, and especially in the nobility, that they are so exact,
meager, and felt towards their pastors, and there is seldom one who
willingly gives to the preaching ministry what he is obliged to give.
Yet St. Paul seriously admonishes that one should not be sparing with
temporal things toward those who communicate spiritual things to us. And
it is not possible, such ingratitude must harm the Gospel very well,
besides the fact that God does not want to let such naughty children go
unpunished.

8 Therefore note this command of the Lord Christ, who on the cross
provides both for the preachers and the sheep or church. He exhorts the
preachers to motherly love, but the listeners and the church to
childlike faithfulness, gratitude and obedience. This is how things are
done, and God wants to be there with happiness and blessing. That is the
first thing.

(9) The other two pieces, how Christ's leg was not broken and his
side was not opened with a spear, do not look like something special.
And yet, because the Evan

When St. John the Evangelist brings forth bright testimonies of the
Scriptures, that Moses and Zechariah prophesied such things so many
hundred years before, we must confess that such two pieces can be
considered as small as they always want to be; for the Holy Spirit
speaks nothing in vain nor in vain. And this is a special and true
apostolic grace in St. John the Evangelist, that he so artfully guides
and interprets the Scriptures everywhere.

(10) In Moses, as we have heard above, there is a clear command that
no man shall be left hanging on the wood overnight, for, says God, the
ground is defiled thereby. Since it was the preparation day and the
Sabbath was to begin with the setting of the sun, the Jews asked Pilate
to remove the bodies from the cross so that they could be buried before
nightfall and before the celebration began. Pilate agreed to this with
the Jews. But since the two murderers were not yet dead, John says, the
soldiers, by the command of the Jews, helped them completely, smashed
their arms and hands on the cross, so that they were dead. And they were
willing to deal with the Lord Jesus in the same way. But before they
could deal with the two murderers, he was different; therefore they did
not break his leg. But one of the soldiers took a spear and opened his
side; blood and water flowed out in different ways, so that everyone was
amazed. This seems to have been an entirely innocent act; but, as I
said, John testifies that it was not an innocent act, for Moses had
prophesied long before that they would not break his leg, and Zechariah
that they would stab him.

11 Now it is certain that Moses says this about the paschal lamb, in the
12th chapter of the second and fourth book. *) Now how does the
evangelist John come to this, or what does he mean when he says: "This
has happened, that the Scripture might be fulfilled: You shall not break
his leg"? Answer: This is what he means, and what he wants to point out
to us, that we should

*2 Mos. 12, 46; 4 Mos. 9, 12.

486 **L. 2, 146-148.** how Christus Johanni commands his mother 2c. **W.
XIII, 1048-1051.** 487

There on the cross should look at and recognize as the right paschal
lamb, which that in the law has only been a model or figure.

(12) For when God wished to deafen Pharaoh in Egypt with power, and to
resist his stiff-necked will and nobility, and to save his people, he
commanded his people the Jews to slaughter a yearling lamb in every
house that night, and to roast and eat it, and to mark the posts of the
door with the blood. Wherever the angel of strangulation found such a
sign of blood on the door, he was to pass by and not strangle anyone in
the same house. Again, where the door was not marked with the blood of
the lamb, the angel was to choke all the firstborn of cattle and men
throughout the land of Egypt that night. As Moses had told his people by
God's command, so it happened. In the morning, dead men and cattle were
found in all the houses of Egypt; only among the Jews the angel of
strangulation had done no harm, for their doors were marked and insured
with the blood of the lamb.

(13) Therefore behold our paschal lamb, the Lord Christ, who will
punish Pharaoh and all Egypt, that is, sin, death and the devil, and
will put an end to the tyranny of his Christian church; for this reason
he lets himself be killed like the paschal lamb and roasted on the wood
of the cross, so that he may sprinkle us with his blood, and the angel
of strangulation, who brought us to death for our sins and gained power
over us, may pass over before us and do us no harm. As Paul finely says,
1 Cor. 5:7: "We have a paschal lamb, which is Christ, sacrificed for
us"; that is, that we should enjoy His blood, and that the devil, death
and sin should find no power over us, nor do us any harm. This is what
John wants us to learn here, because Christ, just like the paschal lamb,
has not had a leg broken.

(14) But let us also look at the other circumstances, how the Jews
kept the paschal lamb, so that when we see how it rhymes so finely with
the Lord Jesus, we may take comfort in this sacrifice made for us, and
accept it all the more diligently.

The paschal lamb had to be one year old, male, and without any
infirmities, healthy and beautiful, otherwise it could not be taken as a
paschal lamb. This means that this little paschal lamb, the Lord Christ,
will produce and build a church for himself; for year-old lambs are
fertile and can produce others. But the Lord Christ is without change,
for he is the Son of God, and has not, as we have, sinful flesh and
blood, but is holy altogether.

16 Such a little lamb was taken from a flock and kept alone until the
fourth day. So Christ came out of the host of God, the Jews, as he was
named and called a son of Abraham, David 2c.; that he was set apart in
the four years before his suffering for the but ministry of preaching
the kingdom of God among his people, the Jews.

(17) The paschal lamb was eaten in the evening to signify that Christ
was to come in the last days, when the people of God, the Jews, were to
perish, and Moses and his worship were to cease. For this reason the
Lord sometimes compares his gospel to a supper or night meal; and the
apostles call the time of the New Testament the last time and days.

The paschal lamb was neither boiled nor eaten raw, but roasted. The fire
is called suffering and temptation everywhere in the Scriptures. So the
roasted paschal lamb is Christ, who suffers death on the cross. It is
not to be eaten raw, that is, whoever wants to enjoy it must not be
crude, safe and godless; like our Epicureans, who think that if they do
what they want, they will still be good Christians. But they do not eat
the paschal lamb properly, they cannot enjoy it; just as little as those
who eat it boiled in water, that is, those who do not keep the doctrine
pure and counterfeit the doctrine of faith with the doctrines and
statutes of men, as the pope does.

(19) For the paschal lamb also they had to eat unleavened bread and
sour salts. So, says Paul, we should also keep Easter, not in the old
leaven, so that we let sin have its reins and do not want to improve
ourselves;

488 **8.2, 148-iso. How Christ commands Johanni his mother 2c. W. xm,
1051-1053.** 489

nor in the leaven of malice and wickedness, that we should deal in
hypocrisy, and not be converted from the heart: but we are to keep
Easter in the sweet dough of sincerity, that we may keep ourselves in
good conscience, and live in the fear of God; and in the truth, that it
is not hypocrisy, but a right earnestness, that we should call upon God
for his grace to such things, and desire from the heart to keep his
word. This is unleavened bread and sweet dough.

20 The salse means the holy cross, because, as Paul says, it is not
absent; all who want to live godly in Christ must suffer persecution.

(21) Nothing of the paschal lamb was to be left over; it was to be
eaten whole, or what remained was to be burned with fire, and not a bone
was to be broken in it. It is the same with the Lord Christ: whoever
wants to be a true Christian must not eat this and leave that; he must
accept and believe everything that Christ says, and not eat it
piecemeal, as the fanatics and the mobs do. Arius put up with
everything, but he did not want to believe that Christ was eternal God.
Anabaptists do not put up with the baptism of children, despise such
first baptism and seek a better baptism. Today's sacrament devotees
accept everything that Christ says and make themselves believe that they
are good Christians. But they do not like it and do not want to believe
that Christ, when he gives the bread, says: "Take, eat, this is my
body"; and when he offers the cup to them: "Drink from it, all of you,
this is the New Testament in my blood. Such things are not to their
taste, they do not leave them alone (since it is God's command that one
should not overload anything on this little paschal lamb, but eat it
all, or burn the rest with fire), but break the legs, that is, they
torture, crucify and break the word of our Lord Christ as they please,
only to make a pretense of their shameful error. Thus it is found in the
Anabaptists, in the pope, and in all the mobs, that they eat what they
like of this paschal lamb; the other, which they do not like, they leave
over, or break.

22. But what was to be done with the blood is indicated above, namely,
that this lamb's blood should serve us, so that neither sin, death nor
hell should harm us, and Pharaoh the devil, with his Egyptians, the
world, should no longer oppress or oppress us. For this is why Christ
was offered up, that he might make us free, John 8, and dissolve and
destroy the work of the wicked devil.

23 John reminded us of this when he said, "It is now fulfilled that
Moses said, 'You shall not break his leg. In this way he wants to show
us the whole custom and the true fruit of the suffering of our Lord
Christ, that he was sacrificed for us, and that through his blood we are
purged from sins and death and the devil, which, as Pharaoh held and
afflicted the children of Israel in Egypt, always press us and afflict
us and drive us. But through the blood of our paschal Lamb Christ JEsu
they are satisfied, and we are pacified, so that we are freed from all
burdens and come out of the shameful Egypt into the Promised Land and to
eternal life.

(24) Now let us consider the third part, in which, as can be seen, the
evangelist is particularly concerned, since he not only includes the
testimony of the prophet Zechariah, who prophesied of such sideways
stitching, but also with so many earnest words testifies to the
miraculous sign that blood and water flowed out of the dead corpse. For
both are unnatural: as soon as a man dies, his blood is also cold and
dead, and no longer flows; and this is even more contrary to nature,
that blood and water should flow differently from a dead corpse.
Therefore John says, "He that hath seen hath borne witness, and he
knoweth that he saith true, that ye also may believe." The purpose of
this miraculous work, as there was much to it, is that we may diligently
meditate on it and finally learn to believe from it; that is, as we said
above about the little paschal lamb, we may hope for forgiveness of sins
and eternal life through the Lord Christ and his death. This is the main
purpose of this story, and it is true

490 **L. 2, 150-152.** how Christus Johanni commands his mother 2c. **W.
XIII, 1053-1056.** 491

the prophet is extremely fine with the evangelist, as we will show
hereafter.

(25) Therefore, first of all, you must drop these thoughts, as if it
was a harmless (accidental) act that the one soldier went and stabbed
the dead body. It was harmless to him, he had no special thought about
it; but it happened out of God's special order, otherwise the Holy
Spirit would not have prophesied about it so many hundred years before.
Thus we see that the Lord Christ keeps such wounds in His body after His
resurrection, and especially instructs His disciples that they should
know Him thereby. Therefore it is not a harmless act, it should have
meant something special, should have had an effect and should have had
an effect, that the Lord was thus stabbed in the side and blood and
water flowed out.

26 Therefore take heed that you do not do as crude men commonly do, and
think, What is it to me what has flowed out of the Lord Christ's side?
It is enough for me that I know that he died on the cross. So do not
think, but for the honor of the Holy Spirit and for your comfort, listen
diligently to what such a transaction entails, which John so faithfully
describes and Zechariah so long before prophesied.

First, it is certain, and no one can deny it, that it is unnatural for a
dead body to sweat or bleed. For as soon as the blood cools, it no
longer flows, but stops. But here we have a special dead body; therefore
it is different from others. He is flesh and blood, just like our
bodies, and dies. But because his flesh and blood are without sin, he
dies in such a way that even in death a sign of life remains. Otherwise
the blood would cool down and stop, but in the body of the Lord Christ
it remains warm and alive, so that as soon as the side is opened, it
jumps, as if one were to open the vein of a healthy person. This is what
John wants us to notice diligently, and to learn from it the right kind
of blood of our dear Lord Christ, namely, that it flows, lives and has
its effect even after death. Just as the blood of the paschal lamb was
enjoyed by the

Jews not because it was alive, but because it had died and they had
eaten it; for the angel went through Egypt by night and choked all the
first births; but the houses of the Jews, when the lamb's blood was on,
he left and choked no one in them. So the blood of our dear Lord Christ
still lives and flows, it is not stagnant or cold; it flows and leaps
after he is dead, and all who are sprinkled by it have forgiveness of
sins and are children of eternal life.

28 Learn this. For this unnatural flowing indicates that the blood of
our dear Lord Christ, the true paschal lamb, should have and retain its
effect, power and virtue even after his death, that it should flow, leap
around and mark the faithful standing by the cross, so that the devil,
death and sin may leave all those on whom they find such a mark
satisfied and not harm them. This is the true nature, power and virtue
of the blood of our dear Lord Christ, and it remains in the church
forever after his death.

29 Why is it that not only blood flows out, but also water? This was
undoubtedly done to show that no one would sprinkle the blood of our
dear Lord Christ except those baptized in his name. As our Lord Christ
himself says, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he
that believeth not shall be damned." That therefore both are together:
where the blood of Christ is and worketh, there is the water, blessed
baptism, also; again, where the water floweth not, that is, where holy
baptism is not, there is the blood of Christ also not, it floweth not,
as, among Turks, Jews, Gentiles 2c. For and for blood and water will and
should flow with each other and none without the other.

(30) Mark this very well, for much is at stake: not for those who died
in the Old Testament and did not experience baptism, for they had their
own baptism and were saved by faith in the Blessed Seed; nor for our
infants, who in their mother's womb and before they are baptized are
overtaken by death, who no doubt, because God has given them a baptism,
are not saved.

492 **L. 2, 152-184.** how Christ commands Johanni his mother 2c. **W.
XIII, 1056-1059.** 493

But for our own sakes, that we should not slight such a sign of grace,
nor keep ourselves and ours from it. For where the water of this baptism
is, there the blood of our Lord Christ is; for here both water and blood
flow from his side. But the purpose of his blood is shown above, namely,
that we may be protected against the strangler angel, be cleansed from
sins, and live forever. The prophet indicates this very finely and
agrees with the evangelist. For thus he speaks in the 12th chap. V. 10:
"Upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, I will
pour out the spirit of grace and of prayer: for they shall look upon me
whom they have bruised, and shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for a
child, and shall be grieved for him, as one is grieved for a first
child.

First of all, it is undeniable that the prophet speaks of the New
Testament times and the grace that is to come to us through the death of
Christ. But such grace is that God gives the spirit of grace and the
spirit of prayer, that is, by his Holy Spirit he comforts our hearts, so
that through Christ we provide ourselves with all grace and mercy to
God, and in all troubles call upon him and seek help, as little children
do to their father.

On the other hand, John shines a true apostolic spirit in front of us
and says: The stabbing, which the prophet further reports, was fulfilled
at that time at the cross. But what will follow from such a stabbing,
the prophet indicates, and says: "They will look at him", who have the
spirit of grace and prayer, and "will mourn him, as one mourns for a
child, and grieve over him, as one grieves over the first child. Such
mourning and grieving is nothing else, but that we may rightly learn in
our Lord Christ the sin for which he suffered on the cross. For the fact
that they look upon him as he is bruised, and mourn and are grieved for
him, is a sign that he is innocent and suffers all things for our sake.

(33) Such suffering causes us to recognize our distress and misery and
to deal with it.

We must not go safely into the world in sins, but lament our sinful
heart and evil life, ask God for forgiveness, hold on to the suffering
of Christ and console ourselves with it, as the one who is holy and
obedient to God, and for this reason was not guilty of such death, and
yet took it upon himself and suffered it out of unspeakable love for our
sake.

34 We need such compassion, sorrow and lamentation; Christ also needs
it, for otherwise he has no Christian church. This church alone, as
Zechariah says here, looks at the bruised Christ and weeps over him, not
like the women of Jerusalem, who wept over Christ so that they did not
think of themselves. But the Christians or Christian church weeps
because it recognizes its sin, for which Christ suffered death. Thus the
prophet finely points to the fruit of Christ's suffering. And soon
after, in chapter 13, v. 1, he says: "At that time the house of David
and the citizens of Jerusalem will have a free and open fountain against
sin and impurity."

(35) Behold, how finely the prophet joins the sting and the fountain,
that is, the blood and the water, or holy baptism. If then thou wilt
rightly interpret this history, say, Out of the side of the Lord Christ
flows blood for the washing away and remission of my sins, as the Lord
himself testifieth in the Lord's Supper, when he offereth the cup; and
water also floweth out. So that his body is an open fountain. For what
purpose? Against sin and impurity. For through baptism the blood of our
Lord Christ is administered to us, as St. Paul speaks of it, saying:
"We were baptized into the death of Jesus Christ, that is, so that the
death of Jesus Christ might be ours and that we might enjoy it, so that
through it we might be freed from sin and death and live forever.

From this the holy fathers took the beautiful sayings. Augustine says:
John uses the word "open" ("one of the soldiers opened his side") to
indicate how the door of life was opened at that time, since the holy
sacraments of the church flowed here, without which one could not attain
to life, which is the right life.

494 **D- 2, 154-156.** How Christ was laid in a new tomb. **W. XIII,
IV5S-1061.** 495

cannot enter. The holy sacraments, he says; for he speaks not only of
baptism, which is signified by water, but also of the supper, where one
drinks the blood of the Lord Christ inside. As Chrysostom also says and
says: "Since the holy mysteries have their origin here, when you go to
the holy chalice, you should go as if you were going to drink from the
side of the Lord Christ.

(37) Such a saying is not used by the sacramentalists, who boast that
the whole ancient church held to its opinion that in the supper there is
only bread and wine, and not the body and blood of Christ. But how does
this rhyme with Chrysostom? For they cannot be so blind and foolish as
to say that wine flowed from the side of Christ, just as they say that
in the Last Supper one does not drink the blood of Christ, but only
wine. Yet Chrysostom says: "Whoever goes to this cup should go as if to
drink from the side of the Lord Christ; there they will find not wine
but His blood.

(38) And hence it came to pass, that in the supper of the Lord the cup
was mixed with water, because blood and water flowed together out of the
Lord Christ's side. Cyprian argues strongly that such mixing should not
be omitted as a special command of Christ, and the Armenians have been
condemned as heretics for it. But because Christ did not command such,
and

In the supper there is nothing more than that Christ took the cup and
gave it to the disciples, it is unnecessary to make such a necessary
commandment out of it.

(39) Therefore let us leave these things, and keep the doctrine to
which the holy evangelist directs us, namely, that the blood of our dear
Lord Christ shall keep its power and effect in us after his death, and
preserve us against death and sin, if we are baptized with water
according to the commandment of Christ. For there the blood of Christ is
actually found, as it is indicated here, that blood and water flow
together: where the blood is, there is the water also; and where the
water is, there is the blood also, and accomplishes what it should,
namely, that it washes away sin and makes completely clean. As Zechariah
prophesied of the open fountain against sin and uncleanness.

40 Therefore we should thank God for His unspeakable grace and mercy,
that He has allowed us to come to such a fountain, to be baptized in the
name of Jesus, His Son, and thus washed away all our sins with the blood
of our Lord Christ, so that from now on we may provide ourselves with
everything good to God through the Holy Spirit and cry out to Him
through the spirit of prayer in all kinds of distress; until finally the
last fruit of Christ's death is found, so that through Him we may come
out of this miserable life to eternal life. May God grant this to us
all, amen.

**The thirteenth sermon.**

How the Lord Christ was taken down from the cross and laid in a new
tomb, and the tomb was kept by the soldiers.

**Matth. 27, 57-66.**

In the evening there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who
was also a disciple of Jesus. He went to Pilate and asked for the body
of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded that it should be given to him. And
Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in clean linen. And laid it in his
own new sepulchre, which he had hewn out of a rock, and rolled a great
stone before the door.

496 **D- 2, 1S6.157.** How Christ was laid in a new tomb. **W. XIII,
1061-1065.** 497

of the tomb and went away. And Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were
there, and sat down by the sepulchre. The next day, after the day of
preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees all came to Pilate and
said: Lord, we thought that this deceiver spoke while he was still
alive: I will rise again after three days. Therefore command that the
sepulcher be kept until the third day, lest his disciples come and steal
him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead; and let
the last deception be worse than the first. Pilate said to them: There
ye have the keepers; go and keep as ye know. And they went and covered
the sepulchre with keepers, and sealed the stone.

This is the end of the history of the passion of our Lord Christ, how he
was taken down from the cross, laid in a new tomb, and the tomb was kept
by the soldiers. But it rhymes exceedingly well with the conclusion. For
there it is seen what the death of our dear Lord Christ has wrought,
both in his friends and in his enemies. The enemies become restless and
fearful, and visibly fall deeper into sin. But those who love the Lord
Christ and faithfully believe in him, even though they are weak and
fearful people, become confident and bold through the death of Christ,
and now dare to do what they could not have dreamed of before. But as
the death of our dear Lord Christ wrought these things at that time, so
it is to this day, as we shall hear hereafter.

(2) The trouble was very heavy and great, that the Lord Jesus should
die so shamefully on the cross; therefore his enemies blasphemed him to
the utmost. His disciples, however, who had stayed with him until then,
were not allowed to be seen, because they could not think of anything
else than that it was now over with him. His mother, the dear Virgin
Mary, stood there like a sorrowful woman, and with her other women. Even
though she had firmly adhered to the angel's sermon and the holy
people's prophecy about the infant Jesus, her heartache was so great
and her sorrow so painful that she would not let herself hear anything
special. So that for the sake of the multitude that had stayed with the
Lord Christ and had been around him until then, there is complete
silence; no one is allowed to stir or be heard. The enemies of Christ
keep the field, they are confident and of good cheer, the cry is all
theirs alone, otherwise everyone must be silent.

3) But why such weakness and stupidity?

For the sake of the goodness of the devout heart, it has been said above
that no one should be presumptuous or have too much confidence in
himself. For if these pious hearts are in such a state here that they
almost forget all comfort and are drowned in sorrow and lamentation, how
much more can such stupidity be found among us when we have to dare and
suffer something for the sake of the gospel. Therefore, we must keep in
the fear of God and ask the Holy Spirit to cheer our hearts, fill them
with comfort, and make us bold enough to dare and suffer for the sake of
the glory of God and His Word.

4 When the trouble was at its greatest, and those who had been the
finest Christians and had always kept themselves unashamedly around the
Lord Christ were cringing and cowering, and did not know what to do or
where to stay because of fear, sorrow and displeasure, first Joseph of
Arimathea (which is otherwise called Jos. 15, and in the book of Judges,
chapter 9, v. 41, Aruma) was found. He dared to go to Pilate and asked
that the dead body be granted to him, that he might take it down from
the cross and bury it on earth. Nicodemus, who had been so fearful
before, although he loved to hear the Lord and loved him, came to him
only at night. He brings myrrh and aloes for a hundred pounds, which is
our coin for three and a half florins, so that the Lord may not have a
bad but an honest burial. For it was the custom of the Jews, as reported
by John, because they had the hope of resurrection and eternal life from
the Word of God, to bury the deceased bodies honestly in the ground, and
to bury them with myrrh and aloes.

498 **2, 137-159. How Christ was laid in a new tomb. W. XIII,
1065-1067.** 499

They were prepared so that they would not only remain long and slowly
decay, but also smell nice and pleasant.

Now Lucas and Marcus report especially of Joseph that he was a disciple
of the Lord Christ, that is, that he had diligently listened to his
preaching and had put up with it, and that he had waited for the kingdom
of God. We must have good regard for this piece of evidence, for it will
be found what moved him to do such a thing, that he dared and went
before Pilate. For it was not a bad bargain.

The chief priests and the whole council of Jerusalem had complained to
the Lord Jesus as a rebel, a deceiver and a blasphemer, and Pilate had
passed judgment on such a complaint. That Joseph should now come
forward, who had previously spoken out against all actions taken against
the Lord Jesus, and had not wanted to be present, and now asks for the
body of Christ, so that he may bury it honestly in the ground: such a
thing could not have been dared well; for he had thereby burdened the
whole council, even Pilate himself, who had condemned the Lord, and had
sufficiently given to understand that he believed it to have been a
pious, righteous man, who had been wronged in the sight of God and the
world.

(7) But what moves him to do such a thing, that he dares to be so
arid? Nothing else, but that he waits for the kingdom of God. That is,
he still has the hope, although Christ hangs miserably on the cross and
dies, that God's kingdom will not remain outside, but will come, and
that God will accomplish through this dead Christ everything that is
promised in the prophets about the Messiah and his kingdom. For if the
centurion, who stood at the judgment and saw the Lord pass away, learns
so much from these and other things that he freely confesses, "Truly,
this man was the Son of God," Marc. 15:39, then this same Joseph and
the pious Nicodemus will undoubtedly have grasped such thoughts as well,
and not only from the sermons of the prophets, but from the words of the
Lord Christ, which they have heard several times and have now first of
all brought to their hearts through the remembrance of the Holy Spirit,
they will actually have learned the

The Lord had hope that it would not be over with him, but that God would
establish his kingdom now, when everyone thinks of it the least. As the
Lord preached a good sermon to Nicodemus about such hope, John 3, when
he held up to him the likeness of the serpent in the wilderness and said
that he too would have to be lifted up on the wood.

At that time, the Holy Spirit kindled such thoughts in the weak and
stupid hearts and heated them to such an extent that Joseph went before
Pilate and asked for the body of the Lord Christ, whom he had condemned
as a rebel and blasphemer. Nicodemus, however, brings myrrh and aloes,
so that the Lord may have a delicious, honest burial, and so that they
may testify to all the world that their hope is not all over, that
God's kingdom will still be found, that the world will defy it as it
wills, and that Christ will present himself as weak and miserable as he
wills.

9. Now this is the fruit of the death of our Lord Christ, that the
weakest, most stupid hearts come forward without all shyness and fear,
confess Christ, bury his body, which hangs there in all dishonor, in the
most honest way; as a testimony that against the Jews, the high priests,
Pilate and all the enemies of Christ, they consider him to be the Son of
God and praise him, hope in his kingdom, and take comfort in him even
now that he is dead, and everyone believes that he is completely gone.
For this is what Marcus and Lucas say, that Joseph waited for the
kingdom of God, that is, he hoped that God would establish a new kingdom
on earth through this man, forgive sin, give the Holy Spirit and make
him eternally blessed. For this is actually called God's kingdom, which
is promised in the prophets that the Christian or Messiah will establish
it.

(10) Just as Isaiah prophesied of Christ, "He will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoldering wick," so Joseph and Nicodemo
are seen here. Until now, they have been weak, stupid Christians; fear
has hurt them so much that they were not allowed to make themselves
known publicly. Nicodemus only came to Jesus at night, which is why John
calls him a secret disciple. But Christ

**500 2, 159-162.** How Christ was laid in a new tomb. **W. XIII,
1067-1070. 501**

The Holy Spirit is too good for them and does not want to push them away
from such fear. But now that the danger is greatest, and those who were
otherwise strong and courageous Christians were not allowed to let
themselves be seen anywhere, the Holy Spirit works through the death of
Christ, so that the smoldering and almost extinguished little light
flares up and shines like the beautiful sun. For what Joseph has
secretly believed and held about Christ, he now lets everyone see, and
does not shy away from the Jews or the Pilates. He cares more about
Christ, who died in all dishonor, than about the whole world. Let this
not be a small work nor bad fruit of the suffering of Christ.

11. But this is an example for all of us, that we should follow this
Joseph and Nicodemo, and when Christ hangs on the cross, that is, when
the gospel is persecuted and the poor Christians are martyred over it,
we should come forward and, regardless of the tyrants, praise the Son of
God and his word, and honor it with public confession; until the dead
Christ is seen with his glorious resurrection, and then the
fainthearted, stupid, fearful Christians will also be comforted, and
come to confession again.

For this change will always remain in the church. Some and the strongest
will be weak and will not be able to hold on to their anger. Again, the
weakest will stand out and make themselves heard with joyful confession,
so that there will never be a lack of people who recognize and confess
Christ. The strong will not or cannot do it because of the astonishment;
they must learn and experience how nothing a man is, whom God sets apart
from us with His Spirit: so the very weakest, who do not have the
reputation, must do it. For God, as a rich householder, wants to have
all kinds of servants in his house, not only the strong and the strong,
but also the small and the weak. So that the strong may not despise
anyone, they must learn their weakness from themselves; and that no one
may judge another, the Spirit of God comes upon the weak, comforting,
consoling and strengthening them in such a manner that

Everyone must see and praise the divine power in them. This is what our
dear Lord Christ's suffering does for and in his church, so that his
Christianity may not perish, but remain, grow, and expand.

(13) But how is it on the other side, when one is hostile to the Lord
Christ, and cannot rest until they bring him to the cross? There the
contradiction is found. For just as the sun has its effect on matter (it
softens and melts wax, but makes dung hard and dry), so it is here also.
Through the suffering of our Lord Christ, the pious hearts become
confident and bold, and now dare what they could not dare before Christ
lived. But the godless Jews, who therefore hastened with the Lord Christ
to death, hoping that when he was down there would be no more need, when
they have accomplished their will, and Christ is now dead on the cross,
and laid in a new sepulchre, they are at first troubled, and all run
before Pilate, saying, "Lord, we have heard that this deceiver spake
while he yet lived: Therefore command that the sepulcher be kept until
the third day, lest his disciples come and steal him away, and say to
the people that he is risen from the dead, and that the last deception
be worse than the first.

(14) Mark these words diligently, and thou shalt see what manner of
heart they have. They have well noted and rightly understood the
preaching of the Lord Christ, but what fruit does it bear them? Joseph
and Nicodemus, who undoubtedly kept the same sermon and comforted
themselves with it, are cheerful and happy about it and hope for all the
best. But these peelers become restless and begin to fear the dead man,
since it is natural when someone knows his enemy is dead that he no
longer worries about him. This cannot and will not be the case with the
godless Jews, as you see, they are afraid of the dead Christ now that he
lies in the grave.

15) In Pilato's case they pretend that his disciples want to steal
him, saying,

502 **2, 162-164. How Christ was laid in a new tomb. W. xm, 1070-1073.**
503

But in their hearts the word of the Lord Christ is a sharp and piercing
thorn, so that they fear, "Dear, how if it were true? How if he were
the Messiah, and rose again from the dead? How would it be for us? They
become restless and restless because of this. But they do not amend such
thoughts, they do not think: Oh, what have we done! Let us still crawl
to the cross, and not despise such an excellent warning and miraculous
work, which have now been seen with his death. No, such thoughts will
not enter into them; but as they have sat with hatred and enmity toward
the Lord Christ, so they remain, and become visibly angrier and angrier,
seeking ways and means as they can, that they may dampen the Lord and
hinder his glory.

1,6 This is also an example and warning to us here: when we see such
things in the enemies of the word, that we are not frightened by them.
For so it shall be: Whoever knowingly goes against the word, the longer,
the deeper he will fall into sin, and the more he seeks rest, the more
restless and anxious he will become. As we have heard above about the
blood of our Lord Christ. It was easy for the Jews to bring Christ to
the cross and let him be strangled; with well-considered, light, little
courage they said: "His blood be upon us and our children. But
afterwards it was found how small a thing it had been that Jerusalem and
the whole land had to be turned back because of it. So it is here also.
All their thoughts were: If only this Jesus were dead, there would be no
more need. God hanged them and let Christ die on the cross. But at that
time, the trade increased, and they had less peace than before. The word
of the Lord Christ, which they did not believe, was in their hearts like
a burning fire and a gnawing worm. They could not believe it, yet they
could not despise it. So it shall be with the enemies of the word. The
more they seek rest through their tyranny, the deeper they will fall not
only into trouble but also into sin. After that, there will be more
trouble.

17. when they berathschlagt everything best

they shall only make their cause worse, and promote the holy gospel
against their will; as happened to the Jews here. They desired the
Pilate Guardi, or soldiers, to the tomb for three days, and sealed the
tomb to prevent the disciples of the Lord Christ from committing a
mischievous act and stealing his body. Very wisely it was thought of,
but how did it work out? Just as they were concerned, so it happened to
them. When Christ rose from the dead early on Easter day, and the angel
came from heaven to the tomb, and there was an earthquake, and the stone
was rolled away from the door by the angel, the guardians were
frightened and lay there as if they were dead. But as soon as they came
to themselves, they got up and ran out, one from there, the other from
there, and came to Jerusalem, bringing the message to the chief priests
about what had happened to them.

What do you think they will have thought? How will their hearts have
trembled and shaken? They could not think it was a joke, because their
own witnesses, the Pilate Guardi, appointed by themselves to the grave,
were standing there; from them they not only heard what had happened,
but they could also see it; for such a great fright cannot be recovered
so soon, one hears it in the speech, one stands it in the face, the
whole body is full of it, and it staggers away. Therefore it is easy to
assume that such a message would have made the chief priests and elders
afraid.

019 But there is no recovery yet; they go deeper into sin and evil
conscience. For as soon as they hold council on the Sabbath, they give
enough money to the soldiers to help them lie, saying, "You have fallen
asleep, but his disciples have come and stolen the body. Behold, this is
the consolation which poor men make for themselves, and thus make do.
They know in their hearts that Christ, whom they innocently gave up to
death, has risen from the dead. What care they have had for him,
everyone may consider for himself; for the heart must have been troubled
by this.

504 **L. 2, 164-166. how Christ was laid in a new tomb. W. xm,
1073-1075.** 505

will be. And yet they spend a lot of money to help them lie and to
persuade people otherwise. These can be wicked hearts, possessed more
than with a devil, which so wantonly oppose the truth, and adorn and
comfort themselves with knowing lies. Learn this, that you may be
accustomed to it among the enemies of the word; for as I have said
above, he who opposes the truth cannot help himself but with lies.

20 Meanwhile our dear Lord Christ comforts his Christianity, and lets
himself be seen that he is no longer dead, but alive; and the lies of
the enemies of the word must help that the word may advance and have the
more reputation. For if the Jews themselves had not preserved the tomb,
such a lie would have had a subtle appearance, the body of the Lord
Christ would have been stolen. But since the guards are around the tomb
and the tomb is sealed with all diligence, the lie that the body of the
Lord Christ was stolen can no longer take place. The transaction itself
is sufficient proof that there was a higher and greater force than
Pilate and his soldiers; otherwise they would not have fled.

21 Thus it shall be for and for, with lies the enemies of the gospel
must help themselves; but such lies shall not only do no harm to the
word, but shall even promote it, so that everyone may learn to know and
flee the lies, and hold to the word of God and the right truth. As,
praise God, has happened in our time, and the papists have only promoted
the gospel with their lies, cries and writings. For they reveal their
lies too coarsely, and drive people to the truth with them. This is also
the fruit of the suffering of our Lord Christ, that the longer the
enemies of the word go on, the more they have to promote the truth
against their will.

22) But that the evangelists particularly report how the tomb where the
Lord was laid was in a garden, and a new tomb, where no one had laid it
before, and Joseph had himself made it.

This was done not only so that the testimony of Christ's resurrection
would be all the more certain, but also because there was a special body
here, the like of which had never been seen on earth before, so that it
had to have a special and new place to be buried.

Our dear Lord Christ had flesh and blood like us, but it was holy flesh
and blood, in which the Son of the eternal Father was clothed. Since
such flesh and blood should have had its rest, a new grave was due to
it. And yet this tomb was not his own, but Joseph's. For as Christ was
not made man for himself, but died for our sakes: so also for our sakes
he is in the grave, and his grave is our grave; that we, being raised up
by him at the last day, should live with him for ever.

24 The example of Joseph, who had his tomb made while he was still
alive, should also be noted. From this it can be assumed that he did not
forget his last hour, as people commonly do. For everyone sends himself
into the temporal life in such a way, as if we should remain here
forever. On the other hand, the godly regard their whole life here on
earth as a pilgrimage, since they have no lasting things and must always
stretch out their heads toward the right and eternal fatherland. He who
travels overland, even if he gets a good inn, does not desire to stay
there; he knows that he is not at home there. Christians do the same:
they consider life here to be an inn for the night; if they are treated
kindly, they accept it with thanks; but if it is a cold, evil,
unfaithful inn, as commonly happens, they console themselves that it is
only for one night, and that things will get better one day. So did the
pious Joseph. He was rich and a well-to-do citizen of Jerusalem, but his
thoughts were always there: Here you have no lasting, you must also go
down. Therefore, in his garden, where he had his greatest desire, he
prepared a tomb for himself, where he would await the joyful
resurrection through the Lord Christ with all the saints.

**506 8.2, 166.167. On the holy day of Easter. W. xm, 1076,1077,1098.
507**

(25) Rich people should think of such things and put such monuments in
their pleasure houses, which would remind them of the future and take
them away from the temporal. But there we learn that everyone shuns such
things and thinks only of pleasure and joy.

(26) Thus your love has the history of the passion of our Lord Christ,
in which we are to learn first of all how great and terrible a burden
sin is, since the Son of God Himself bore it so heavily and had to pay
for it with His own death; so that we may keep ourselves in the fear of
God and beware of such a burden.

27 Secondly, we should learn to comfort ourselves against sin with the
sacrifice of the Lord Christ, so that, even though sin or death may
afflict us, we may still have the comfort of knowing that Christ has
paid for our sin, and that for his sake God will be pleased with us and
remember our sin no more. Sol

These are the two most important lessons that should be held up to us in
such history and practiced by us forever.

28) After that, this history can be used for patience and suffering,
since the Son of God presents us with His own example here; item, for
love toward one's neighbor, as the Lord Himself often admonishes,
saying: "As I have loved you, so love one another. But who will or can
tell all for what we may well need the suffering of our Lord Christ?

Therefore, we should thank God for such teachings from the bottom of our
hearts, and ask Him to kindle them in our hearts through His Holy
Spirit, and to make us stronger in faith, love and patience day by day,
until we are eternally saved after this miserable life. May our gracious
Father in heaven, through his Holy Spirit, grant this to us all for the
sake of his dear Son and our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

**On the holy day of Easter.**

**The first sermon.*)**

**Matth. 28, 1-10.**

Now in the evening of the Sabbath, which dawns on the morning of the
first feast of the Sabbaths, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to
see the sepulcher. And behold, there was a great earthquake. For the
angel of the Lord came down from heaven, and stood by, and rolled away
the stone from the door, and sat upon it. And his form was as lightning,
and his raiment as white as snow. And the keepers were afraid, and
became as though they were dead. But the angel answered and said unto
the women, Fear not: I know that ye seek Jesus crucified. He is not
here; he is risen, as he said. Come and see the place where the Lord
lay, and go quickly and tell his disciples that he is risen from the
dead. And, behold, he shall go before you into Galilee, and ye shall see
him there. Behold, I have told you. And they went out hastily unto the
sepulchre with fear and great joy, and ran to tell his disciples. And as
they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, Hail.
And they came unto him, and took hold of his feet, and bowed themselves
to him. Then said JEsus unto them: Fear not: go and tell my brethren,
that they may go into Galilee, and there see me.

*) Held publicly in 1531.

**508 L- 2, 167-169. On the holy day of Easter. W. xm, 1100-1102. 509**

**Of the fruit of Christ's resurrection.**

Because today's feast holds before us the comforting and joyful article
of our faith, in that we confess that Christ rose again from the dead on
the third day, it is necessary first of all to grasp and know the
history in the most simple way, and then also to learn why this happened
and how we can enjoy it.

For the sake of history, this is how it happened. Christ was betrayed by
Judah there on Green Thursday in the evening, when he got up from supper
and went into the garden. There he was captured by the Jews and led from
one high priest to another until they finally decided to hand him over
to Pilate, the governor, who was in charge of the court. Since it was
now about three hours to the day, the sentence was passed on him, and he
was carried out to the court and crucified. At the sixth hour, that is,
at noon or an hour above, the earthquake and the darkness of the sun
came. Then, at the ninth hour, which is approximately three hours before
sunset, Christ died on the cross. So Marcus divides the hours and time;
the other evangelists do not show it so actually.

But now it is written in our faith, that Christ rose again the third
day. This is said somewhat differently than: after three days. For the
Lord Christ did not die for three whole days and nights; but on Friday,
about three hours before night, he died, as has been said. Such three
hours are called the first day. After that, all night and all day of the
Sabbath, he lay dead in the grave; and after the Sabbath, the night
until the following morning. The same night is also counted as a day.
For the Jews begin the day with the night, and to them the night and the
day are one whole day. We turn it around and make day and night a whole
day. Although it is not held so in the church. For there, today's day
always belongs to the

Evening! to the following day, and go to church festivals the night
before, before the day comes.

(4) Therefore, since it is very early on Sunday (which is the third
day from Friday, when Christ was crucified), that the dawn is about to
break, and the soldiers are lying around the tomb, the dead Christ rises
to a new and eternal life, and rises from the dead, so that the soldiers
lying around the tomb do not see such a resurrection. For from Matthew
it is good to assume that the Lord Christ did not rise in the
earthquake, but that the earthquake began when the angel came down from
heaven and removed the stone from the tomb. But Christ came through the
closed tomb, and without breaking any of the seals that were pressed
against the tomb. Just as he came to the disciples the same evening
through closed doors.

(5) Above the earthquake and the angels, the soldiers are so terrified
that they lie there dead. But as soon as they come to themselves again,
they run out of the tomb in heaps, one here, the other there. For the
angel was not there that they should be glad; but that they should be
afraid of him, and be afraid. But there were other people whom the angel
was to comfort and to speak kindly to them.

6th Now as the soldiers are running away from the tomb, Mary Magdalene,
Mary Jacob and Salome, with Peter and John after them, are going to look
at the tomb. Then the angel comforted and told the women that Christ was
no longer there, that he had risen, and that they should see him in
Galilee. And they commanded that they should go in haste and proclaim
these things to his disciples. As they are on their way back, the Lord
Christ meets Magdalene in the form of a gardener. Item, as John reports,
he also appears to Petro. And towards evening he comes to the two of
them

510 **L. 2, i69-i7i. On the holy day of Easter. W. xin, 1102-1105.** 514

He reveals himself to them when he breaks the bread or presents it to
them at the table. When the same two disciples hurriedly ran back to
Jerusalem and wanted to tell the others what they had encountered, how
they had seen the Lord, and they were amazed, yet not all of them could
believe, Jesus came through the closed doors and stood among them, John
20.

(7) So much happened on the holy day of Easter with the revelation of
our dear Lord Christ, as can be seen from the evangelists. And therefore
it is necessary that it be well known; for it is an article of our
faith, in which, as we shall hear, much depends.

Now it is not enough to know the history: one should also learn what it
serves us and how we should use it. Of the same we will now also say a
little. For even though it is preached daily throughout the year, no one
can preach it or learn it sufficiently, for it is such a rich subject.

(9) But if we are to understand the custom of the resurrection of our
Lord Christ, we must have two different images in mind. One is the sad,
miserable, shameful, miserable, bloody image that we heard about on Good
Friday, of Christ hanging in the midst of murderers and dying in great
pain. We are to look at such an image, as your love has heard, with an
undoubted heart, that it all happened for the sake of our sins, that he,
the true and eternal priest, gave himself as a sacrifice for our sin and
wanted to pay for it with his death. For every man ought to know that
his sins have wounded Christ and made him miserable, and that his
sufferings are nothing else than your sins and mine. Therefore, as often
as we think of or look at such a sad, bloody image, we should think of
nothing else but that we see our sin there. If such a sorrowful image
should always remain, then it would be terrible.

(10) But just as in faith we put these two articles together in the
most precise way: Christ was crucified, died, and was buried.

He was dead, went down to hell, and on the third day rose again from
death: so we see that this image of sorrow does not remain long. For
before three whole days are over, our dear Lord Christ brings with him
another beautiful, healthy, friendly, joyful image: so that we may
certainly learn the consolation that not only are our sins wiped out and
strangled by Christ's death, but that through his resurrection we shall
be justified and eternally saved; as St. Paul says to the Romans in
chapter 4, v. 25. Paul says to the Romans in chapter 4, v. 25: "Christ
is dead for our sins, and is raised again for our righteousness"; and 1
Cor. 15:17-19: "If Christ be not risen, your faith is vain, ye are yet
in your sins; they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are lost. And
we are the most miserable of men, if in this life alone we hope in
Christ." For just as before sins hung on his neck and pinned him to the
cross, so now you see in this other image that there is no longer any
sin in him, but righteousness; no pain or sorrow, but joy; no death, but
life; and eternal life, which is far, far above this temporal life. This
is the image we should ever rejoice in.

(11) To look at the first image by heart is a little terrible, but
look at the cause, and we should not wish it otherwise. For there you
see that God has taken away from you your sins, all of which were too
heavy for you to go down under, and has laid them on His Son, who is
eternal God and strong enough for sin. There let your sin lie. For you
will not be able to lay them better, since they will press you less nor
weigh you down. Then take this other image also before you, in which you
see how your Lord Christ, who before was so horrible and miserable
because of your sins, is now beautiful, pure, glorious and joyful, and
all sins have disappeared in him. Continue your calculation: If your
sins are not in you because of the suffering of Christ, but are taken
from you by God Himself and put on Christ, and are today on Easter Day
after His resurrection on

512k . **2, 1-1-173. On the holy day of Easter. W. xin, 1105-1108.** 513

Nor Christ anymore: where will they be? Is it not true, as Micah says,
that they are sunk into the depth of the sea, that neither devil nor any
creature shall find them any more?

(12) Now this is the glorious, joyful article of our faith, which
alone makes Christians, and yet is a mockery to all the world, and is
profaned and blasphemed by everyone. For popes and cardinals are
commonly of the kind that they consider history itself a laughter and a
fairy tale, are good Pliniani, who laugh even more when one speaks of
another and eternal life, after this life. So you see in our nobility,
item, burghers and peasants that they believe it more out of a habit
than that they are serious that there is another life. Otherwise they
should ever keep to it, and not take so much care of this temporal life,
food, honor and other things, but rather strive for the eternal. But let
them preach and say what they will, and reason will think it
foolishness. So this article resists, and does not want to go so deeply
into the hearts as would be necessary.

(13) But we, if we would be true Christians otherwise, should make
this article firmly certain in our hearts, that Christ, who bore our sin
on the cross and paid for it with his death, rose again from the dead
for our righteousness' sake. The more firmly we believe this in our
hearts, the more joy and comfort we will find. For it is impossible that
this image should not rejoice you, that you now see in Christ such a
beautiful, pure, healthy man, who before was so wretched and miserable
because of your sins. For then you are sure that your sins are gone and
no longer exist.

(14) Hence the fine beautiful hymns, Latin and German, were made by
the ancient Christians; as when we sing: Christ is risen from his
torture to all, we should all be glad, Christ should be our consolation.
And in the sequence: Agnus redemit oves, Christus innocens Patri
reconciliavit peccatores. Mors et vita duello conflixere mirando, dux
vitae mortuus regnat vivus: The innocent little lamb Christ has
reconciled us poor erring sheep with his father, and is ever a

wonderful war, that death and life fight with each other, and the Lord
of life dies, but still lives and reigns again 2c.

(15) Whoever made the song must have had a high and Christian mind to
paint this picture in such a fine way, how death attacked life, and how
the devil also stabbed life. Well, the life, our Lord Jesus Christ,
suffered and let himself be killed. But death struck unjustly. For life
was eternal. Death did not see that behind the mortal body an eternal
power and divine strength should be hidden. So he played the game and
attacked the person who could not die, and yet died. So it happened that
the corpse was dead and buried, but the person remained alive. For this
must be especially understood, that this person is at the same time
bodily dead and yet eternally alive. Death had accomplished as much as
it could and could go no further. Because the person is alive and cannot
remain in death, he comes forth again and throws death and everything
that helped death, sin and the devil, under himself, and reigns in an
eternal, new life, to which neither sin, the devil nor death can harm
anything anymore.

This is a strange, unheard-of sermon, which reason cannot grasp; it must
be believed that Christ lives, and yet is dead, and so dead that death
must die in him and lose all its power. But these things are preached to
us for comfort, that we should believe and learn that death has lost all
its power. For once, praise be to God forever, such a man is found whom
death attacks like all other men, and strangles him: but in the
strangulation he himself must die and be devoured, and the strangled
Christ shall live forever.

17 St. Paul praises this in very fine words, Col. 2:14, 15: "Christ
hath blotted out the handwriting which was made by the law, and was
against us. He took it away and nailed it to the cross; he stripped away
the principalities and the powers and carried them away.

514L . **2, 173-175. On the holy day of Easter. W. XIII, 1108-1110.**
515

publicly, and made a triumph of them by themselves."

(18) This saying includes two things. Firstly, it says that Christ,
with his suffering, erased the handwriting that we had to give of
ourselves because of the law. This is what St. Paul means: We all know
through the law what God requires of us, what we should do and not do.
Wherever we do wrong, either by not doing what we are commanded to do or
by doing what we are forbidden to do, we cannot pass by; our conscience
stands there and convicts us that we have done wrong. So that our
conscience is like a book of guilt, in that we bear witness to ourselves
that we have been disobedient, and for this reason must bear God's
wrath and disfavor. The handwriting, says St. Paul, comes into being
through the law; for if the law were not there, there would be no
transgression. So then both sin and the handwriting are there, which
commits us, so that we cannot deny that we are guilty; like a merchant
to whom one puts his own handwriting and seal. Then, says St. Paul, we
enjoy our dear Lord Christ, because he takes such a handwriting and
attaches it to the cross, that is, he makes a hole through it, and tears
it so that it is no longer valid, nor should it accuse and damage us.
Cause: He, the Lord Christ, hangs on the cross because he stepped into
our sin and wants to pay for our sin with his body. This is the first
thing.

19) Secondly, Christ has "stripped" the principalities, that is, he
has taken away the devil's power, so that the devil should no longer
drive and coerce Christians to sin, as he did before they came to
Christ. For they can resist the evil spirit through the help of the Holy
Spirit, and resist him through the word and faith, so that he must leave
them satisfied. For this reason Christ gives us his Holy Spirit. Just as
the devil has departed and has been deprived of his power, so have the
powers departed, that is, the death that subdues us all has also been
subdued by Christ. So that Christians henceforth make a mockery of the
devil and death.

can. For even though they are both wicked and angry, and turn all their
power against the Christians, they can do nothing, as Paul says to the
Romans Cap. 8, 1: "Those who are in Christ JEsu, there is nothing
condemnable about them."

20 Just as the Lord Christ overcame death, so he also overcame sin. For
in his own person he is righteous; but because he takes upon himself the
sins of others, he becomes a sinner, as he laments, Ps. 41:5: "I said,
O Lord, be merciful to me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee." This is the cause of sin attacking him. And he, the Lord Christ,
gladly lets himself be seized and brought to the cross, so that he dies,
not otherwise than as if he had forfeited death himself and had sinned
himself. As Isaiah says, Cap. 53:12, "He is counted as one of the
transgressors," yet he has not sinned, but we have sinned; and he does
no more than take upon himself strangers and take upon himself our
iniquity. But there the holiness, which is hidden under foreign sin, is
so great that sin cannot overcome it. Therefore, sin runs up and strikes
the unrighteous man like death; therefore, it becomes weak and dies in
his body, as St. Paul says.

The devil also wanted to prove his dominion over Christ, therefore he
needs his power against him and wants to bring him under himself. But he
finds a higher power that he cannot overcome. For even though the Lord
Christ presents himself as weak, and does nothing else but fall to the
ground and give way to the devil, there is still an insurmountable power
hidden in such weakness. The devil does not see this and therefore loses
all his power, so that our Lord Christ can boast that he is both above
and below, and therefore these three powerful enemies, death, sin and
the devil, must lie at his feet.

This glorious victory we celebrate today. Now it is up to us to take
this to heart and firmly believe that in Christ God fought with the
devil, righteousness with sin, life with death, good with evil, honor
with blasphemy.

516 **2.2, 175-178. On the holy day of Easter. W. xm, 1110-1113.** 517

and conquered. We are to let this image be our command and look at it
often. For as we see in the first image on the silent Friday how our
sin, curse and death lie upon Christ, and make of him a wretched,
miserable man: so we see another image on Easter Day, where there is no
sin, no curse, no disgrace, no death, but only life, grace, blessedness
and righteousness. With such an image we are to lift up our hearts. For
it is presented to us and given to us that we should not think of
ourselves otherwise than as if God Himself had raised us up with Christ
today. For as little as you see sin, death and cursing in Christ, so you
should believe that God also wants to see so little in you for Christ's
sake, if you accept and take comfort in this resurrection of His. Such
grace is brought to us by faith. In that day, however, we will no longer
believe, but will see, grasp and feel.

23 Nevertheless, because we are still here on earth, sin, death, shame
and disgrace, and all kinds of lack and infirmities remain in our old
sackcloth; these we must suffer. But they do not go any further than
into the flesh, for according to faith we are already saved. And just as
Christ was raised from the dead, without sin and death, in everlasting
life; so are we also in faith. For sin is gone, and we have become
children of God through Christ. Therefore there is nothing lacking, but
that we lay down our heads and let ourselves be embraced, then our
bodies also will rise to eternal life and be pure and holy without all
sin; since we are now just as frail and sinners as other people, unless
by the help of the Holy Spirit we do not give the flesh its lust and
shun gross sins. For though Christians sometimes fall, they do not
remain in sins, but rise again through righteous repentance and obtain
forgiveness of all sins through faith.

(24) Therefore a Christian cannot be judged by the outward life. For
in one case it is as unclean and dilapidated as the life of the
unbelievers, which is why they pray daily: Forgive us our

Guilt. But whoever wants to look at and judge a Christian rightly, let
him do it according to faith. For we are sinners by reason of our flesh
and blood, and must likewise die and expect all kinds of misfortune here
on earth, and probably more than other people who are unbelievers.
Because we feel sin more than the world, which lives in safety and does
not care about sin.

025 Yea, sayest thou, how then can we boast that we are holy and without
sin? So that through Christ, who bore our sins and rose from the dead,
we believe and ask forgiveness of sins. No one else can do this but
Christians. For believing and asking for forgiveness of sins is the work
of the Holy Spirit. Where the Holy Spirit is not, it will be done
slowly. As can be seen in the enemies of the gospel, in the pope and his
crowd; they are great, horrible sinners, but they do not feel it and
therefore do not ask for it. But once they have to feel it, they will
not be able to stand, but will have to despair. Since they know nothing
of this image, that Christ is risen and has no more sin in him. But a
Christian, as much as he grasps this image with faith, has so much
blessedness in Christ JEsu, who rose from the dead, no longer bloody nor
stained, but beautiful, lovely and glorious. For just as before he was
bloody and hung on the cross for our sins, so now for our comfort he is
beautiful and pure and has eternal life, so that we may rejoice and be
comforted in him, because it was done for our sake.

(26) So it is with one another: according to faith in Christ we are
clean and holy; according to the old Adam we are unclean and sinners. We
should throw such filth into the Lord's Prayer, and then we will be
holy, even though we are sinners. For we know that whatever we lack, our
Lord and Head, Christ, has risen from the dead; he has no more sin or
death in him. Therefore, through faith in him we have neither sin nor
death. But he that believeth not, and hath not Christ, he

518 **L. 2, 178-180. On the holy day of Easter. W. XIII, 1113-1116.**
519

must be and remain a sinner with all his works and worship, nothing
helps for that.

27 Therefore, we should diligently and carefully contemplate and form in
ourselves this joyful, lovely, comforting image of Easter. For in the
same image there is neither sin nor death. If then sin should trouble
thee, and conscience afflict thee, because thou hast done this or that,
and art weak in faith; stand here, and say, It is true, I am a sinner, I
am weak in faith, I cannot deny it; but again I take comfort in knowing
that Christ Jesus hath taken my sin upon him, and bare it. But on Easter
Day he rose from the dead in such a way that all sin and punishment for
sin disappeared. Tell me then, you sin, you death, you devil, what did
this man do to you, that you accused him before Pilato and brought him
to the cross? Did you also do right in this? Then sin, death and the
devil will have to confess that they have done wrong and wronged him.

Then you can say to sin, death and the devil, "Roll over and let me be
satisfied," or settle it with him and ask him where he has gone with my
sins, whether he has not been able to bear them,

but had to put them back on me. He therefore that can turn away the
devil unto the Lord Christ, on whom he hath burned his mouth, is healed.

(29) This is the true doctrine of the faith, which every man imagineth
to have, and to know. But there are truly few of them who can do it
rightly, for it cannot be spoken in or out of words; the Holy Spirit
must do it. If then you can do this art, you are a Christian. But if you
cannot yet do it, thank God that you are among those who like to hear
such things and do not like to blaspheme, as the Turks, Jews and Papists
do: they want to be so pious for the sake of their person that they may
stand before God's judgment, and without this image they fight with
death, sin and the devil. Then faith must perish. But learn that you do
not rely on your holiness, and that you imagine this image of Christ as
if you knew nothing about yourself; just as your eyes do not see
themselves when you look before you; so that you alone may have Christ
in your heart, who rose from the dead and overcame sin and hell; and
then you will be healed. May our dear Lord Christ Jesus help us to do
this, amen.

**On the holy day of Easter.**

**The second sermon.*)**

1. your love has heard about the resurrection of Christ, how it is
done, why it is done, and how we should use and enjoy it. Of such use of
the resurrection this gospel also teaches.

(2) For this is first of all a great thing, that the dear angels are
the first messengers to win the glad tidings that Christ is risen and is
no longer in the grave; and

*From the explanation of the 28th chapter of the Gospel of Matthew.

remind the women that Christ had foretold them this, even though they
did not believe or understand it. Such a message is a certain sign,
although the angels are pure and holy spirits, but we are poor sinners,
that they nevertheless neither flee nor despise us, but want to be good
friends with us, since Christ died for us too well and rose again.

3) If God had not wanted us to accept such a resurrection, and had not
wanted us to

520 **8.2, iso-182. On the holy day of Easter. W.xm, ms-ms.** 521

he would have kept his messengers, the dear angels, in heaven and not
let us know about it. But because the angels are ordained and sent to be
the first preachers to proclaim to us the resurrection of Christ, this
is a certain sign that the Lord Christ, as we have heard before, has
risen to our good, and that God's will is that we should comfort
ourselves and believe the angels' preaching. So first of all the work
stands in itself, because the angels are sent, that we must conclude:
The resurrection of Christ is to serve us as well as his suffering, and
was done for our sake.

(4) Besides the work, we can also hear from the words what they think
about the resurrection of Christ. For the angels come with two commands:
the first is to the women, that they should not fear on account of
themselves, but rejoice that Christ is risen; the other command is, that
they should not keep this resurrection secret, but should go quickly and
proclaim it to the disciples. This is to rejoice greatly for both parts.

5 For the angel to say first, "Fear not, for I know that ye seek Jesus
crucified: for he is not here, but is risen from the dead" is as much
as to say, "What foolish, simple folk are ye, that ye should be
astonished and afraid? Christ is alive and has risen from the dead.
Therefore you should be happy and not worry about anything else. For
that Christ liveth, he liveth well for you, that ye may enjoy him, be
protected by him, and be preserved from all distress. For this is the
way of languages: he who is not to be afraid should be cheerful and of
good cheer, hoping and waiting for the best. But he that is afraid must
wait for a worse thing, which he would rather have. So you see, whoever
is afraid of the executioner, of death, of sins and of the wrath of God,
there is no joy, no hope, but only lamentation and mourning, worry and
unrest. These things shall be no more with you, says the angel, because
Christ is risen. This is to indicate that we should

The resurrection of Christ comforts us against the devil, sin, death and
hell. For where these enemies should or could do more harm, it is
impossible that we should not fear. This is the first command, not only
to women, but to all baptized and believing Christians who believe and
know that Christ is risen, that they should not fear.

(6) The other command seems to be different from this, but it is just
an opinion that the angel tells the women to go in haste and proclaim to
his disciples how Christ has risen from the dead. For this is also a
certain indication that the disciples should rejoice and accept the
resurrection. But now, behold, who are the disciples? Aren't they poor
sinners, who have wronged the Lord, and in his greatest trouble have
shamefully forsaken him, and Peter has denied him altogether? Above this
they are now with each other, not to be seen before the Jews. There is
no thought that Christ should live again and first establish his
kingdom. And since the women are already coming, saying that they have
seen the Lord, since Simon Peter and those from Emmaus are also coming,
no one wants to believe them and thinks it is a fable. Yes, when the
Lord himself comes and shows them hands and feet, lets himself be felt
and attacked, they still do not even want to believe that it is true,
they think it is a ghost.

(7) The fact that the angel was so anxious that the resurrection of
Christ should be proclaimed to the disciples, who were drowned in
unbelief and had an evil conscience, is a certain indication that the
Lord Christ has risen as a comfort to the poor weak believers, even to
those who are completely unbelieving, so that they may enjoy his mercy.
They should seek and find help and protection with him.

(8) Therefore, if we find such weakness, sin, and unbelief in
ourselves, let us not despair on that account, nor think that Christ
does not want us; for here we see that for the comfort of such poor,
weak, miserable sinners the angels come from heaven, and must order
through the women that they may know that Christ is risen, and therefore
draw comfort and joy from it.

**522 L. 2, 182-184. On the holy day of Easter. W. XIII, III9-1121.
523**

should be. For, as heard in the next sermon, where the resurrection of
Christ is, there must be comfort, joy and a good conscience, since
neither death, sin, nor the wrath of God is found in such an image.

(9) Now these are the sermons of the dear angels concerning the
resurrection of Christ, which come from heaven for this reason, so that
the poor, frightened consciences may become aware of them and rejoice
and be comforted. Such preaching and testimony should be enough for us.
But Christ himself comes to the women and preaches to them like angels,
greets them in the most friendly way, and also tells them not to be
afraid. With this he wants to teach us all how we should rightly use his
resurrection, that we should cast out all fear, be joyful and of good
cheer.

(10) For there is nothing in the whole world that can frighten a
Christian who has Christ for his Lord. Sin will not do it, for we know
that Christ paid for it. Nor will death, for Christ has overcome it. He
has torn hell asunder, and bound and captured the devil. Whether the
world then is hostile to the Christian by its nature, and puts on every
plague, how shall we do to him? It is only a temporal suffering, since
we know that we shall enjoy the resurrection of Christ to eternal life.
Therefore this sermon of the angel, and after that of our Lord Christ,
shall go and remain among Christians forever: Fear not, be glad, give
thanks and praise to God; for Christ is risen and is no longer here.

Now Christ does not leave us with this comfort; he goes further and
makes it much greater and more glorious. For thus he says, "Go and tell
my brethren, that they may go into Galilee, and there they shall see
me," or as John tells us in the 20th chapter, v. 17, that he said to
Mary, "Go unto my brethren, and say, I ascend unto my Father, and to
your Father, and to my God, and to your God."

(12) This can ever be called comforting preaching, that he calls his
disciples "brethren. Such a name is nothing special among men. For
where one calls another brother

If we call ourselves brothers, such a name brings nothing more with it
than an advantage of money and friendship. But when Christ calls us
brothers, who is the Son of God, then it is first of all an excellent,
high, unspeakable name. For if he calls us brethren, he will also have
to share with us, and not only keep the inheritance that he has, but
also throw it in with us. For this we must take care of the Lord Christ
in every way, that he does not use such a name only for appearance, as
the world is wont to do, since one often writes to another: Dear
brother, and yet in his heart he is his worst enemy, to whom he wishes
all unhappiness. We should not be so unkind to Christ. If he calls us
brothers, he means from the bottom of his heart that he is our brother
and wants to consider us brothers and deal with us as brothers.

(13) How then did the apostles get such honor? Did they deserve such a
name because they so shamefully ran away from him, denied him, and no
longer had a heart for him, that he should live again and establish his
kingdom? This should ever have given the Lord cause to consider them his
enemies and not brothers. But, as said before, he wants to deal with
poor sinners, and wants the poor sinners of his resurrection to receive
and comfort themselves; otherwise he would not call his disciples
brethren in truth, who had behaved so very badly against him and did not
deserve such a name; just as little as we, who are also poor sinners,
and yet should accept this name. Just as Christ commands all Christians,
when they want to pray, to say: Our Father, who art in heaven. For if we
call God in heaven "Father," we must ever be Christ's brethren, as he
says here, "I ascend unto my Father and your Father, unto my God and
your God." But the difference is that Christ is the natural and eternal
Son of God for Himself; but we come to glory through Christ, because He
died for us and rose again for our good, so that through faith in Christ
we become God's children, filii adoptati, non nati, adopted ones.

**[524 L- 2, 184-186. On the holy day of Easter. W. xm. 1121-1124.
525]{.underline}**

but not born children, as Paul distinguishes.

14 Now the word that the Lord calls his disciples brethren is the right
absolution, that he may absolve them from all sins, that they may forget
them, and fear them no more. For Christ has never had any sin. If then
the disciples are to be called brethren of Christ, they must also have
no sin; otherwise Christ would have an advantage in the inheritance and
would not be properly our brother. But because he says we are brothers,
it follows that we belong to the same inheritance.

15 What then is the inheritance of Christ? It is not money, goods, great
power and splendor. For experience teaches us that such goods are also
possessed by those who are not children of God nor brothers of Christ.
Therefore such cannot be the rightful inheritance of Christ, which he
and his brothers alone have. Rather, this temporal thing is like the
sun, the rain and other gifts of God, which God gives equally to the
pious and the wicked. But the true inheritance of Christ is this, as
Paul says of it, 1 Cor. 1:30, 31: "Christ is made unto us of God
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that, as
it is written, he that boasteth, let him boast of the Lord."

We poor people are so blinded by sin that we know nothing certain about
God, about sins, or about righteousness. And although there is still a
little knowledge of God in us, as Paul says in Romans 1, we can see how
soon it is lost, so that we fall into error and idolatry. This is now
the first part of our inheritance, to which we come through Christ, that
we learn to know God rightly; as he says, Matth. 11, 27: "No one knows
the Father, except the Son, and to whom the Son wills to reveal it."
Now this is the highest and greatest wisdom, whereas all the wisdom of
the world is mere foolishness. For though it has great renown before the
world, it will last no longer than here on earth. But this wisdom, that
Christ teaches us to know God, that God will be gracious and merciful to
us, is eternal wisdom, and eternal life itself, as Christ says, John
17:3;

and serves us to defend ourselves not only against men, but also against
the devil himself, and to know and judge him.

The other part of our inheritance is that Christ made us righteous. For
we do not live in sins alone, but were also conceived and born in sins.
But through Christ we come to this, that God will not see such sin nor
impute it to us, but give it to us and forbear it. This is what it means
to be righteous, if God considers us righteous, even though we are poor,
miserable sinners.

The third part of our inheritance is that Christ has been made holy for
us by God. Not only by sanctifying Himself for us and offering Himself
as a sacrifice, as John 17:19 says, but also by giving us His Holy
Spirit, who establishes a new life in us, resists sin and drives us to
heartfelt obedience to God.

The fourth part is that he is made unto us also unto salvation. There
are temptations, hardships, troubles, persecutions, whatever they may
be, but Christ is with us and holds us up, so that we may finally be
victorious and experience salvation; not only temporal, but eternal
salvation.

20 We should accept and rejoice in such a rich, eternal inheritance. For
Christ calls us to such hope, because he calls us his brothers. But it
is a pity above all pity that we have more joy when a hundred guilders
are given or created for us by a man than when the Son of God places us
in such a rich and eternal inheritance. Now it is true that we should be
content with this if Christ would let us be his disciples, his servants,
his disciples, or if he would call us his friends. For who would not
want to take on such a great Lord and Master? But he lifts us higher,
and will not let it remain with a lowly one, and calls us his brothers.
Therefore, we should not forget this great comfort, and always remember
this rich, eternal brotherhood, and take comfort from it in all
hardships and in the midst of death.

21 But what does the devil have to do?

526 **D. 2, 186-189. On Holy Easter Day. W. xm, 1124-1127.** 527

He drives the pope and the false, seductive teachers to not report such
brotherhoods, and in the meantime they make other brotherhoods in the
name of the devil, because they distribute good works as an inheritance
to the deceased saints, monks and priests. Such punishment befalls them
justly. For whoever does not want to rejoice or be comforted by this
brotherhood is worth nothing better than to put his heart and trust in
other godless, idolatrous, earthly and futile brotherhoods.

(22) Therefore let us be thankful for this blessed doctrine, and
accept it with all our hearts, and so depend on the resurrection of
Christ, that we may have a firm confidence in Christ as our brother,
that he will use his life, now that he is alive, for our salvation, and,
as Paul says, keep us from all wrath. Whoever could firmly believe this,
would not let any misfortune trouble him. For whatever may be the need
or the want, we know that Christ lives, and we also shall live with him.
What can temporal suffering trouble us, if we have eternal life through
Christ so surely? Why should we be angry with those who do us wrong? Is
it not true that it would be better for us to grieve with them and have
compassion on them, since their hatred and envy of us is sufficient
proof that they are not in this brotherhood and should not enjoy this
eternal inheritance? What good is their temporal inheritance, their
power, money, goods and splendor, which they misuse for more sins and
more severe condemnation?

So, if we could believe in this brotherhood, we would not care so much
about the temporal, but would always look more to the eternal
inheritance, which is offered to us in this brotherhood. As St. Paul
very finely admonishes when he preaches about the resurrection of Christ
in the 3rd chapter to the Colossians, and says vv. 1-3: "If you have
been raised with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is
seated at the right hand of God, and seek the things that are above, and
not the things that are on earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid
in Christ, in God."

For if we want to take this brotherhood seriously and boast that we are
children of God, then we must always do our Father's will and not be
disobedient children. And, as Paul says, we must put to death and put
off our members on earth, that is, evil lusts and works, and, as God's
elect, saints and beloved, put on heartfelt compassion, kindness,
humility, gentleness and patience, so that one may bear with the other
and forgive 2c.

(24) For this cause we have before remembered, under the inheritance
of Christ, sanctification also, which is to follow in all things, both
in faith and life; as Paul also saith in another place, 1 Cor. 5:7, 8:
"We have a paschal lamb, which is Christ, sacrificed for us. Therefore
let us keep Easter, not in the old leaven; neither in the leaven of
malice and wickedness; but in the sweet dough of sincerity and truth";
item: "Let us sweep out the old leaven, and be a new dough, as ye are
already unleavened." This is strangely said; but it is just what we
heard above from Paul, that Christ is made unto us for righteousness and
sanctification. For because we believe in Christ, that he paid for our
sin, by such faith we have forgiveness of sin, and are justified, or, as
Paul calls it, we are without leaven. Nevertheless, we still have flesh
and blood on us, which is not yet dead, but full of leaven and evil
desire. We are to sweep them out and kill them, not to cling to them,
but to keep ourselves holy. For to this end our Lord Christ gives us his
Holy Spirit, that we may resist sin and keep ourselves according to
God's word and will.

(25) Thus your love sees what the resurrection of Christ is to
accomplish and work in us, namely, that we should not fear henceforth,
and should recognize and glory in Christ as our brother, and take
comfort in the right inheritance which he has given us. And we are also
to be careful in what we do, so that we do not lose this inheritance
again through disobedience, like children who have gone astray. That is,
then, to make right and good use of the joyful resurrection, and to make
the

528 2.2, 189.190. On Easter Tuesday. W. xm, 1127. ii64-ii68. 529

Celebrate Easter properly. But where this does not happen, either
because we lie in sins and disobedience, or because we do not want to
reach for this consolation in hardships and temptations, nothing is more
certain than that we have nothing of this resurrection and this glorious
inheritance.

nor knows. May God grant us His Holy Spirit through Christ, that we may
take comfort in such a resurrection, and that in such faith, confidence
and hope we may increase from day to day, and that we may finally be
saved, amen.

**Easter Tuesday.**

**Luc. 24:36-48.**

While they were talking about this, Jesus himself stood among them and
said to them: Peace be with you! And they were afraid, and thought that
they saw a spirit. And he said unto them: Why are ye thus terrified? and
why do such thoughts come into your hearts? Behold my hands, and my
feet, it is I myself: feel me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as ye see that I have. And when he had said this, he showed them
his hands and feet. And when they yet believed not for joy, and
wondered, he saith unto them: Have you anything to eat here? And they
set before him a piece of broiled fish, and honeycomb. And he took it,
and did eat before them. And he said unto them: These are the words
which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you: for all things must be
fulfilled which are written of me in the law of Moses, in the prophets,
and in the psalms. Then he opened their understanding, so that they
understood the Scriptures. And he said unto them: Thus it is written,
and thus Christ must suffer, and rise from the dead the third day, and
preach repentance and remission of sins in his name among all nations,
and begin at Jerusalem. But you are all witnesses of this.

(1) This history also took place on the day of Easter, just then, when
the two disciples came again from Emmaus to Jerusalem, and announced to
the disciples what they had encountered and how they had seen the Lord;
and is precisely the history which will be preached on the coming Sunday
from John; without this being reported there by Thoma in particular, and
the history which followed about eight days later also being appended.
Now, one could probably make many pieces out of it, since it is a rich
material; but since we have done the article on the resurrection, we
will leave it at these two pieces, which are the most distinguished.

2) The first, that the disciples, when the Lord comes to them
unexpectedly through closed doors, are frightened by him, and think that
it is a ghost. From these words we have that it is not new to see
spirits. For he himself, the Lord, does not deny it, as if the spirits
should not let themselves be seen.

He confirms this by making a distinction between the spirits and
himself. For thus he says: "Why are you frightened and think like this?
Behold my hands and my feet. A spirit has neither flesh nor bone.

This is useful and necessary, so that it is known that we are not alone,
as if the devil were over a hundred miles away from us. He is all around
us, and sometimes puts on a larva; as I myself have seen that he lets
himself be seen as if he were a sow, a burning straw mop, and the like.
This must be known, for it serves us not to make superstition out of it,
and not to take such spirits for human souls; as has happened hitherto,
and the papal mass has been greatly promoted and exalted by it. For
everyone thought that if the devil thus let himself be seen and heard,
they were human souls; as one has good testimonies of this, not only
from the pope's Scribes.

**[530 L. 2, 190-192. On Easter Tuesday. W. xm, 1168-1171.
531]{.underline}**

The first part of the book is not only about the devil, but also about
Gregory and other old teachers, who did not consider it to be a ghost of
the devil, but rather about believing souls. Unfortunately, we know only
too much about the horrible error and idolatry that followed from this.

For with it one has received purgatory. Through purgatory, one then
received the merit of one's own and other good works, as if these were
to benefit the deceased. But how by such false teaching the death and
resurrection of Christ was diminished and honored as the work of men, is
easy to see. Thirdly, the abominable abomination of the mass followed
from this, by which the sacrifice of Christ was completely obscured and
the Lord's supper was turned into an abominable abuse, as if it were to
be enjoyed by the dead and not by the living. Such misery all arose from
the superstition that where the devil put on a mask and let himself be
seen now in one place and now in another, everyone believed that it was
not the devil but a human soul. Otherwise, if it had been thought to be
the devil, it would have been believed slowly, because it is known that
he is a murderer and a liar. For this reason Christ did not want his
testimony even then, when he spoke the truth; as can be seen in Marc. 1,
25. and in other places, when Christ forbids him to speak, and does not
want his testimony, even though he spoke the truth.

5 It is therefore necessary that we know and believe that it is true
that the devil sometimes lets himself be seen, now one way, now another.
As the dear holy angels also do. For we always walk and stand between
angels and devils. The devils watch and seek how they may choke us,
tempt us, and do us harm; but the good angels are around us, if we are
pious and God-fearing, so that they may protect us from harm and keep us
safe. This serves to teach us to fear God and to bless ourselves more
diligently every day, and to call upon God more earnestly for protection
against the evil spirits, so that they may not harm us, poison us with
pestilence or otherwise, or cause us other misery.

(6) Whoever desires to be safe from such things, the best and most
certain thing is to live in the fear of God, to pray diligently, to
speak much and gladly of God's word. This is the right cross, so that
we may bless ourselves and protect ourselves against the enemy. For he
cannot stay there, where God's word is in his heart, he must troll
himself. In the church he does not remain now either. For thus says
Christ, "Where two or three are in my name, there will I be in the
midst of them." But where Christ is, the devil will not be able to stay
long. This is certainly true. Therefore, we should gladly hear God's
word, remember it often and often, and gladly speak of it. But whoever
tells lies, after-talks, lives in sins and an evil conscience, the evil
enemy will not tarry long, but Christ and His angels will depart from
it. Therefore let no one deny that the devil does not let himself be
seen, that he does not frighten or deceive people or harm them secretly.
But when he does this, learn and make the holy cross, not only with your
hand before you, but seek to have it in your heart, to comfort yourself
with God's word and to pray. And let him paw and bang at it as long as
he pleases; you shall remain safe from him. Only tell him confidently in
your heart, and say, Thou art a devil, and remainest a devil; but I am a
Christian, and have a stronger Lord over me than thou art: therefore let
me alone.

(7) It has often happened to me that he has caused a disturbance in my
house and has wanted to frighten me. But I took my profession before me
and said: I know that God has placed me in this house, that I should be
master inside. If you have a stronger profession than I have, and if you
are master here, stay there. But I know that you belong in another
place, namely, in the abyss of hell. So I fell asleep again and let him
be angry, for I knew well that he could not do anything to me. Now this
is the first part that we cannot omit, since the disciples and the Lord
himself speak of spirits that are evil spirits and therefore appear to
frighten and make people afraid.

532 **8.2,is2-i9s. On Easter Tuesday. W.xm, 1171-1174.** 533

The other part is that Christ says: "Thus it is written, and thus
Christ had to suffer, and to rise from the dead on the third day, and to
preach repentance and remission of sins in his name among all nations,
and to begin at Jerusalem.

(9) At Jerusalem, saith he, let this preaching begin, and afterward
let it go forth into all the world, that Christ must die, and rise again
from the dead. For what purpose? To preach repentance and forgiveness of
sins in his name, and in no other name. So that no penance, no
indulgence is valid, neither in St. Peter's nor St. Paul's, much less
in my name, that I would become a monk, do this or that work to earn
forgiveness of sins with it; but it is said: In his name one should
preach the indulgence that he has earned through his suffering and
resurrection. Therefore, whoever desires forgiveness of sins should
believe that Christ suffered for him and rose again from death. This
should be the right sermon.

(10) But that it may be known that such a sermon cannot soon be
grasped and learned once it is heard, therefore the evangelist
diligently adds these words, saying, "He," the Lord Christ, "opened
their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. Such
things belong to it; otherwise the people go in and out of the sermon
like cows. There is no understanding there, nor can there be any, unless
Christ is there first and opens the understanding.

(11) Now what is the meaning of the Lord's putting repentance and
remission of sins together, and saying in plain words, Let such
preaching begin at Jerusalem? This is a very annoying command to start
preaching repentance and forgiveness of sins in Jerusalem, where the
greatest saints, the Levites, the chief priests and the people of God
were. Surely everyone would think that there was no need for such
preaching of repentance and forgiveness of sins.

012 But the Lord will say this much, Ye Levites and Jews, ye shall be
first, and repentance shall be preached unto you, that ye may amend
yourselves, or ye shall never be forgiven of sins.

come. For preaching repentance means nothing else than punishing sin and
teaching that it is impossible to be saved, so we convert and believe in
Christ that God will be merciful to us for his sake.

The Lord wants such a sermon of repentance to go throughout the world.
For this reason no man can excuse himself; we must all accuse ourselves
of being sinners and give ourselves up. What else would it be to preach
repentance to us? Yes, he wants such preaching to begin at Jerusalem,
among the people of God and in the most holy place; that the Pharisees
should be told to mend their ways. For they do worse than harlots and
knaves, since they still consider themselves pious and holy, as if they
had no need of such preaching of repentance.

14 In sum, Christ condemns the whole world by this command, and reproves
them all sinners; and if we desire otherwise to be sanctified, he wills
that every man fall on his knees, lift up his hands, and submit: Lord, I
am a sinner; I am in need of correction, but I cannot; therefore, Lord,
have mercy on me and help me.

(15) When this happens, that we despair of all our life and deeds,
then comes the other part, which is called the forgiveness of sins. This
is what the Lord wants to be preached. That it is therefore primarily a
matter of recognizing that we are sinners and then asking for mercy. For
in this building, where one wants to make a Christian, this must always
be the first stone, that one recognizes sin. For otherwise one will not
be able to rejoice or be comforted in forgiveness. So the Lord wants to
show both here, that all the world is under sin, and that through Christ
alone it becomes righteous and holy.

Reason has its own special judgment. One man makes himself believe that
he is pious by fasting and praying much; another by giving much alms,
and so on. But the gospel makes all these things sins and says,
"Repent. Then the quarrel arises. The pope does not want to be a
sinner, nor does a monk in a monastery; and we ourselves would also like
to live in such a way that we could not be accused of anything. But
there is no end to it.

534 **L. 2,i9s-is7. On Easter Tuesday. W. xin, 1174-1177.** 535

Now, what shall we do to him? Shall we therefore despair? For we are
sinners, and know that God is hostile to sin. No, but because
forgiveness of sins is commanded to be preached beside repentance: that
forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in the name of Christ to all
who hear and believe; accept this and be comforted; say, Lord, I am a
sinner; but spare me for thy Son's sake. I will live by the mere grace
offered me in the name of thy Son. So do thou right unto him, and thou
shalt be saved. For there is a promise that all who accept the gospel
will have their sins forgiven and remitted. For one shall ever preach
forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ. But where Christ is not,
there can be no remission of sins.

(18) Therefore the indulgence of the pope is a lie and a fraud, which
he sells in the name and merit of the dead saints. For here it is
written: In my name it shall be preached, who died for you, and rose
again from the dead; otherwise no man died for you.

19 The pope calls this preaching heresy, as you know, and blasphemes us
for forbidding good works. But how shall we do to him? We have not
invented these words ourselves, nor have we made them, that repentance
should be preached to all nations in the name of Jesus. But what need
would there be to preach repentance if we had or could do good works?
The righteous do not need repentance preached to them, but sinners do.
But now such a command goes over the whole world, that repentance should
be preached in all the world. It follows that in the whole world there
is nothing but sinners and sin, and no good works. Why else would one
need repentance and forgiveness of sins?

020 But blind men will not hear, and always blaspheme that good works
are forbidden. Therefore it is necessary for God to open our minds, so
that we may say: Lord, have mercy on me, I am a poor sinner; but I take
comfort in your grace, that you have commanded forgiveness of sins to be
preached in your name. He who thus recognizes himself praises God, and
gives

praise him for being true in his word, which accuses us all of being
sinners and exhorts us to repentance. On the other hand, he also praises
God by believing in the forgiveness of sins through the name of Christ.
On the other hand, the impenitent and unbelieving blaspheme God, and
will finally receive their punishment because of it.

(21) So let our faith be before God, and let Christian conduct follow
faith, that we may do good to others, gladly help, be obedient, and wait
each one for his profession; thus we shall become righteous saints, holy
before God by faith, and afterwards, for the sake of life, also
blameless before men. Otherwise, if a person is not first pure and holy
by faith, how can he be called to do good works, because the source of
the works is evil and impure? For the heart first of all does not
believe that God is true, who is called to preach repentance in all the
world; and because you do not want to consider yourself a sinner, it
follows that you will not desire nor seek forgiveness of sins.

(22) Those who recognize themselves as sinners and hope that God will
forgive such sins through Christ are the true Christians, with whom
repentance and forgiveness of sins are found. About such teaching we are
called heretics and condemned. But we should thank God that we can come
to grace, recognize ourselves as sinners, and be comforted by the grace
of God; and after that, in such faith, do righteous good works, which
therefore proceed in repentance and faith. For where such preaching and
teaching is, there Christ will be also; there no devil shall come, yea,
neither shall we any more fear the devil, nor death, nor be afraid of
him. For there is forgiveness of sins and a joyful, peaceful heart,
which gladly does all that it should.

(23) But the rest, who believe not, do no good work. And even if the
work itself is not evil, the heart is. These are displeasing and unkind
works, since God cannot have any pleasure in them. But the heart does
not become pure, because only through faith in Christ do we recognize
ourselves as sinners, but through him

**5362 .2, 197-199. On Easter Tuesday. W. xm, 1177-1179. 537**

Hope forgiveness of sins by pure grace.

(24) From this it follows that a Christian is both a sinner and a
saint; he is both wicked and pious. For in our own persons we are in
sins, and in our own names we are sinners. But Christ brings us another
name, in whom is forgiveness of sins, that for his sake our sins are
forgiven and given to us. So it is both true: sins are there; for the
old Adam has not yet even died: and yet they are not there; because God
does not want to see them for Christ's sake. They are before my eyes, I
see and feel them well. But there is Christ, who tells me to repent,
that is, to confess myself as a sinner, and then to believe in
forgiveness of sins in his name.

(25) For repentance, contrition, and knowledge of sin, though it may
be present, is not sufficient; it must come to pass that one believes in
the name of Christ for the remission of sins. But where there is such
faith, God no longer sees sin. For you stand before God not in your own
name, but in Christ's name, who adorns you with grace and
righteousness, even though you are a poor sinner in your own eyes and
person, and are full of weakness and unbelief. But this should not
frighten you to death, for how else would you be able to hear this
sermon on repentance? Therefore say, O Lord, I am a poor sinner: but
thou sayest it shall not be so with me: for thou hast ever commanded to
preach also forgiveness of sins in thy name 2c.

26 Now this is the right article that makes a Christian. For even if you
want to fast to death and make yourself a beggar by giving alms, this
will not help you, you will not become a Christian with it, you will not
go to heaven with it, you will not make God gracious to you with it. For
here it is: In my name, says Christ, repentance is to be preached, so
that people are frightened, and forgiveness of sins, so that they are
comforted again. So that our Lord Christ alone may be the robe of grace
that is put on us, so that God our Father may not

We ask you to consider us sinners, but to accept us as righteous, holy,
pious children and to give us eternal life.

27 This doctrine, you know, before this time, before the coming of the
gospel, was very secret in the world and known to few people. It was
said that one should preach forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ;
but all life and teaching went against this, that whoever wanted to be
saved should accomplish this with good works, and pay for his sin
himself or do enough. That is, to put away sin in his own name. But this
is vain and wrong. For it is the name of Christ alone in which one
should preach forgiveness of sins. Monk's name, nun's name, pope's
name, fasting name, alms name, yes. St. Peter and Paul, the name of the
Virgin Mary should not do it.

28 We can see here what poor people are still in the papacy and how
miserably they are deceived. When they go to confession and let
themselves think they are the most pious, and believe that they will be
absolved of all their sins after confession, such release or absolution
is not only in the name of Christ, as it should be, but in the name of
the Mother of God, the holy apostles and all the saints. But what kind
of absolution is this? It is an abomination, since one should flee from
it as from the devil; so one still wants to force and drive people to it
as to the highest service of God. But whoever wants to obey the command
of Christ, he hears here, forgiveness of sins is to be preached in the
name of Christ JEsu alone. Cause, because he alone died for us. None of
the other saints died for your sin; what do you need their name for the
forgiveness of your sins?

29 This is the teaching of today's gospel, that those who confess their
sins, and know that they are sinners, shall have forgiveness of sins in
the name of Christ. This seems to be an easy art, how to come to
forgiveness of sins. For one must not carry stones, build churches, say
mass, but only hear the word of God, give glory to God,

538 L. 2, 199,200. on the first Sunday after Easter. W. xin, 1179-1183.
539

if he lets us preach repentance, that he is true and that we are poor
sinners; and then learn to build on God's grace, and to look to the
name of Jesus, in which forgiveness of sins is preached. Whoever
believes this cannot be harmed by sin, for he has Christ and his name
and is righteous. Not because he has not sinned, but because sin is
forgiven through Christ, and we are counted holy and righteous by grace
because of Christ. As we pray and confess in our faith: I believe
indulgence or forgiveness of sins. For such grace we should thank God
that we have come to the kingdom of Christ and His Word, which is a
kingdom of grace, in which all sins are forgiven through the name of
Jesus.

30. and shall yes this teaching actually and

This is to be distinguished from the other doctrine, which teaches about
good works. Not because those who desire to be saved should not do good
works, as the papists wrongly interpret it, for such obedience is laid
down for us long before in the law, but because such good works cannot
serve to forgive sins. For Peter and Paul and all the saints, however
pious they may be with their lives, it does not help them in the sight
of God, who does not want to be paid by works alone; he wants to have a
pure heart. But this helps all Christians, that they believe in Christ
and hope for forgiveness of sins and eternal life through his death. So
that both must be: good works must be done, and yet forgiveness of sins
must be believed in the name of Christ alone. May our dear Lord Christ
grant us this, amen.

**On the first Sunday after Easter, Quasimodogeniti. *)**

**John 20:10-31.**

Now in the evening of the same Sabbath, when the disciples were gathered
together, and the doors were shut, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and
stood in the midst, and saith unto them: Peace be unto you! *And when
he had said this, he shewed them his hands, and his side. Then the
disciples were glad to see the Lord. Then said JEsus unto them again:
Peace be with you! As the Father has sent me, so I send you. And when he
had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto them: Receive ye the
Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. But Thomas, one of the
twelve, called Gemini, was not with them when Jesus came. Then said the
other disciples unto him, We have seen the Lord. And he said unto them:
Unless I see in his hands the marks of the nails, and put my finger into
the marks of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will see him. I
will not believe it. And again his disciples were there eight days, and
Thomas with them. When Jesus came, and the doors were shut, he entered
into the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. Then saith he unto Thomas,
Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand,
and put it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing. Thomas
answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God. saith JEsus unto him,
Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, thou hast believed. Blessed are they
that see not, and yet believe. Jesus also did many other signs in the
presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book. But these
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God; and that believing ye might have life in his name.

1. this history your love has heard in the next sermon, that it
happened on Easter day, after the disciples of Emmaus

Held publicly in 1533.

came again to Jerusalem, and told the others how they had seen the Lord.
Now John has the way before other evangelists, that he not only tells
the history, but also the sermon of Christ.

[540 **L. 2, 200-203. on the first Sunday after Easter. W. xm, 1183-E.**
541]{.underline}

and adds words that are most important and most needed. So he reports
the words here, since one does not find anything in the other
evangelists, like the Lord at that time, after he wished peace to his
disciples and showed hands and feet, he said to them:

**As the Father has sent me, so I send you.**

2 These are excellent words with which he commands them to preach, and
brings the passion and resurrection of Christ into its proper use and
practice. For if, apart from the ministry of preaching, history or
history alone had remained, history would have been of no use to us at
all. As can be seen in the priesthood, history is right and good there,
as we have it; but because it is not conducted in the preaching office,
as Christ commands here, it remains without any fruit, just as if it
were a story by Dieterich of Bern, which one hears and teaches; but one
has nothing more from it than knowledge. Therefore it is up to him to
bring the story of the passion and resurrection of Christ into its
proper use.

3 But this is done in the way that the Lord preaches here, saying: "I
send you as my Father has sent me. How the Father sent Christ is taught
long before by St. Isaiah, in chapter 61, v. 1, 2: "The Spirit of the
Lord is with me; therefore the Lord hath anointed me. He has sent me to
preach to the wretched, to bind up the brokenhearted, to preach a
release to the captives, an opening to the bound, to preach a pleasant
year of the Lord" 2c. This is the command, since Christ is sent with.
And here he says that he also sends his disciples in the same way as he
was sent, and commands them again until the end of the world such
ministry as he led, that they should preach just as he preached. So this
command and sending here is only about the teaching, that the disciples
are to lead the same from Christ, just as he led them in the world.

(4) What then is this doctrine, Isaiah says in fine, glorious, clear
words, that Christ is anointed and sent for it,

That he may comfort the affrighted, the foolish, the desponding heart.
Which sermon then goes differently, that is not the right sermon of
Christ; Christ certainly did not command it, but it is a sermon of
Moses. For Moses preaches in such a way that the frightened, stupid
hearts become even more frightened and despondent. But this sermon is
called Christ's sermon, by which the miserable are comforted. For
Christ came with a new command, so that the works he did were new works,
such as had never been done before in the world, that the Son of God
suffered and rose again from the dead. Just as Isaiah prophesies about
the teachings of Christ, so we also hear here about Christ. For thus are
the words of the evangelist and his words:

**And he breathed on his disciples, and said unto them: Receive ye the
Holy Ghost: Whose soever sins ye forgive, they are forgiven them; but
whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.**

(5) This is the right spiritual government, which is to be
distinguished from the temporal government as far as heaven and earth
are from each other. Now those who are in this spiritual government are
right kings, right princes, right lords, and have to rule. But here see
and learn how such rule is limited and how far it goes. Namely, as the
words clearly state, as far as the world is; and yet shall have nothing
to do with anything else but sins. It shall not deal with money, nor
with goods, nor with food, nor with all that pertains to food. This is
what secular emperors and kings, princes and lords are to do with,
ordering and doing everything as is best for the common good and peace.
But this spiritual regiment is based solely on sins. Where sin is
concerned, this government should also be concerned, and not otherwise.

(6) For we must beware lest we mix them together, as the pope and his
bishops have done, who have so used the spiritual government that they
have also become temporal lords, and emperors and kings must bow down to
them. Christ did not command his disciples to do this.

542 **D. 2, 203-2M. First Sunday after Easter. W. xm, ii87-n89.** 543

He did not send them out for worldly rule, but commanded them to preach
and to rule over sin. That therefore the ministry of preaching is its
own definition, that one should preach the gospel of Christ, and forgive
sin to the broken and fearful consciences, but retain sin and bind the
impenitent and secure.

(7) Such binding the pope has also miserably perverted and led far
from that which is called "binding" in the Magisterium; for he has
interpreted it as if he could make law and order not only in the church,
but also in the secular government, as it seemed good to him. But the
opinion does not have it at all. I, as a preacher and messenger of
Christ, am not to teach you about housekeeping, agriculture, food and
other things, for God has given you your reason for such things. But if
you are not able to handle many things properly, then you may need
worldly people who can advise you. But my command and rule is based only
on sin, that I teach you how you should have been eternally lost because
of your sins, if Christ had not paid for them and done enough.

(8) Therefore, the whole point of this doctrine is to know what sin
really is; that sin is not money, nor goods, nor kingdom, nor food, nor
bread, nor wine, nor any other such thing; but it is a burden that
weighs down your heart and conscience before God, that you must fear His
wrath and await eternal damnation. For we are speaking here of true,
right sins, which God considers sin and worthy of eternal death; not of
Mr. Simoni's sins, since the jugglers handle pabst and bishop, that one
does not juice or eat meat on a forbidden day, that a monk goes without
a Scheppler, a nun without a Weihel (veil). Such are papal sins, which
are sins before the pope and his consecrators, who have devised them;
but before God they are not sins, and condemn no one, for God has
nowhere forbidden such things. But here we speak of sins, which are real
and true sins, which no man has devised, but

in which we are born and live, which are against God's commandment, and
against which God's commandment testifies, and not only man's
commandment. With such sins, says the Lord here, the apostles are to
deal, that they may forgive, or bind and keep. They are not to deal with
money and goods and worldly affairs. That therefore in an apostle's or
preacher's mouth there is heaven and hell at the same time: if thou
wilt be impenitent, sure and wicked, that they may cast thee down to
hell; again, if thou knowest thy sin, and comfortest thyself of the
passion and resurrection of Christ, heaven shall be open unto thee, and
such a sentence shall be pronounced upon thee by the minister of the
church, as the devil himself must fear, and count thee free from all
sin, if thou accept it with right faith.

(9) Now this is such authority, against which emperors and kings are
nothing, that an apostle, even every disciple of Christ, may pronounce a
sentence on the whole world, that sin shall be done away. And such
judgment shall be as mighty and sure as if Christ himself had spoken it;
as his words here testify, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I
you."

(10) Now this is one thing, that sin is not to be called a worldly
thing, but a fear and burden of the conscience, which bewails and makes
us guilty before God. This also serves to prevent us from committing the
foolish sins of which I have spoken above. For if you wanted to be
released from the same foolish and lying sins, it would follow that you
would then also have to turn to foolish and lying righteousness.
Therefore, notice this definition well, that sin means that which
exposes God's law to us and accuses us of it. If it is not such a sin,
then it is not a real sin, but an imagined and made-up papal sin, since
God knows nothing about it and harms us nothing.

011 But now it is seen that there are many of them in right, great,
public sins, such as avarice, adultery, thievery, usury, wrath, envy,
gluttony, blasphemy, and the like; and yet they care nothing for them,
go on always, and leave roses.

**5448 .2, 205-207. On the first Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1189-1193. 545**

wear. There is no lack of sin, but the fact that one does not recognize
it and does not want to let go of it. Such sin cannot be forgiven, but
binding belongs to it, and the other force, since Christ says here
about: "Whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

(12) Therefore a certain distinction is to be made here, and the
proper sins are to be divided in this way: that some sins are sins both
before us and before God; but some are sins only before God, and not
before us; for we do not want to recognize them, nor to be concerned
about them, nor to ask forgiveness. So David says: Tibi peccavi: "Lord,
I have sinned against you and done evil in your sight. There it is both
together, that David sees that he has done wrong, and knows that it
displeases God. As if he wanted to say, "I recognize and feel sin, not
only by remembering it, but also by seeing and feeling the power of sin,
what it is capable of, that it is an evil devil and a terrible burden
that wants to accuse me before God, drag me into hell and eternal death.
As Paul also speaks to the Romans in chapter 7, v. 8, 9: "Without the
law sin was dead, but I lived without the law." This means that sin is
always in us, but because the law does not come, sin is as if it were
asleep, for it does not hurt, it does not bite or gnaw. Hence it is that
you go and gather one over another; otherwise you would fear God and
become more godly.

(13) But when the thunderbolt, the law, comes into the heart and stirs
the conscience, then sin comes to life in a moment, so that you see what
a mighty thing it is, that it takes away God from you, gives you over to
the devil and pushes you into hell. Therefore Paul says: "When the
commandment came, sin came to life again. But I died, and it came to
pass that the commandment was unto death, which was given unto me for
life," v. 9, 10.

014 Now this is the true sin, which is sin before God and me. So also
David, when he sinned with Bathsheba, went and cared little for it,
because

Sin was asleep and still dead. But when Nathan came and struck thunder
into his heart, "You are the man," sin began to live in David's
heart. He began to die. But Nathan comforted him, saying, "Nay, thou
shalt not die."

(15) This is called the apostles' rule, a rule which is not over life
and limb, money and goods, and what belongs to this life, but over real
sin, which you and God consider to be sin. That therefore all the sins
of the world are subject to the apostles and all church servants, and in
case of need to all Christians; that you can be sure in your heart when
you hear from your pastor, or if you cannot have him, from another
Christian, that in the name of Christ your sins shall be forgiven you,
that it is certainly true, and can just as easily be lacking as if
Christ himself had promised you, or had had you promised by an angel
from heaven.

(16) But such a command and power shall not serve the apostles and
ministers of the church for hope or glory, for they have nothing of it:
but they shall serve thee thereby, that thou mayest be delivered from
the enemy, who is too strong for thee, and shall hold thee captive for
ever without this consolation. Therefore it is a great and glorious
power that a poor man, who is himself a wretched sinner, may presume to
drive out the enemy, to whom otherwise all the world must give way. For
thus saith Christ, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them"; item, "Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, the same shall be
loosed in heaven." Because now the words are clear: "As my Father
sends me, so I send you," so let no one ever doubt that as he hears
forgiveness of his sin, so he shall surely have it. But where sin is
gone, the devil's power is gone; he must depart.

(17) This is also the reason why your love is often exhorted, because
Christ has given such glorious power to his church that you should use
it and by no means despise it. For this is why the Lord Christ
instituted this ministry, so that all sins may be forgiven, provided
they are true sins and are recognized and believed in the words of the
Lord Christ. For the other foolish

546 **2.2, 207-210. On the first Sunday after Easter. W. xm,
iiss-ii96.** 547

Sins of man do not belong here; they must be sins that stir the heart
and make it anxious.

(18) As Adam also preacheth unto his son Cain, in the first book of
Mosiah, saying, "Is it not so? if thou be godly, thou art pleasant; but
if thou be not godly, sin resteth at the door." That is, you are
standing there now, and you are a sinner; but you do not yet feel it:
sin sleeps, but in a very uneasy place. Therefore watch, if it wakes you
up once, it will be much different with you. For it sleeps not because
it wants to sleep always; but it is to make out, that is, to give you a
conscience, to frighten and gnaw you, so that you do not know where to
go in or out.

(19) Those, then, who do not accept their sins, have true sin, but not
forgivable sin. Therefore their sins are kept and bound for them; for
they do not desire to be forgiven, or they would cease from them.

20 In the papacy they preached thus: Whoever desires forgiveness of
sins, he should consider his sin and make a repentance or sorrow for
himself. The forgiveness of sins was then based on such repentance. Now
it can happen that such a way is taken from the example of the ancients,
who, just like us, do not want to absolve anyone, saying that he
confesses to be a sinner and that it is seen that he is sorry for his
sin. This is right and should be so. But to say that such sorrow and
repentance deserve that sin should be forgiven is wrong and unjust. For
repentance is not merit, but it is sin itself and the regiment of sins.
There is no need to build forgiveness of sins and grace on it.

(21) For before such repentance comes, sins are not taken care of. For
although sin is there, it is only a sleeping and dead sin, as Adam says
of Cain. But when sin comes to life, and no longer sleeps, but attacks
and terrifies the heart and conscience, this can never be called a
meritorious work, but, as Paul calls it, it is the

real living sin. But who will say that sin can deserve mercy?

(22) Therefore the people of the papacy have been miserably deceived
and seduced, that they have been absolved on such repentance as on merit
and good works. As in all Pabst's bulls the words are: contritis et
confessis, those who have repented and confessed shall have forgiveness
of sins. For repentance, if it is right, is nothing else than the
kingdom and rule of sins, which can never earn anything. Therefore one
has forgiveness of sins, if one believes the command of Christ here, and
accepts the word, which is proclaimed to us out of such command and in
his name, with hearty trust. Although it is necessary for those who
sincerely desire forgiveness of sins to be sorry for their sins, such
sorrow and repentance deserve nothing. Indeed, if God did not restore
consciences through the comfort of the Gospel, such repentance and
sorrow would even tear us away from faith and make us full of fear.

(23) That is, to awaken sin, to make it greater and stronger, and to
make it do what sin is supposed to do, so that the longer it goes on,
the more it grows, and one sin is added to another. Just as when a thief
has stolen and is hanged by the hangman, it does not stop there; other
sins add to the stealing, so that one becomes hostile to judgment and
justice, to the authorities and to God Himself. Paul speaks of this in
Romans 7 with a fine word, and says, v. 13: "Sin becomes exceedingly
sinful through the commandment," that is, it then becomes a real sin.
Where sin has its effect, and from one sin the world becomes full of
sin, so that there is no rest or resting place, this is what they called
repentance and sorrow.

(24) When this is right in the heart, then Christ comes and says,
"You are full of sins, and the longer you think of falling from me, the
more you think of falling from me: should I forgive your sins for this?
Oh no. There must be such repentance and sorrow. For otherwise thou
canst not be at enmity with sin from the heart, neither wilt thou ever
desire from the heart that it should be forgiven thee. But this is

548 **L. 2, 210-212. on the first Sunday after Easter. W. xm,
ii96-1200.** 549

the right way, that you may find yourself where my word is, and hear it,
and receive it with faith; and thereby you shall be delivered from sins.

(25) In this way they did not preach in the papacy, but sent the
people to St. James, to Rome and to other places, and after that to
their own repentance and satisfaction. But they did not say the least
thing about the word and command of Christ. But here it is: "Whose
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins
ye retain, they are retained. Therefore we should not seek forgiveness
of sins anywhere else, but only in the words of the Lord Christ. But
whoever looks elsewhere, as happened in the papacy, will not find it.
For what has it helped that we have toiled so hard with fasting,
singing, praying, watching, reading the Mass, and other things, so that
we might come to the forgiveness of sins? If my works, repentance and
confession can do it, what need is there of Christ's word? And what
need is there for him to give the command here? So let us be Turks and
Jews, who also believe that they want to be saved, even if they do not
have Christ. But the pope is worse than Turks and Jews, since he still
misuses the name of Christ for such error.

(26) Therefore, let us be careful to remember that Christ's
forgiveness of sins is found here in his word, and not in pilgrimages,
masses, almsgiving, or other works, call them what you will. If anyone
then desires forgiveness of sins, let him go to his parish priest or to
the nearest Christian, where he knows and finds God's word; there he
shall certainly find forgiveness of sins. For it is decided that we
cannot overcome sin by any work, but everything we can do, even if we
torture ourselves to death, is in vain and futile. As we have learned in
the papacy: Whoever had a bad conscience and therefore entered a
monastery or did other works to help him and make him happy, had to
confess that neither orders, prayers, fasting nor other torture could
have remedied such suffering.

27 What is the cause? Nothing else, except what is written here: that
sins may be retained, or forgiven, by the word. Therefore, whosoever
cometh not into this word, where there is remission of sins within, must
come into the other, whereby sins are retained; for there is no other
way nor means of remission of sins, but by the word. Therefore, do what
you will, but those who do not go to the Word and try to help themselves
with their own works will keep their sins. For our Lord God did not put
the forgiveness of sins in any work that we do, but in the one work that
Christ suffered and rose again. But the same work he hath put in the
apostles' and his ministers' mouths by the word, yea, in the mouths of
all Christians in time of need, that they should shew forth the
forgiveness of sins, and preach it to all them that desire it.

028 If then thou wilt seek forgiveness of sins, thou shalt surely find
it. For the command is there to forgive sins. But if thou wilt not get
it there, thy sins shall be retained, and thou shalt do what thou wilt.
For, as has often been said, apart from the word there is no forgiveness
of sins. Christ put the same word into the mouths of his apostles, and
indeed of all Christians. If anyone will not take it from this and
believe the word, let him do and do what he will, and his sins shall be
retained for him. For there is a strong command that the Lord take away
the forgiveness of sins out of all the world and all works, and put it
into the word, and there it shall be found.

Now this is not to be understood of absolution alone, that one may be
absolved from sins; but as reported in the beginning, the Lord here
summarizes the whole ministry of preaching or church office with this
command, that forgiveness of sins is to be proclaimed and distributed in
preaching and in the holy sacraments. For this is why the gospel is
preached, so that people may recognize their sin and become pious and
righteous. Baptism is preached for this reason, so that our sins may be
forgiven through the death of Christ. Item, the Lord therefore
institutes his supper, that we may

550 **L. 2, 212-214. on the first Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1200-1203.** 551

believe that his body was given for us and his blood was shed for our
sins, and so not to doubt the forgiveness of sins. So that faith may be
established that you and I are forgiven of our sins, Christ has decreed
that not one should be baptized or go to the sacrament for another, but
that each one should do it for himself. So also let each one hear the
word for himself, and seek and desire absolution. And let him not doubt
when he hears the word of forgiveness of sins in the name of Jesus, so
that his sins may be taken away from him and he may be delivered from
them in heaven and in the sight of God.

(30) Thus the word and the sacraments are not to be separated. For
Christ also put the sacraments into the word. And if it were without the
word, one could not take comfort in the sacraments; indeed, one could
not know what the sacraments were. Therefore it is not only a great
blindness and error, but also a terrible pity that the papists preach
forgiveness of sins, and yet forget the word, since it is all about, and
point people to a monkey game, that they should seek forgiveness of sins
with their own devotion and works.

31 Because our dear Lord Christ has put the forgiveness of sins into the
Word, and, as has often been reported, into the mouths of the ministers
of the church, and, to some extent, of all Christians, it follows that
one must believe in the forgiveness of sins, and that one can come to it
through faith alone. As then the reason of our doctrine is this, that we
are justified and saved by faith alone in Christ alone.

For you must ever confess that the word of our dear Lord Jesus Christ
has been spoken,

which he puts into the mouths of his dear disciples, cannot be grasped
with hands, nor with works, whether it be fasting, praying, almsgiving,
or whatever works it may be. It is faith alone that can grasp such a
word; and the heart alone is the right box for it, into which it can be
closed. That it is therefore true and certain that we must be justified
by faith alone, since forgiveness of sins is fasted in the word alone,
but the word can be accepted by faith alone.

The pope and his crowd do not know this; indeed, they are so stubborn
that they do not want to know. Therefore, faith and word have been left
behind, one with the other, and the poor people have been directed to
their own work, piety and merit. Now preach that God command you to be
silent, all of you boys. But it is highly necessary that we always hold
such papal doctrine against our true doctrine and do not forget the
papal abomination, so that we do not fall into it again, and seek
forgiveness of sins apart from the Word, in our own works. For the Lord
does not point us here to works, but to his word, which he puts into the
mouths of his disciples, and sends them just as he was sent.

(34) Wherefore, when sins are forgiven, and hearts, as Peter saith,
are purified by the Holy Ghost, then shall righteous and excellent
fruits grow and follow out of an excellent and good heart. For faith
does not celebrate, and the Holy Spirit, according to his nature, always
drives to obedience, and against the flesh and sin. May God grant us His
grace through Christ to believe and experience these things, amen.

[552 L.2, 214.2is. On the second Sunday after Easter. W. xm, 1212-1215.
553]{.underline}

**On the second Sunday after Easter, Misericordias Domini. *)**

**John 10:12-16.**

I am a good shepherd; a good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
But a hireling that is not a shepherd, that owneth not the sheep, seeth
the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf
catcheth and scattereth the sheep. But the hireling fleeth; for he is a
hireling, and regardeth not the sheep. I am a good shepherd, and know
mine own, and am known to mine own; as my Father knoweth me, and I know
the Father. And I lay down my life for the sheep. And I have other
sheep, which are not of this fold. And these I must bring, and they
shall hear my voice, and shall become One fold and One Shepherd.

This gospel, like other works of Christ, can be interpreted in two ways:
first, from faith, and then from love. According to faith it has the
opinion that Christ alone is the right shepherd, who dies for his sheep,
and no one else. For this work, for which Christ dies for us, no man, no
saint, nor angel has been able to do, that he could have finished the
man who was strangled by the devil through sin in paradise. Such is this
shepherd's own work, which no one can imitate. Just as other works
cannot be imitated by him, so that he has revealed himself to be the Son
of God.

2 Therefore no one can speak these words which Christ speaks here: "I
am a good shepherd; a good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
For this reason he wants to draw us to himself and teach us to believe
that the suffering of all the saints is not comparable to his suffering.
Moses and the prophets were great men, who preached and taught rightly
what one should do and believe. They also suffered much for it. But in
the work that Christ says here about dying for the sheep, they are all
vain hirelings and cannot save the sheep from the wolf. For you can see
that Moses and the prophets, when they preached and preached long

*) Held in house in 1534. item in 1533.

they have done their best, yet they remain dead and cannot save
themselves. How would they save a sheep or help it against the wolf, the
devil and death? Christ says: "A hireling who is not a shepherd, who
does not own the sheep, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep, and
flees, and the wolf catches and scatters the sheep. But the hireling
fleeth, because he is a hireling, and respecteth not the sheep."
Therefore, whoever endures in such a journey and does not want to be
torn apart by the wolf, the devil, must be careful not to rely on the
law or on good works, on this or that saint. For the law does not abide,
it departs; yea, that is more, it is yet well against us, and condemns
us. The good works also do not keep the sting, even they disappear.
Therefore let all comfort fall on holy living and good works, and learn
that by a right faith we may find our way to this one who says, "I am a
good shepherd, and lay down my life for my sheep." For this one does
not flee from the wolf, and would rather be torn to pieces over it than
leave a lamb to the wolf. Therefore, in such a journey, we should look
to him alone and hold on to him, knowing that through him, against the
devil, sin and death, as through the faithful shepherd of our souls, we
shall be preserved to eternal life. This is one thing that must be
grasped with faith: there is nothing we can do about it;

554 **2.2is-2i8. On the second Sunday after Easter. W. xm, 1215-1218.**
555

But he, the good shepherd, our Lord Christ, has done and arranged it
all, and commanded us to accept it and cling to it with firm faith.

The other lesson is that all the deeds of our dear shepherd are also
presented to us as an example. For just as Peter says about faith, 1
Peter 2:24, 25.Christ himself offered up our sin in his body on the
wood, that we might be freed from sin and live unto righteousness; by
whose wounds ye were healed, because ye were as sheep going astray; but
now are ye converted unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls." So
soon after he says also of love, saying, "Christ suffered, leaving us
an example, that ye should follow in his steps." Just as Christ died
for us, saving us from sins and eternal death through his own work,
without our doing, so we should also serve one another, no matter how
evil he may be. This then means to follow the example of Christ, and
every Christian also becomes a good shepherd. For even if I cannot save
others from death and sins with my own death, for this is the work of
the one true shepherd of Jesus Christ, as you have heard above, I can
still lay down my life so that others may be drawn to the word and
brought to the confession of Christ through such examples. For we see
how the world and the devil are hostile to the word; but especially the
pope turns all his power to suppress the word by force. There the pious
shepherds must suffer and in part give up their lives because of it.

4 Therefore devout, faithful preachers belong to them, because they are
redeemed by the death of Christ, so that they quickly follow the example
of Christ, and also die for the sake of the sheep, leaving their necks
above the word. Such dying does not make the others blessed. For
salvation comes only through the death of Christ. But nevertheless it
strengthens the others; and thus God is praised through my blood and
death, and the neighbor is strengthened in faith by it, although he is
not redeemed from death by it. For

The same must have happened before by the death of the one and right
shepherd, Christ JEsu, as is now often reported.

Here, then, are found hirelings and wolves. Before, in the first
doctrine of faith, Moses, the law, the prophets and all men are
hirelings, be they ever so pious. For none of them can protect himself,
let alone others, from the wolf, the devil and sin. But here, in the
doctrine of love, wolves are called the false teachers and tyrants who
persecute and condemn the doctrine. Wherever there is a devout
Christian, he will not be deterred when he sees the wolf, but before he
would let his neighbor be deprived of the word and the right knowledge
of Christ, he would rather leave his life and limb over it. As the holy
apostles and dear martyrs did: they did not flee, but ran into the jaws
of the wolf.

6 So it shall be. Whoever wants to be a preacher, let him mean it with
all his heart, that he alone seeks God's honor and his neighbor's
betterment. If, however, he does not seek them alone, but wants to
consider his own benefit or harm in such a ministry, you must not think
that he will stand. Either he will flee from it shamefully, and leave
the sheep and run away; or he will keep silent, and let the sheep go
without pasture, that is, without the word. These are the true
hirelings, who preach for their own profit and avarice, and are not
satisfied with that which God gives them daily for food as alms. For we
preachers should have no more of our ministry than abundance. But those
who want to have more and preach for the sake of money and good are
hirelings who do not respect the herds. On the other hand, a pious
preacher leaves everything above, even his life and limb.

(7) This is the other doctrine of the example, and applies not only to
those who are in church offices, but to all Christians. For let them all
confess the word, and rather lay down their life and limb, than let the
word press them into idolatry. For they know that they have a shepherd,
who for this cause hath laid down his life: whether they have already
laid down theirs

**[556 L. 2, 218-220. on the second Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1218-1222. 557]{.underline}**

They must also let them receive it again through him and never lose it
again in eternity.

8 Now the Lord goes on and preaches a sermon about his sheep,
distinguishing them from all other sheep. He also wants to separate his
teaching from heresy and all other teaching, and says:

**I am a good shepherd, and know mine own, and am known to mine own; as
my Father knoweth me, and I know the Father. And I lay down my life for
my sheep.**

009 As if to say, All things are for this cause, if ye will be my sheep,
that ye may know me your shepherd aright; and there shall be no need of
you.

010 Therefore a good preacher shall not preach any other thing unto the
people, but Christ only, that they may know him, what he is, and what he
giveth; that no man depart from his word, and that he only be accounted
a shepherd, laying down his life for his sheep. This is to be preached
diligently. After this we are also to set an example, so that, just as
Christ did and suffered everything for our sake, we also should gladly
do and suffer everything for the sake of the word. Whoever hears these
two things and understands them is called Christ's sheep. As he also
said above, "My sheep hear my voice." He who preaches and teaches it
is called a good shepherd, without which he cannot lay down his life for
his sheep, as Christ did.

(11) But they that will not hear such doctrine, or will not shew it
unto the sheep, are not Christ's sheep, neither are they right
shepherds; but where they are best, they are hirelings, or even ravening
wolves. They are not to be listened to, but to flee like the devil
himself. Thus is the Pabst's sermon by all means. He does not purify
the words of Christ when he says: "I am a good shepherd, and lay down
my life for my sheep"; but teaches that if we want to be safe from the
wolf, the devil and death, we must be our own shepherds and protect
ourselves by our own works. As you know, what has been preached about
the sacrifice of the Mass, almsgiving, pilgrimages, monasticism and
other things in the papacy.

(12) If we want to be true Christians, then

we must be like a little sheep that knows its shepherd's voice and
hears only him; it knows other voices and hears them not. Let us
therefore say to the pope and such preachers: I do not know your voice;
I hear a wolf that wants to tear me away from my shepherd and devour me.
Always away with the cry of the wolf; I will keep to my shepherd.

13. For thus Christ says here: "They shall hear my voice." And above
he saith, "The sheep follow not a stranger, but flee from him: for they
know not the voice of strangers." For it is impossible that a little
sheep, having once begun to believe, and having heard and apprehended
the voice of its shepherd, should hear the preaching which is contrary
to the voice of Christ. It hears the commandment of emperors and kings,
the commandment of princes, the commandment of cities, but it knows that
it does not serve salvation, for it is not for this reason that one
enters eternal life by such outward obedience. But when a preacher comes
and teaches, "If you want to be saved, you must do enough for your
sins, say mass, give alms," 2c. the little sheep does not hear, and
says, "I do not know your voice; it is not the shepherd's voice, but a
wolf's voice.

14) For a sheep has the nature and characteristic above all other
animals that it has a certain and sharp ear. If there were ten thousand
sheep together, they would flee and shy away, but they would not shy
away from their shepherd's voice, which they knew and followed. So, if
a thousand sheep are in a bunch together and their mothers are all
bleating, each little lamb knows its mother's voice and follows her
until she finds it, so that it can actually and surely hear.

(15) Christ looks at this kind and quality, and says, "I also have
such little animals, for I am a shepherd, and my sheep also have this
kind of nature, that they know my voice very surely and truly.
Therefore, where my voice is not, there no one brings it. Will therefore
teach us,

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1533.

[558 **D. 2, 220-222. on the second Sunday after Easter. W. XIII.
1222-1225.** 559]{.underline}

If we want to be his sheep, we must also have certain ears that separate
the voice of Christ from all other voices, be they bright, beautiful and
friendly.

(16) Therefore, we are to learn here and be careful to hear the word
of God and to base ourselves solely and surely on it, so that we do not
give way to the devil's temptation of all evil, which is in his power
to devour us, and also beware of false doctrine. For the wolf does not
let go of his wiles: if he cannot fell or catch you with false doctrine,
he will do it inwardly in the heart by evil thoughts. Then you must act
like a little sheep and say: I do not accept the voice; it is the
wolf's voice and not my shepherd's voice. My shepherd's voice means,
"I am a good shepherd, and I lay down my life for the sheep." So you,
wolf, would gladly lead me to despair, to fear my shepherd and run away
from him. So you will be able to resist the temptation, since the devil
would gladly weigh down your heart and make it mislead, or sad and
fearful.

(17) So let us learn to hear and know the voice of our Shepherd with
certainty; then we will know him rightly, and he will know and love us
again. For how can he be an enemy to us, if he lay down his life for us,
and give us eternal life, and take away from us death, and sin, and all
unhappiness? We will not find such things in any other voice, therefore
we should be all the more diligent to do so.

(18) Then this sermon is also comforting and fine in the case that the
Lord calls himself a shepherd, but us, who have and hear his word, his
sheep. For no Christian ever has cause to complain that he is forsaken.
It may well be that one lacks money and goods, another lacks health, a
third lacks something else, so that it seems as if we are in the midst
of wolves and have no shepherd. As Christ said to his disciples,
"Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves"; and we see it
daily before our eyes that the Christian church is in no other condition
than that of the wolves.

a little sheep that the wolf has now caught by the pelt and wants to
eat. It does not seem that we have a shepherd who will take care of us.

019 But it must be so, that we have no other comfort than the voice of
that shepherd, and his little pipe, as the Lord saith here, My sheep
know my voice. Whoever then turns to the voice and follows it can then
boast that he knows his shepherd well and that his shepherd also knows
him. For whoever heeds the word and follows it, the devil will have to
leave him satisfied. For let it be with life and limb, with money and
goods, with wife and child, as God wills, then he will always hear his
shepherd's voice crying out to him: You are my dear sheep, because you
listen to my voice and recognize me, and I also recognize you. So that
such knowledge is in the word and faith, and in nothing else. As the
Lord himself says, "I know them, even as my Father knoweth me, and I
the Father."

For when Christ, the Son of God, walked on earth Himself, He walked as
if He had been given to all devils and evil men, that they might do
their will with Him as they pleased. God poses as if he had forgotten
him, as if he knew nothing about him and did not know him. But since
Christ himself laments: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me";
since he dies on the cross and is buried, and the devil is now in hope
that God has forsaken him: then one sees that the Father knows him; for
he brings him out of hell and death.

21 So then, says Christ, so shall it be with you, my sheep. Do not be
deceived, though it may seem that I do not know you. For a Christian
must remain on earth so covered with misfortune, heartache, sin, and all
kinds of infirmities and afflictions, that it may be seen as if there
were no difference between him and an ungodly man. For life and death
are the same in outward appearance; and what is more, it seems that a
Christian is worse off with our Lord God than a heathen, for he is worse
off and has more troubles and trials. But do not be mistaken, but

[560 **L. 2, 222-224. on the second Sunday after Easter. W. xm,
122S-1228.** 561]{.underline}

remember what he says here, "I know my sheep."

(22) Yea, saith the devil and reason, how can he know thee, seeing
thou art so ill? Then answer thou, I know that he knoweth me, and shall
not hinder me in such faith, that I must die, and suffer all manner of
mischief. For I know his voice, and I hear it; and I hold to it, that he
saith unto me, as a shepherd unto his lamb, I am thy shepherd, I died
for thee, I laid down my life for thee. I hear this word and believe it;
this is my sure and certain sign that he knows me and I also know him.
Whether I feel differently than Christ says here, there is no harm in
that. After all, all of this is only a temporal challenge. On the other
hand, the word of eternal life teaches me that even if I feel death and
must die like others who do not believe in Christ, what of it? For here
I have the voice of my shepherd, which most kindly assures me, "He that
believeth on me shall never see death"; item: "I lay down my life for
my sheep". Therefore I do not doubt at all, my faithful shepherd -
Christ Jesus, knows me.

(23) But such knowledge remains hidden, that there may be room for
faith; otherwise, as soon as we were baptized pure and immortal, we
would have no need of either word or faith. But because the word still
remains, it must be believed and not even experienced until that day
when we no longer believe it, but will see and experience it in the
work. So there is no doubt that when a person is baptized, he becomes as
beautiful and bright before God as the dear sun, so that no sin remains,
but vain and eternal righteousness. For thus Christ Himself says, "He
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." But such things cannot
be seen outwardly. And yet it is true, if we judge by the word and the
voice of the shepherd. Therefore, it is all up to us to hold fast to the
word and remain true to it until the time when it will be revealed in
another and eternal life, as we now hear and believe in the word. For as
the present life and that life are two distinct lives: so it is not
possible to

It is important that you feel here in this life what you will feel and
experience there.

Therefore, it is a great art to know a Christian. Yes, one cannot really
know him here on earth. For what man can say that he is in eternal life?
And yet we must confess that this same child, who is still burdened with
death, sin and all misfortune, since he is not considered to have
eternal life, immediately begins to live eternally from his baptism. How
does this happen? One does not see it, but one sees only the old life.
But over the same old and sinful life God has made an eternal life, so
we already live in it (according to the word and faith), even though we
do not yet see or feel it.

(25) To know a Christian aright is not to judge him nor to look at him
with the eyes of the flesh, but by hearing and by the word. Like a
little sheep, which have their life by hearing; if they hear not the
voice of their shepherd, they go astray, and are led among wolves. For
without the voice of the shepherd it cannot be kept. Where it has the
same, it remains safe. But if it loses the voice of the shepherd, all
joy and security are gone, and it must fear and be afraid everywhere. It
is the same with a Christian: if he loses the word, his comfort is also
gone. But if he holds fast to the word, he sees his shepherd Christ, and
all that Christ has purchased and promised him, namely, forgiveness of
sins and eternal life. So he goes in full, certain hope, eats, drinks,
works, and does what he is commanded to do, yes, even suffers with joy
what he is commanded to suffer. For he hangs his ears on the voice and
mouth of his shepherd, and is accustomed to judge not according to what
he feels or senses, but according to the voice and how he hears. Now
this is what Christ says here: "I know mine own, and am known to mine
own, even as my Father knoweth me, and I know the Father, and I lay down
my life for them."

(26) Let us learn this, and so accustom our hearts that we may not be
offended at it, though Christians suffer and die.

[562 **D. 2. 224-226. on the second Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1228,1229.** 563]{.underline}

like other people. For this alone is the art of Christians, that they
can say, "For the sake of the outward life I see no difference between
Christians and unbelievers; indeed, Christians are generally worse off,
and have to suffer and suffer a hundred times more than other people.
But in the word I see a great and excellent difference, namely, that
Christians and unbelievers are distinguished, not according to their
noses or outward piety, but that they have and hear the voice of their
shepherd. The Gentiles do not hear it, nor the Turks nor the Jews, but
only the sheep of the Lord Christ. Otherwise, counting by the nose and
worldly things, no difference will be found.

(27) The Lord gives such glorious comfort to his Christians in that he
calls himself a good shepherd, saying, He knows his sheep as his Father
knows him, and lays down his life for them. It should also follow that
we, like the sheep, should keep ourselves right with such a devout and
faithful shepherd; that is, we should follow our shepherd's voice
alone. He comforts us, he has given his life for us; we should believe
such comfort and not despair because of sins, as the devil and our
sinful flesh always want to do and often make us fainthearted and timid.
Then we also love one another, and so love that we should also lay down
our lives for one another's sake. But how many are there who hear such
a voice? Most of them listen to the devil's voice and follow him when
he incites them to be stingy, unfaithful, deceive, lie and do other
things that are completely contrary to Christian love.

Such people prove with their own lives that they are not true sheep of
Christ, because they do not hear his voice: he warns so faithfully that
we should be patient in suffering, firm in faith and fervent in love,
and not hear the voice of the devil and of our own flesh, which tempts
us to sin; it is the wrong way that will lead us to destruction. But
most of it acts like a mad sheep: it cries, it whistles, the shepherd
does whatever he wants, so it always runs toward the wood, goes astray
and is given to the wolf. Let us all beware of such naughtiness, and be
pious, faithful sheep, who know our shepherd as he knows us, that is,
who love him, gladly hear his word, gladly follow his word, and do what
he tells us. But that the Lord says of other sheep, which he also shall
lead, that they may be one shepherd and one flock, this began
immediately after Pentecost, when the gospel was preached in all the
world by the apostles, and continues to the end of the world. Not as if
all men should be converted and accept the gospel. For nothing will come
of it; the devil will not let it come to that. So the world is hostile
to the word without that and wants to be unpunished. For this reason,
there will remain in the world all kinds of faith and religion. But this
is called One Shepherd and One Sheepfold, that God will receive all who
accept the gospel into children for Christ's sake, whether Jews or
Gentiles. For this is the right, one religion, to follow this shepherd
and his voice. May the faithful Shepherd of our souls grant us this
through the Holy Spirit, Amen.

564 **L. 2, 226.227. On the third Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1230-1234.** 565

**On the third Sunday after Easter, Jubilate.**

**The first sermon.**

**John 16:16-23.**

Over a little one ye shall not see me; but over a little one ye shall
see me: for I go unto the Father. Then said some of his disciples one to
another, What is this that he saith unto us, Over a little thing ye
shall not see me; and over a little thing ye shall see me, and that I go
unto the Father? Then they said: What is this that he saith concerning a
little one? we know not what he saith. Then Jesus perceived that they
were about to ask him, and said unto them: Of this ye ask one another,
that I said of a little one ye shall not see me; and of a little one ye
shall see me. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye shall weep and wail;
but the world shall rejoice. But ye shall be sorrowful: but your sorrow
shall be turned into joy. When a woman gives birth, she is sad, because
her hour has come. But when she has given birth to the child, she no
longer thinks of sorrow for the joy that the man is born into the world.
And ye also now have sorrow; but I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from you. And in that day
ye shall ask me nothing.

This gospel is a part of the comforting sermon, which the Lord preaches
to his disciples at night over the table, because soon after he was
betrayed in the garden of Judah and captured by the Jews. And especially
this consolation goes like this: although the disciples should be angry
and sorrowful over the shameful death of the Lord, yet such sorrow shall
not last long; for he, the Lord, shall be but a little one of them;
after that they shall see him again when he rises from the dead, and
shall rejoice in him, and enjoy such joy forever.

Now John tells us in many words how the disciples did not understand
such a sermon, and how they were not able to understand what the Lord
was talking about. Therefore the Lord must explain it to them, and they
still do not understand. Just as the disciples were sore, so we also
learn that we can never get out of the small things, and that the very
things that prevented the disciples from understanding them lie in our
way.

003 For when the temptation came upon them, and they saw the Lord Jesus
die so shamefully and miserably, they could not think that it was but a
small thing; but so

Their hearts were troubled: the Lord Christ was finished, and it would
now be in them that they would be treated and dealt with like their
Master.

4 But that they should have thought that it would only be two days, when
the Lord would rise from the dead into eternal life, and help them here
on earth against the world, the devil, sin and death, until he finally
made them blessed: nothing came of it. Therefore John reports afterwards
how on Easter Day, for fear of the Jews, they locked the house and
refused to believe that Christ had risen from the dead, although the
women and Peter and the other two disciples told them so. In sum, they
could not believe that it was only a small thing. They thought that
Christ would remain eternally in death, like other people; otherwise
they would not have mourned so much, but would have waited for his
resurrection with joy and consoled themselves with it.

(5) It is the same with us; when God lets a disaster come upon us, the
first thought that comes to our mind is: we must stay at the hilt, there
is neither help nor advice. We neither want to say nor sing that it is
only a small thing that needs to be done, and

566 **8.2, 227-23". On the third Sunday after Easter. W. xm,
1234-1236.** 567

God will soon and unexpectedly let himself be seen with his grace and
help. Therefore we become fainthearted and can do nothing but cry and
complain. Yet, as St. Paul says, we should rejoice and glory in our
trials, not only because of the help that is to come, which cannot be
withheld if we only believe and keep the word, but also because through
the cross, as the most certain test, we may know that we are God's
children, as we will report below.

(6) So this gospel is a beautiful sermon of comfort, not only for the
disciples, but for all Christians, that they should learn the word
modicum (about a small thing), and practice it in all their trials and
comfort themselves with it: It is only a small thing to do, then the
suffering will disappear, and all comfort and joy will be found.

In order that such consolation may be grasped all the more firmly, let
us now speak in general of the cross and suffering. Reason thinks that
if God had an eye on us and loved us, he would prevent all misfortune
and not let us suffer at all. But because now there, now there, all
adversity grows upon us, it concludes: God has either forgotten us or is
hostile to us, and does not want us; otherwise he would help us and not
let us lie and wriggle so miserably.

But against such thoughts, which we have by nature, we must equip
ourselves with God's word, and judge not according to what we think,
but as the word tells us. For if we judge apart from and without the
word, our judgment is wrong and deceives us. What then does the word
say? First, that not a hair of our head can perish unless it is the will
of God. Whoever then will judge according to such a word of our dear
Lord Christ will have to conclude: No matter how powerful and strong the
devil and the world may be, they are not able to do anything against a
Christian, unless it is the will of God. As the Lord Christ gives the
simile of the sparrow, which is a useless bird that does more harm than
good; and yet, says Christ, none of them fall to the earth and perish,
unless it be the will of the Father in heaven.

A Christian must certainly conclude that God is more interested in one
person than in many sparrows, if he does not want to prove Christ wrong,
as Christ Himself says in the same place. For this reason, he will keep
them in good watch and guard, and will not allow either the devil or the
world so much power that they can do whatever they want against a
Christian. But if they do something to him, God will know about it and
will have given his will beforehand, otherwise they would have to leave
it alone. This is one thing, mark it well, lest you think, when things
go badly for you, that God has forgotten you; if he remembered you,
things would go differently for you; for he remembers you, and yet lets
things go badly for you.

(9) Soon another thought is found, which is even more dangerous. For
if I am to believe that the misfortune I am suffering has been inflicted
on me by God, then reason continues and concludes: God must not mean
well with me, otherwise he would not let me suffer so much, he would
hand me over to suffering and be merciful to me. When the conscience
strikes here and the sins come to our attention, it is especially
difficult to despair of God, to become an enemy of Him, to turn away
from Him, and to seek help elsewhere, since God has forbidden it. For it
seems to us that it would be much more tolerable and far less,' where
the misfortune was inflicted on us by the evil enemy or evil people,
than that God should thus impose it on us.

(10) There is need again for us to be in harmony with God's word and
not to follow reason and its judgment. For then we would certainly
either fall into despair, or become enemies of God and pay no attention
to Him at all. Now, what does the Word say about this? Paul says in 1
Cor. 11, 31. 32: "If we judge ourselves, we will not be judged. But if
we are judged, we shall be chastened of the Lord, lest we be damned with
the world." This is a clear saying that God chastises and punishes
those whom He wants to preserve and keep for eternal life, and cannot be
an enemy to them, and that they must nevertheless suffer all kinds of
misfortune, crosses and trials.

568 L. **2, 230-232. on the third Sunday after Easter. W. xm,
1236-1239.** 569

(11) Therefore, in the time of temptation, we should keep this saying.
One has this, the other another concern, which he would like to be
overridden; but if he rightly considers, "Behold, if it were not for
this temptation, you would fall into this or that evil; God does it for
your good, that he may keep you in his fear, drive you to word and
prayer: then it will be found good that God does not punish us for being
hostile to him, but that he shows his love toward us and keeps us from
eternal misery. In this way the epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 12, 5. ff.,
brings up the saying of Solomon, Prov. 3, 11. 12.: "My son, do not
despise the chastening of the Lord, and do not despair when you are
punished by Him. For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and chasteneth
every son whom he receiveth. If therefore ye endure chastening, God
beareth you as children. For where is there a son whom the father does
not discipline? But if ye are without chastening, which they all have
received, then are ye bastards, and not children"; item: "If we have
had our fathers in the flesh for chasteners, and have chastened them;
ought we not much more to be subject to the spiritual father, that we
may live? And they chastened us a few days according to their pleasure,
but he for our profit, that we might obtain his sanctification. But all
chastening, when it is there, seems to us to be not joy, but sorrow. But
afterward it will give a peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who
are exercised by it." This saying testifies not only that the
punishment God inflicts on us is a love punishment and not a wrath
punishment, but that it is a fatherly love punishment. Therefore, when
we feel the punishment, we should not think that God is angry with us or
does not want ours. For for this very reason He punishes us, that we are
children, and remain with the inheritance, and are not to be cast off
from it.

12. But just as the word of the cross and suffering preaches to us, so
we also see it in examples. Who can, may, or will say that the almighty,
heavenly Father did not love His only begotten Son, Christ Jesus? And
yet

see his life and death, is not the love so hidden, that whoever would
judge according to the outward appearance, would have to say that God
was hostile to him from the heart, and ' respected him far, far less,
than the godless Jews, who exercised all their will to anger against
him? As Isaiah says, "We respected him as the one who was smitten by
GOD." And the Jews at the cross mocked his: "If he is the Son of God,
let him come down from the cross" 2c.

Just as God kept His Son here on earth, so He will keep all Christians.
As Christ himself says: "The servant is no more than his master. If
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you." And the epistle
to the Hebrews, as now heard, says exceedingly well: "If ye be without
chastening, which all the children of God are made partakers of, ye
shall not be children, but bastards." So you can see how Scripture and
example harmonize finely, that we should recognize God's gracious will,
and not think, when things go badly for us, as if God had forgotten us
and did not want us; but should accept the challenge as a certain
indication of God's love, and not doubt, because God thus calls us
home, we are His dear children.

14 Now one should also learn the reason why God deals with His children
so mercilessly (as it seems) and keeps them constantly under the rod.
Paul indicates such a cause when he says, "We are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world." Item David, Ps.
119, 71: "It is good for me, O Lord, that thou hast chastened me, that
I might learn thy judgments." And Isaiah, chapter 28, v. 19: Vexatio
dat intellectum: "The accident alone teaches to heed the word." For it
is certain that if God gave us everything we would like to have and
protected us from all misfortune, we would certainly not pay attention
to our sin and would not think of the word or prayer. But if now here,
now there the hail strikes, and now this, soon another adversity is
found, then one has cause not only to hurry to prayer, but also to
remember how we

570 **L. 2, 232-234. on the third Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1239-1242.** 571

We have deserved such punishment by our sins, and for this reason we
should henceforth be more diligent in our efforts to improve our lives,
so that the punishment may be taken away or alleviated. As the epistle
says to the Hebrews, "Our Father who is in heaven chastens us to use
us, that we may obtain his sanctification.

(15) Therefore, when a Christian feels the cross, he should not allow
himself to be softened that he would not weep and mourn. He should
remember: I have a merciful God in heaven, who holds me like all his
children, and through such temptation, harm and adversity will remind me
of my sins, and admonish me to repentance, so that I may become more
pious and keep myself from sinning, and remain his child. Whoever does
this needs the cross rightly and does not become impatient in suffering;
therefore, he is not moved by impatience to seek forbidden means and
help, but waits for God's help and asks for it.

16. for this is the fourth part: that after it is known that nothing
can happen to us apart from God's will, and that it is God's gracious
will where He allows something to happen to us: that then one should
further know and believe that God will also bring about the end and
salvation with the temptation; as St. Paul very finely speaks, 1 Cor.
10:13: "God is faithful, who will not let you be tempted above your
ability, but will make an end of temptation so that you may be able to
endure it." And it rhymes especially with this passage that the Lord
says here of the modico (the little one): "It shall not last long; your
sorrow shall become joy, and everlasting gladness.

(17) But there are two excellent reasons why we cannot consider it a
small thing, and therefore do not want to follow it with faith. The
first is that the temptation is so great and severe that it seems to us
that we must remain above it, that there is no strength or power left to
hold out any longer. As is seen in Hezekiah the king, Isa. 37, when the
king of Assyria's archenemy summoned the city of Jerusalem, Hezekiah
sent to the prophet Isaiah and told him these words

saying, "This is a day of affliction, reproach and blasphemy. For the
children have come to birth, and there is no strength to give birth,"
v. 3. And the Lord also uses the same simile here of a woman giving
birth. There it can be seen as if child and mother must remain with each
other. For the temptations of Christians are not bad, small temptations;
as can be seen in the 69th Psalm, where Christ himself laments and cries
out, v. 2, 3: "God, help me; for the waters are come up to my soul. I
am sinking in the deep mud, for there is no bottom. I am in deep waters,
and the flood wants to drown me."

(18) The other is that we see no way, means, or manner by which we can
be helped. So we conclude that we are finished, and cannot believe that
it is only for the sake of a little thing. The likeness the Lord gives
of a woman in childbirth serves this purpose especially well. For there
it can also be seen as if there will be no end and the mother must
remain. But in a moment, instead of death, a twofold life comes forth,
the mother has recovered, and a beautiful, healthy child is born.
Therefore, all sorrow disappears immediately and there is joy. This can
be seen every day before one's eyes. For even though things may
sometimes go badly, such things seldom happen. The common course, as
Christ says here, is that a constant, long-lasting, heartfelt joy soon
and unexpectedly follows the sorrow and pain. This is what the Lord
wants us to learn, and when we are in sorrow, temptation and distress,
to remember it: Let it be for a little thing, and after that it shall be
better. As the epistle to the Hebrews also says: "All chastening, when
it comes, seems to us to be not joy but sorrow. But afterward it will
give a peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who are exercised by
it."

(19) So, first of all, it is called a "little one" for the sake of
the sudden, rapid change that is to come sooner than one thinks, if we
only persevere with prayer and do not drop our trust in God's gracious
help.

572 ' **2.234-236. On the third Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1242-1245.** 573

let. After this, the trial is also called a small thing, so that it may
be confused with eternal joy. For what is it that poor Lazarus is poor
and miserable for ten or twenty years, compared to the fact that he will
live for eternity? So Paul says to the Romans in chapter 8, v. 18: "I
consider that this time of suffering is not worthy of the glory that is
to be revealed in us"; and 2 Cor. 4, 17. 18: "Our affliction, which is
temporal and light, creates for us an eternal and exceeding glory, which
we see not in things visible but in things invisible." And Peter, 1
Pet. 1, 6. 7.: "Ye shall rejoice in blessedness, which now for a little
season are sorrowful in divers temptations; that your faith may be found
righteous, and much more precious than corruptible gold"; and afterward
on the 5th chapter, v. 10. Chapter 10: "God of all grace, who has
called you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, will prepare,
strengthen, fortify and establish you who are suffering a little while.

(20) Therefore, if anyone believes and believes it to be true that it
is a matter of a little, he has a certain comfort to which he can turn
in the face of adversity and suffering. Therefore it all depends on
this, that we trust our dear Lord Christ and believe his word to be
true, that although misfortune and temptation are upon us, it is only a
matter of a little; so that we may comfort ourselves in suffering, as
one comforts a woman who is in childish distress, that she should have
confidence that God will soon relieve her of the burden, and restore her
with a joyful sight.

idols. For it is not possible to come to joy, one must first have pain
and suffer something. As I said before, our reason may always plague us
and want to interpret such suffering and pain as if God wanted to let us
perish in it, but this is not the opinion. For the very pains and
travail that a woman in childbirth has, come because a new fruit is to
be brought into the world. So God allows the temptation to come so that
we may find salvation and rejoice because of it.

21 Now it is especially good that the Lord tells the disciples what joy
is to come to them. "I," he says, "will see you again." This
happened on the holy Easter day, when they saw him in a new, eternal
life. So Christ also sees us, and our heart rejoices when we see his
resurrection before us, and see how he has overcome us to good sin,
death, and the devil, that through him also we should live forever. This
is the true lasting, eternal joy, which turns away all sorrow and shall
never be taken away from us.

22 Therefore we should not be impatient or fainthearted under the cross,
but hold fast this comfort, that though we suffer, it may be for a
little. For Christ is risen from the dead and sits at the right hand of
his Father, to ward off the devil and all misery, and to make us
eternally blessed. May our faithful God and Father grant us this through
His Son and our Redeemer, Christ Jesus, amen.

[574 **L. 2, 236.237. On the third Sunday after Easter. L. 2, 237.**
575]{.underline}

**On the third Sunday after Easter, Jubilate.**

**The second sermon.*)**

In today's Gospel, your beloved hear a prophecy and warning about the
fate of the Christian church and all devout Christians on earth, namely,
that they will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice.

(2) Such a prophecy does not rhyme at all with our reason, for we know
the difference between Christians and the world. The world does not know
God, and either persecutes or despises God's word, and devotes all its
diligence, effort and work to having good days here on earth and to
having everything to the full, thus going in the highest security, doing
what it reveals, regardless of whether God is pleased or displeased, as
we can see, not by bad, lowly people, but by those who are the most
pious in front of the world, such as the pope and bishops, and the same
spiritless crowd of all, along with their followers.

It is certain, however, that the Christian church is such a small group
that knows God well, has only comfort in Him and puts all hope in Him,
considers God's word to be the highest and noblest treasure, and turns
its whole life, all diligence and care, towards resisting sin and the
flesh and keeping to God's will. Because Christians alone see and know
how great grace God has shown them, they do not want to disobey and
anger such a gracious God. This is also their greatest concern when they
are hurried by the flesh or otherwise do wrong out of weakness.

4 Because we see such inequality and difference between the Christians
and the world, we cannot judge nature in any other way than that each
part has its own nature.

*) This sermon is found only in the Nuremberg editions published since
1547. Walch also does not have it in this place. D. Red.

The Christians shall enjoy their piety, the bad boys shall be punished
because of their misconduct. This is our reason's actual understanding
and judgment, and where it is otherwise, it considers it to be
unreasonable; for God, as a just God, must keep His own, but punish the
wicked.

5 But hear and learn thou what Christ here concludes. "Verily,
verily," saith he, "ye shall weep and wail, but the world shall
rejoice, but ye shall have sorrow." This means that the Christians on
earth will be in a bad way and all kinds of misfortune will befall them,
that they will weep and mourn for nothing. But again with the world it
shall go according to the common saying: The greater the mischief, the
better the fortune. But the Lord makes it very annual with the
Christians, because he compares them to a woman who is in childish
distress. For as there is no greater adversity on earth, that where God
does not help by his gracious hand and set child and mother free from
each other, both mother and child must fall to the ground: so the
suffering of Christians should not be a bad, small thing; it should be
the highest, heaviest, most miserable thing, since nothing but God's
hand and help can save.

(6) Now what account God has for letting it happen as unequally as it
seems to us, your love will hear at another time. For first of all
Christ says: His kingdom is not of this world, therefore whoever wants
to be a Christian should by no means set his date to become glorious,
rich, powerful before the world because of his faith. For the Lord of
this kingdom, Christ Jesus, is himself poor and miserable, and for his
faithful service and preaching he had better not be rewarded but with
the gallows and the cross. On the other hand, the Christians have to be

576 **L. 2, 237.238. On the third Sunday after Easter. L. 2, 238.239.**
577

The flesh and blood are their greatest and most dangerous enemy; where
the flesh and blood are not pressed down and subdued by the cross, the
spirit would be struck down. But because the cross lies on the flesh and
presses it, the spirit is urged by necessity to adhere to the word,
prayer and other Christian practices, which otherwise would either
remain at all or be very cold and low. But of this we will not report
now, but see what has moved the Lord to forewarn his Christians of such
evil and to warn them of it, when it seems that it would have been
better to keep silent. For if your heart should know of a calamity
before it befalls you, and yet you are unable to avoid it, you will only
have more displeasure, horror, terror and sorrow, since otherwise both
would be involved at the same time. Horror and suffering, and the horror
does not come before the suffering. On the other hand, this is also
true, because the Lord says so dryly that Christians must suffer from
their faith and confession, so that many are angry about it. To avoid
driving, they will leave Christ and his faith behind, like the example
before their eyes, and the denied evangelicals will turn very finely to
the wind: Because they see that great lords are hostile to the word and
intend to curb it, they stick to the papists, since they have no such
weather to worry about, keep quiet about the gospel, pretend to the
lords, help them to all unkindness; for they are afraid of the fire that
our Lord God kindles through his gospel, and fearing that they might get
burned, go the farther out of the way. For the cross and suffering is
such an herb that few people can digest; it requires very strong
stomachs.

(7) But let the world here judge what it will, we must nevertheless
confess, if we continue to think about the matter, that it is not only
very necessary, but also very useful, that Christ leaves this warning of
his church behind. For this serves us first of all to prepare ourselves
for the challenge, to take heart and courage, and not to despair when
disaster strikes. For the saying is true: Jacula praevisa minus.

nocent: He who worries about the shot can take care. Again, if one is
attacked without warning, one is frightened, courage and sense fall
away, and the person is even upset. This does not happen where one has
foreknowledge, for the heart is prepared for it.

8 Secondly, it serves to prevent Christians from becoming angry at the
cross. For, as mentioned above, it is impossible for our reason to judge
otherwise. Where it sees that things are good and happy, it thinks that
God is merciful, that such people are God's dear children, since He
allows all good things to happen to them; and where things are bad, God
is angry that He does not respect such people, and has either forgotten
them or even abandoned them; as we see is the case today. We, who until
now have confessed God's word and boasted of it as if it were the right
doctrine, have now suffered countless hardships and misfortunes for a
long time. Again, the other part, the papists, are floating in
happiness, and everything they undertake against us is quickly lost to
them. What follows? They do not leave it at that, that we are miserable
and unhappy, but they are glorious and victorious: our doctrine, the
holy gospel, must be used and blasphemed. For they interpret our
accident as a certain sign that our doctrine is wrong. But by their
happiness they boast and defend their lies and idolatry, and they must
be vain of truth and the Holy Spirit, because they are so well off. Now,
they say, you can see which part is right. I think that God is above the
Gospel, since they have been praising it for so long. If it were Verbum
Domini (the word of the Lord), as they boast, it would not lie so
miserable in the muck 2c. Why do the papists speak such things, and how
can they blaspheme God's word so surely and so boldly? Therefore, they
see our accident and their happiness, and judge according to what is
right: because it is so right for them and not for us, they want to be
right and we must be wrong.

(9) This is a hard and great trouble, which has always done much harm
in the world, and has sorely afflicted the poor and weak hearts, but has
greatly strengthened the wicked.

578 **8.2, 239.240. On the third Sunday after Easter. 8. 2, 240.241.**
579

has. The Lord wants to prevent this with this warning, and warn his
Christians against such a false judgment of the world, that they should
judge differently and even learn the contradiction from it. Therefore,
set both parts against each other, as we are today. We, who have and
confess God's word, what do we do? How is it on our side? Alas, the
laughter is small, our poor brothers' accident goes to our hearts, we
weep and lament, and we are sorry that we should have neither peace nor
rest, when we have hitherto rendered all submissive obedience, without
letting ourselves be forced by the word under the pope's lies and
idolatry. That is certain and true. On the other hand, look at our
opponents, who go in leaps and bounds, for whom the sky is full of
violins, they think that we and our Gospel have it all wrong, they are
ready to defy us, it is not far now, so things must be different in the
churches, regardless of the fact that it has been said so long and so
much that for the sake of religion we do not want to burden anyone.

So now you have the two parts. We weep, sigh and lament; our counterpart
laughs, sings and rejoices, and for joy and gladness does not know how
to stand. So now, let us ask ourselves, which part is right? Which part
is dear to God? Which part does God hold dear and with which part? Which
are His dear children? If you want to follow your reason and consider
that part as righteous and pious, which is best, then go and become a
Turk, for there you will find much more happiness than among the
Christians. Or if you want to improve things a little, as is already
done, become a pope, then you must not be afraid for the sake of your
faith and confession; great lords will love and value you, and you will
become a great lord yourself; for the pope is the right Pluto, who makes
his servants rich, Dan. 11, 39.

But what does God's word judge? What does our Lord Christ say about
this, whom we owe to believe as our Lord and eternal God? Of his church
and his dear disciples, who loved him dearly, he says: "Verily, verily,
I am the Lord.

tell you, you will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice." What do
you think? Who are these who are to weep and wail ? Are they not his
dear disciples? What do they do? Do they also murder? do they also
commit fornication? do they also persecute God's word? do they also
persecute Christ, like the chief priests, scribes, Pharisees? Oh no,
they were ever pious, bad, simple hearts, who would have liked nothing
better than to promote God's glory and the whole world's blessedness.
Such pious people should ever be well, God should take care of them, not
only save and protect them, but give them all happiness and blessings.
But Christ says it in clear words: "You will weep and wail. Let the
world weep, which does not know you, despises your word, commits murder,
fornication, theft, lies for and for, and is furiously angry with you;
let these weep, take these into punishment, they deserve it well. No,
says Christ, you will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice. For not
only is it well with you, but because it is also hostile to Christians,
it is its greatest joy that you should be so wretched.

12 Well, here you have the verdict of our Lord Christ. If thou wilt now
follow thy reason, and prove Christ false, go on unto his time, and thou
shalt find in the work who is true. But if thou wilt, as thou oughtest,
let the Lord Christ be justified. Dear, say again: We Lutherans, as they
call us, are weeping and wailing now, for we are in bitter trouble, what
will you take us for? Christ says, "Ye shall weep and wail." Again,
the papists rejoice and go about in leaps and bounds, and in twenty
years they have never been so heartily cheerful, joyful, even defiant
and proud, as they are now; therefore they do not intend to drop the few
abuses we have punished them with, but to bring everything back to the
old state, as it was forty years ago. What will you take them for now,
because they are thus heartily rejoicing? Is it not true, you will have
to confess, they are not Christ's disciples, otherwise they would weep
and wail; but the right world, so according to

580 **L. 2, 241.242. On the third Sunday after Easter. 11.2, 242-244.**
581

God, His Word, and the happiness of mankind, but only does and seeks
what serves their own honor, benefit, and welfare?

(13) Let this be a high and great and exceedingly necessary comfort to
me for the church and all true Christians. For since it should not and
cannot be otherwise here on earth, Christians must weep and cry: if they
did not have and know this consolation, the despair would make the cross
and suffering a thousand times more difficult and completely infallible,
as if God had forgotten them, as if he were an enemy to them, as if he
did not pay attention to them, otherwise they would be better off. Such
devilish thoughts turn a temporal into an eternal, a bodily into a
spiritual suffering, since it would be much better to die ten times than
to bear such anguish of conscience for a while. But God's word shines
before us here, like a bright light in the darkness, and says: Dear
Christian, if you are in trouble, if you have to suffer from the wicked
and watch their unrighteous joy, let yourself go: your Lord Christ has
foretold you that if you want to be his disciple, you must prepare
yourself, you must weep and wail. But no one weeps when he is well and
according to his will. Therefore, be patient and let such suffering be a
certain indication to you that you are a disciple of Christ and a child
of God, otherwise you would be like the world: it should rejoice, for it
seeks nothing else and desires nothing else. It wants to have its
kingdom of heaven on earth; where God's word lies in its way, it wipes
through it: regardless of what God gives or gives away, it does what it
desires. But it does not last long. Therefore, do not be annoyed by your
suffering, weeping and wailing, and do not be angry with the world; get
to know yourself and it well. Your weeping and wailing certainly show
you that you are a disciple of Christ; the world's laughter and joy
certainly show that it is the world and has no part in God's kingdom.

14 Thus the examples are exceedingly powerful. Christ, the Son of God
Himself, the eternal righteousness, must also weep and wail, and be
nailed to the cross; His people, the Jews, and especially His people,
the Jews, must weep and wail and be nailed to the cross.

the spiritual crowd, see it, and in his highest distress they mock him
in the most poisonous way: "If he is the son of God, let him descend.
As if they wanted to say: You have long since boasted that you are
God's son; now it is seen; you should not hang there if it were true:
but it has been a vain lie and blasphemy with you, therefore you must
hold out, the work convinces you that God does not want you. Just as the
papists now say: If our word were God's word, God would not give them
such a great victory against us. And yet it is true: the very Christ who
hangs so miserably on the cross, despised and blasphemed by everyone
with great certainty, is the true, eternal Son of God and the only jewel
in which God, the heavenly Father, has all joy and pleasure, as it is
finely found in the end. For it is not three days since Christ is in his
glory, but his enemies stand with shame and must ultimately fall to the
ground over it, even be eternally condemned.

John the Baptist is called a friend of the bridegroom by the Lord Christ
Himself. But how is he? He must have his head shamefully cut off for the
sake of a harlot. Such an accident moved the Jews to come out quickly
and surely despised his teaching, considering him a deceiver and a devil
preacher. Why? Because he was in such a bad way. But Christ gives him
another testimony, saying that no woman child is like John. How does it
rhyme now? John is such a pious man and carries out his ministry so
diligently that among all the prophets, apostles and preachers, none has
ever been like him, and yet he is in such a bad way. How can God suffer
and tolerate it? Should he not rather have struck the godless Herod and
his whore with lightning and hellish fire into the abyss of hell, and
saved such a great man? Yes, so it seems to us, but God's judgment is
different; that says: You, my disciples, you, my dear children, must
weep and cry, but the world shall rejoice. The more faithfully you keep
God's word, the more diligently you practice and live by God's word,
the worse it will be for you, the worse the world will be for you.

582 **L. 2, 244.245. On the third Sunday after Easter. L. 2, 245.246.**
583

ren. But on the other hand, it should be said: the worse the villain,
the greater the happiness. Christ, Stephen, the Jews, the high priests,
Herod, Pilate: those are pious and must suffer well; these are wicked,
godless boys, they remain great lords, and they are so pleased with
their courage that they do not worry about any sin, and they think they
are still doing God a service.

16 Thus you see how the example and the sermon are in harmony with each
other, and we are warned in all ways against the trouble in which the
whole world is drowned: that we should not judge as they do, but take
our judgment from God's word and not from reason. Otherwise, together
with the blind, unbelieving, possessed Jews, we will mock and ridicule
Christ on the cross, and because of his suffering we will consider him a
blasphemer and a rebel, and completely believe that God was hostile to
him, that he was not the Son of God, that God had abandoned and rejected
him, as you see that the Jews did. But if they had listened to God's
word, they would have kept their mouths shut and judged this case
according to the example of other saints, and said: "All God's saints
have always had it bad, they have had to suffer a lot; but God has
finally saved them and made them honorable: let us see how it will go
with Christ, if he does not help him from the cross, he can still help
him from death 2c. But they did not. When they saw his accident, he had
to be wrong and let himself be scolded for a deceiver; John the Baptist,
also so; we today, and especially now, after all kinds of evil have
befallen those who have confessed God's word with us so far, also so,
praise God! But learn and fret not, as the world does; it becomes sure
of its good fortune, and only goes on the more confidently in sins. For
it bases its judgment on what it has done. If you wanted to do this, you
would have to despair and give up. Therefore learn that the matter
should be and remain good, and yet the Christians should be in a bad
way. This is what Christ teaches you when he says today, "You will weep
and wail." How many thousands of pious, God-fearing hearts there are,
which day and night are now

and weep and sigh; for they cannot leave it alone, they must fear that
the word will suffer some harm. But the other part goes along in joy and
sings: Te Deum laudamus. (Lord God, we praise you.) For as they wish, so
they do. Be careful, then, and for life and limb do not follow the
world's judgment and anger; do not think that the doctrine is wrong or
that the cause is unjust, because there is so little happiness in it.
For if you confess that such people are Christians, then conclude: They
hold themselves so pious, godly and Christian they always want, yet they
will have to weep and cry. For God's children shall not fare
differently; Christ, the Son of God, himself did not fare differently.

(17) Mark this well, therefore, and learn the matter. Do not be
dismayed when things go badly for godly people; do not despair when
things go well for the wicked: it must be so, for Christ prophesied and
warned us: "You will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice.

18 Now let us consider the third cause of this warning. Our Lord Christ
says, as has been reported, that his Christians must go under the cross,
so that they may prepare themselves for it and not be grieved by the
suffering and misfortune. But he does not leave it at that alone, that
they must suffer; but teaches beside it what kind of suffering it will
be, namely, a small suffering, where again consolation is to follow. Not
because it should be a small, bad thing that lies on the neck of the
Christians; no, the cross of the Christians is a hard cross, since they
would have to go under to the ground, where God would not save them.
That is why the Lord uses the likeness of a woman working to give birth:
she is in the highest, most severe, most dangerous suffering that there
is on earth. But still it is a small suffering. For it changes beyond
measure quickly and unawares. When the weak mother, who has worked
herself to death, thinks that it is over, that the fruit and the mother
must perish together, God gives wonderful help, so that in a moment
mother and child are redeemed and live. Thus, says Christ, will be the
suffering of my disciples: they will suffer exceedingly.

584 **n. 2, 246.247. On the third Sunday after Easter. L. 2, 247.248.**
585

But if it is for a little thing, your sorrow shall become joy, and that
joy which endureth not for a time, as the world endureth, but abideth
for ever. For Christ does not put us off to this poor, temporal life,
which must come to an end through death; he wants to make us eternally
blessed. Remember this and believe it firmly, and you will find certain
comfort. For the happiness of the wicked will no longer grieve you,
because you know for certain that you also have a happiness to look
forward to, and such a happiness as is eternal; so your misfortune will
not frighten you, for it will be a small one. Then it shall be turned:
thy short sorrow shall become everlasting joy, and the wicked's short
joy shall become everlasting sorrow. As the examples sufficiently prove.
David, the pious man, was driven out of the country by his own son
Absalom, so that he had to fear that he would not come back to rule for
the rest of his life; as he says to Zadok the priest, when he told him
to go to Jerusalem again with the ark of God: "You go and bring the ark
back into the city. If I find favor in the sight of God, he will bring
me home again and let me see it and his house. But thus saith he: I have
no desire for you; behold, here I am, and he will do with me as it
pleases him," 2 Reg. 15. (2 Sam. 15:25, 26.) There you see what kind of
ride poor David is in. Now it was certain that he had not earned it
against Absalom; again, it was certain that Absalom was not so pious
that he should have such a victory against his father: and yet it
happened both that Absalom became king and David fugitive.

(19) Whoever judges the matter according to good fortune and happiness
will give poor, innocent David to the devil and lift Absalom into heaven
and into the bosom of our Lord God. But both parts are mistaken. Absalom
is a rebellious, wicked wretch; but David is a pious, innocent ruler.
Why then is he so bitterly wicked? and why should the godless Absalom be
denied his privileges?

so did it come to pass? Answer: It had a cause that no man could know;
only God and David knew. David had long before sinned against God by
committing adultery and death; God did not want to let others go
unpunished as an eternal example and warning, so that others might
beware of such sin and learn to fear God's wrath from David's example.
For this reason, David had to bear such shame and damage. But what was
Absalom's business? Absalom could not judge him or pass judgment; it
was a bargain that God alone should and would judge. David saw this,
therefore humbled himself before God, knew well that he deserved it, and
therefore willingly submitted to the punishment. "Does not the LORD
delight in me," he said, "behold, here I am; he will do with me as he
pleases. But this did not make Absalom's case any better before God, to
whom the whole kingdom belonged. But how did it end? Isn't it true that
both parts were about a little thing, and David became king again, and
Absalom hung on a tree like a wicked man? So it shall be for and for
with the church and the wicked. Keep faithfully to God's word, beware
of sins, be pious, wait for what God has commanded you to do, and do no
harm. If you are unhappy, do no harm; Christians must weep and wail. But
if the enemies of the word boast and rejoice, be not dismayed at it; for
it is said, "Over a little thing commerce shall suddenly turn, that
here sorrow may be turned into joy, and there joy into everlasting
sorrow. For because they are in their joy, they think nothing of God and
His word, proceed in sins without correction, and do as they please: how
then can it fail that God should not be angry and punish them?
Therefore, let us learn the warning of our dear Lord Christ today, and
let us be well aware that we are in great need of it. For we now have
very great cause to weep and wail. But for this reason God is not
hostile to us, our teaching is not false, and our hope shall not be in
vain. It is for us, as it has always been for the Christians

586 8.2, 248.249. fourth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII, 1260-1262. 587

gone. Therefore, because weeping and weeping are before our eyes, let us
wait for the joy, such an eternal joy shall be. If the world, soaring in
joy, does not want to think about its future, eternal suffering (as it
cannot think about it, otherwise it would not be so sure of its future).

let them be; time will bring both, that their short joy may become
eternal sorrow, and our short sorrow may become eternal joy, amen, amen.
Dear God in heaven, honor your word and prevent the Pabst's murder,
amen.

**On the fourth Sunday after Easter, Cantate.**

**John 16:3-13.**

But now I go unto him that sent me: and none of you asked me, Whither
goest thou? but because I spake these things unto you, your heart was
filled with sorrow. But I tell you the truth, it is good for you that I
go. For if I do not go, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I go,
I will send him to you. And when he cometh, he shall punish the world
for sin, and for righteousness, and for judgment. For sin, that they
believe not on me. And for righteousness, that I should go unto the
Father, and ye should not see me henceforth. For the judgment, that the
prince of this world is judged. I still have much to say to you, but you
cannot bear it now. But when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will
guide you into all truth. For he shall not speak of himself; but what he
shall hear, that shall he speak; and what is to come, that shall he
declare unto you. The same shall transfigure me: for of mine he shall
take, and shall declare unto you. All that the Father has is mine;
therefore I said, He will take it from mine and proclaim it to you.

(1) This is a good gospel, for it deals chiefly with the high and
necessary article by which we are named and called Christians.
Therefore, although it is heard yearly, it cannot be learned
sufficiently. But if it is to remain in our hearts and bear fruit, it
must be practiced often and well.

2 This gospel, like the one eight days ago, is a comforting sermon that
the Lord preached over the table in the evening, shortly before he was
betrayed and captured. And this is why he wanted to prepare his
disciples against future troubles, so that they would not only not worry
because of this miserable, ignominious death, but would also learn what
good would come from such a death, and therefore receive comfort from
it. Therefore, just as he comforted them for eight days today, such
disgrace and sorrow should only be a small one, after which it should be
transformed into eternal joy: so he also comforts them here, and teaches
them the purpose of his death.

3. "I," he says, "go to him who sent me." That is, I will be
crucified and strangled tomorrow. "There is no one among you who asks
me where I am going," or what I am going to accomplish by this; "but
because I have told you these things, your hearts have been filled with
sorrow. But I tell you the truth, it is good for you that I go," and it
is for your sake. "For if I go not away, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost,
cometh not unto you," and the evil spirit retains his power and
authority. "But if I go, I will send the Holy Spirit to you." This is
the comfort the Lord wants us to learn and grasp, and for this reason
not to be angry or frightened by his suffering, but to take comfort in
the fact that it serves to strengthen the evil spirit and its tyranny,
and that the Holy Spirit is brought to us and given to us.

But what the Holy Spirit will do, what he will bring to us and teach us,

588 **2.2, 249-251.** on the fourth Sunday after Easter. **W. xm,
1262-1265.** 589

The Lord further indicates the same, saying, "He shall punish the world
for sin, for righteousness, and for judgment." This is truly too much
to take in one bite, that the Holy Spirit should take not one school,
one village, one city or two, but the whole world, and punish it. Now
whoever wants to resist such things must truly know a strong back and a
great ambush. For into the world belongs all that is born of Adam,
emperors, kings, princes. None shall be exempt; the Holy Spirit shall
rebuke them all together by the apostles and other preachers, saying, Ye
are all sinners, your none is righteous, your none is learned nor wise;
be ye at Jerusalem, at Rome, in whatsoever estate or station ye may, if
ye learn not of me, ye shall not be saved; but ye are of the devil, as
ye stand and as ye walk, and no godliness, holiness, nor good works
shall be able to help you. This, saith Christ, shall be the ministry of
the Holy Ghost, which he shall work through you poor beggars and
despised people, and shall punish the whole world.

Now this punishment is no joke. For he shall punish the world for sin,
for righteousness, and for judgment. If then sin is in the world, and
righteousness and judgment are not in the world, what will remain or
come of it? Therefore this preaching of the Holy Spirit is a severe
thunderclap against the world, that it is of the devil with all its good
works, and cannot enter the kingdom of God, unless the Holy Spirit helps
it from sins, makes it righteous, and removes it from judgment. There
are many other such sayings in Scripture. As when Paul says: "God has
decreed all things under sin"; item: "We are children of wrath by
nature." And Christ: "Unless someone is born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God." This actually means the preaching of the Holy Spirit,
thus punishing the world because of sin.

But what is sin? Is it not stealing, murder, adultery, and the like?
Yes, these are also sins; but not yet the true capital sin, since the
Holy Spirit has made

world for the sake of punishment. For there are many people who are not
guilty of such outward sin. But of the true capital sin, of which the
Holy Spirit preaches, all the world is guilty; otherwise he could not
punish all the world for it. This same sin is called not believing in
Jesus Christ. Of such sin the world knows nothing, the Holy Spirit must
first teach it; for the world only considers sin that which is forbidden
in the other tablet of Mosiah. It knows nothing about Christ; much less
does it know that it is a sin not to believe in him. And what will we
say about the world for a long time? In the schools themselves, among
the learned Christians, unbelief was not considered a sin, but
especially not an original sin. For no one can preach that unbelief is a
sin except the Holy Spirit, who also makes all the world sinners with
this preaching, since otherwise the world, for the sake of outward
works, can sometimes adorn itself and sell itself as pious.

(7) This then is the preaching of the Holy Ghost, that all the world,
except none, are sinners, because they believe not on Christ. Now this
is a strange sermon, to which the world is not accustomed; indeed, since
the world knows nothing at all about believing in the man Jesus. It
thinks that if it, like that Pharisee, Luc. 18, is not a murderer, not
an adulterer, not an unrighteous person, then it is enough and needs
nothing more. But the Holy Spirit preaches otherwise, saying, "I know
that in such an outward life one is more pious than another; but there
is the chief sin, in which ye all are in, that ye believe not on Christ.
No one has ever seen or known such sin apart from the preaching of the
Holy Spirit.

(8) Therefore conclude straightway and confidently, and say,
Whatsoever is not in faith is sin, whether it be charity, or prayer, or
fasting, or almsgiving; if faith in Christ Jesus be not there, then hear
thou here, that it shall be punished. And there is no other way to get
rid of such sin, except by believing in Christ Jesus.

This is a very powerful text, since no one can pass by. And yet the pope
and his crowd do not leave him unchallenged. Where they can't go any
further, they say, he speaks

590 L. 2, 251-253. On the fourth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1265-1268. 591

de fide formata per caritatem (from the faith that received its essence
through love). But keep such gloss here to this text. For no one can
ever deny that Christ speaks here of sin, and interprets sin as not
believing in him. Then it must follow that the form or good works are
there, as they can be in the best way, if faith in Christ is not there,
that man, with all such good works and virtues, is a sinner, and the
Holy Spirit will punish and condemn him for a sinner.

(10) Therefore, unbelief is the true capital sin and the source from
which all sin flows. For where unbelief is in the heart, that one does
not believe in Christ, it follows first of all that one does not accept
God's word; but either one despises it, or considers it a heresy and
lie, and persecutes it as if the devil had spoken it. More evil follows
from this, that one disobeys father and mother and the authorities, that
no one attends to his office and profession with diligence, but lives in
all fornication and naughtiness; except that some must sometimes fear or
be ashamed before the people. These then are the leaves and the whole
tree of unbelief; which therefore grows and blossoms from this root,
because the Holy Spirit reproves the world, and is not to be resisted.
For he that believeth not on Christ hath not the Holy Ghost, and
therefore can have no good thought. And even though he does something
that is not evil in itself, but good, he does it like a servant, out of
fear alone, and not out of a right, heartfelt obedience. So that the
world is a real devil's spawn, which cannot speak or do anything good,
nor can it take anything into its mind. The cause, the source and
fountain of all evil is unbelief.

(11) Whoever would paint the world rightly and give it its proper
color could say that there is a multitude of people on earth who do not
believe in Christ, and therefore blaspheme and profane His word, who in
their hearts, inwardly and outwardly, with words and deeds, murder,
steal, rob, and indulge in all naughtiness, and in addition abuse all
the gifts and goods of God our Lord.

(12) Against such men, saith Christ here, ye apostles and all
preachers ought to lay yourselves down and stand: for such punishment
must remain until the last day, that they should preach always,
Whatsoever is of the world, believeth not on Christ, is not of the
kingdom of Christ; but is of the devil: not of gross external sin only,
but of the principal sin, unbelief. And it does not help whether you
become a Carthusian, now doing this, now doing that; for as long as
unbelief remains, you are a damned sinner, and nothing helps you. This
alone must help you to drop such unbelief and believe in Christ and take
comfort in him against sin and death.

013 Now your love knows, and hath often heard, what faith is: not only
this, that a man know and believe that what is preached of Christ is
true; but a hearty confidence that thou also wilt accept it, that it is
done for thy sake, and for thy good. For the devil also knows that
Christ died, and believes it as surely as the papists; but he does not
believe that Christ died for him and too well for him. Such faith, that
I accept it, and you also accept it, that it has happened for us, is the
gift of the Holy Spirit alone. He therefore that hath not such faith as
this, that he may say: Christ died for me, that I should be delivered
from eternal death and sin, he is an unchristian, and remains a sinner,
though he martyre himself to death with good works.

(14) This is the first part of the ministry of the Holy Spirit, that
all things are sin, and that we, with all our good works and holy lives,
must be judged and condemned as sinners if we do not believe in Christ.
Therefore only fresh caps and plates, all orders, and what one has
undertaken to acquire forgiveness of sins through them, are trampled
underfoot. For I do not suffer one another to say: Christ died for me,
and: I will wear a cap, do this and that work, that I may become pious
and go to heaven. But whosoever will not receive such punishment, and
accept the Lord Christ, testifieth that he believeth not,

**592** L. 2, 283-2S6. On the fourth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1268-1270. **593**

and be a sinner like all others who are not of faith in Jesus Christ.

The other piece is that the Holy Spirit should also punish the world for
righteousness. This is also a hard word. The world has sin; it has not
godliness or righteousness, nor does it know how it should or could
become godly. What then is this righteousness? Seeing that the world has
judgment and justice, the heathen have given very fine ways and
teachings of a civil, honorable life; and it is impossible that it
should be unjust to hang thieves, to kill murderers 2c. Is not all this
right and good?

16 Christ answers here: Call this life what you will, only that you do
not call it righteousness, for it is not. For I do not preach the
righteousness of lawyers, but the righteousness which I preach is
called, I go to the Father, and henceforth ye see me not. This is not
German enough, and is less understandable than the next, that I should
be a sinner because I do not believe in Christ; for there we think:
There are still natural powers in man that he can make a devotion for
himself, prepare himself for grace and ask for it. This still makes
today that the papists can not be directed to this sermon. So it is also
said here, ridiculously and quite un-German, what righteousness is, that
you are a devout Christian when Christ goes to the Father and you do not
see him. This is a very powerful, beautiful text.

017 For what shall men boast or say of good works? There stands the word
of the Lord Christ, saying, By this ye are not justified, that ye do
this, or that, neither do your works; but this only, that I go to the
Father. Such a walk is true, eternal righteousness. The world knows
nothing of it, for not one letter is found of it in all the other books.
It is found in books: If a man keeps the Ten Commandments and does
nothing contrary to custom, law and order, he is a pious, righteous,
honorable man. But Christ does not say a word here about what you should
or should not do, but about what you should or should not do.

but only from his work, which he does, that he goes to the Father and we
do not see him. This shall be our righteousness, and nothing else.

18 Therefore, if we want to become truly devout, we must not begin with
our works. It will not do for thee to become a monk, so much as to
leave, watch, and pray. But it will do, if you want to get rid of sin
and become a Christian, that you know that Christ has gone to his
Father, and comfort yourself of such a walk from your heart, and nothing
else. Yes, you say, I thought I had to fast, pray and do good works! You
should do good works, for God has already commanded and enjoined you to
do them in the law. But this does not make you pious or righteous before
God. Cause: This happens only because Christ goes to the Father. This
way alone, and no other, is how we are redeemed from sins and justified.

19 Now the name of the Lord Christ is nothing else, but that he suffered
and died on the cross, and by death departed from this world, and went
to the Father, that is, ascended into heaven, where he sitteth at the
right hand of God, and reigneth. But we do not see these things, but
believe. This is the treasure by which we become righteous. So that
"righteousness" is not my work, power, or ability, but of the Lord
Christ, that he goes to the Father. This is what is said in German: No
one is justified, saved, or freed from sins, except by the fact that
Jesus Christ suffered, died, and rose again from death. This passage
makes one righteous, and nothing else.

(20) But how does it rhyme with this doctrine that the papists say
that he who would be saved must do it himself by his works? That would
be right: A Christian should live a Christian life and do good works;
but that one should be justified by good works is false and untruthful.
For it says here that only the going of our Lord Christ to the Father
shall do and establish it. This is the right and true righteousness,
which the world knows nothing about, and only the Holy Spirit teaches.

21. for the papists have not accepted the saying

**[594 8.2, 256-258. fourth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII, 1270-1273.
595]{.underline}**

Christ: "If you want to enter eternal life, keep the commandments of
God", has a far different opinion, and clearly shows that the papists
do not know what it means to keep the commandments of God, otherwise
they would not drag such a saying here. Therefore this opinion stands
firm and certain, that we can have no other righteousness, nor eternal
life, but this, that Jesus Christ has gone from this world to the
Father. I will abide in this, say I, and the devil shall not take it
from me, nor overthrow me. He may terrify me and make me
conscience-stricken; for I know very well that my ways are too weak for
him. But there is another way, which is not mine, but Christ's, in the
highest obedience to his heavenly Father; whom the devil will never be
able to make unrighteous or a sinner, if he makes me a sinner at once;
therefore I will also accept and comfort him.

(22) For this must be in every way, that this work may be done with
faith. There is no lack of this course and work of Christ. Christ has
accomplished it, and henceforth it is only up to us to accept it with
faith and take comfort in it. If you believe, you have it; but if you do
not believe, you have nothing. For with eyes it cannot be seen, as it is
clearly stated here, "I go to the Father, and henceforth ye see me
not." So that our righteousness may be taken purely and entirely apart
from us, and placed solely on Christ and His work or His course, so that
we may know for certain where we are to remain at last. For if it should
depend on our works and satisfaction, on our confession and repentance
(as has been preached in the papacy, and still is), our hearts could
never be satisfied. For when would we know that we had repented and
confessed enough, and had done enough for sin? Therefore our dear Lord
Christ has taken it away from us completely and placed it on Himself,
that we should base ourselves on the fact that our righteousness is
called and is His walk, His death, His satisfaction. For then we can no
longer doubt that the person is too high and too great, namely the Son
of God, and carries out the work that the Father has done.

himself arranged for us to be saved from sins and death, as John
therefore calls him a little lamb of God.

23 Thus your love sees how powerfully it is cut off in this text, that
righteousness is not our doing and not our doing; but that Christ goes
to the Father. If then thou hast such righteousness by faith, do good
works also, and be diligent, as best thou canst, to obey God. But before
you set your heart on Christ through right faith and confidence, you
will not be able to do good works. Cause, the heart is still evil and
unclean, there is no forgiveness of sins, because there is no faith.

(24) So the righteousness of Christians is a special piety that no
heart can conceive; one must hear and learn from the Holy Spirit; and
even if one hears it, one will not be able to comprehend it; it must be
believed, as the Lord says here, "I go to the Father, and you do not
see me away. That is, you must believe, otherwise you will not be able
to grasp it. This is the righteousness of Christians, which only the
Holy Spirit teaches. Philosophers, worldly authorities, lawyers, father
and mother can preach about the righteousness of the world. But a
Christian has a special art, because the world does not know about it,
namely, that apart from faith everything is sin, and that true, eternal
righteousness stands only on the fact that Christ goes to the Father,
and we no longer see him.

The third part is that the Holy Spirit will also punish the world for
judgment. But what kind of judgment this is, the Lord finely indicates
when he says, "For the prince of this world is judged. Just as the Holy
Spirit punishes the world for sin, because it does not believe in
Christ, and for lack of righteousness, because it does not know, and
does not take comfort in the fact that Christ has gone to the Father, so
He also punishes it for judgment, because it does not know about it, and
because it is afraid, when it should not be afraid if it heard Him and
accepted His word. For it is a miserable plague to have sin and no
righteousness, and to know no comfort against sin, death, and other
calamities.

596 2.2, 258-261. on the fourth Sunday after Easter. W. xm, 1273-1276.
597

26 Therefore Christ says that this also should be the ministry of the
Holy Spirit, that he should preach judgment and proclaim it everywhere
through the gospel: The prince of this world is judged, and therefore
can do no harm to those who believe in Christ and take comfort in his
going to the Father. He may well try them, now here, now there, but he
will not be able to do anything. For he is indeed a prince of the world,
but now judged, he who has lost his palace and his armor, and has been
bound by Christ with the chains of darkness, as Peter calls it.
Therefore Christians must not be afraid of him, nor of his whole kingdom
of the world. For when the prince is judged, the world, which is his
kingdom, must surely also have lost all power.

27 The unbelievers do not know this. Therefore, even if they sometimes
come to the word and begin to believe, as soon as the world sees it
sourly and wants to be angry, they are afraid and fall away again, as
Christ says in the parable of the seed on the rock. But the Christians
hold fast. Because there the punishment of the Holy Spirit always rings
in their hearts and ears: Why will you fear? Why will you be afraid? Do
you not know that the prince of this world is judged? He is no longer a
lord, no longer a prince. Thou hast another stronger Lord, Christ, who
hath overcome and bound him. Therefore let the prince and god of this
world look sour, bare his teeth, snarl, threaten, and stand unruly, for
he can do no more than a bad dog on a chain: he may bark, run now and
then, tear at the chain; but he cannot bite you, because he is bound and
you keep out of his way. So is the devil against every Christian also.
Therefore, it is all a matter of not being secure, but keeping the fear
of God and prayer, so that the chained dog may not harm us. But whoever
wants to be safe and walk safely without any worries, such a chain dog
could frighten him least of all, if he did not come so close to him that
he could bite him; as one can see from the evil dogs that they listen
and do not let themselves be heard all the way.

(28) Such comfort is especially necessary for those who have the
ministry of the Holy Spirit in the world and punish the world for sin
and righteousness. For the world will not and cannot suffer any
punishment less than to be called sinners, and to cry out for such
people as have no righteousness. Therefore, where such punishment goes
publicly (as it should go), the world begins to rage and rage as if it
were nonsensical. But the Holy Spirit is there and preaches to us about
this judgment; otherwise the preachers would become fearful and be
frightened. For this reason the Holy Spirit is called Paracletus, that
is, a comforter and helper, who makes hearts joyful and courageous in
temptation and all kinds of trouble and distress, because they hear and
believe that the prince of this world has been judged.

(29) This is the preaching of the ministry of the Holy Spirit, what
good he is to do on earth, and of what he is to preach and teach the
people especially. And it is certainly true that whoever does not
consider such preaching and teaching to be the noblest and highest
treasure on earth, so that he would rather leave life and limb behind
than receive such treasure, is not a Christian. Cause: Body and life,
and what we have, are all temporal and transitory. But this is an
eternal treasure, which brings us eternal life. As Paul says, "The
gospel is the power of God, which makes blessed everyone who believes in
it." For this reason we should rejoice with all our hearts in the
salvation Christ says here, and thank God, our gracious Father in
heaven, day and night for it, and pray that He will keep us in this
knowledge and let it increase from day to day, the longer the more, so
that we may be freed from sins and become partakers of eternal
righteousness, and may take great comfort in this judgment, that the
prince of this world has been judged.

(30) Now the Lord says again in response to such preaching, "I have
yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. But when
that one, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you in all truth."

31: But how the papists have used such a text

**598 D. 2, 261.262. On the fifth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1276,1277,1288,1289. 599**

you know that they defend all their changes and innovations with this
saying and say: The Holy Spirit has brought about such changes and
innovations and Christ has prophesied about it here. But it rhymes
exceedingly badly.

32 Therefore this is the right understanding, as if Christ wanted to
say: You hear what kind of ministry the Holy Spirit is to lead and what
he is to do among you. Of such things I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye understand them not till ye know them. For beyond what I
have now said, the Holy Spirit will also do this, that he will guide you
in the truth and guard you from false and vexatious teaching. For where
there is no such guidance of the Holy Spirit, it very soon happens that
one falls short of the truth or departs from the word; as we see how
wickedly an error is spun.

Arius had one or two sayings to which he adhered, and did not see so
many other excellent, bright testimonies of Christ. For this reason the
Anabaptists instruct rebaptism, so that the Lord says: "Go, teach, and
baptize all nations. Since the teaching of the aged is to precede
baptism, they conclude that infants are not to be baptized: Children
should not be baptized before they can be taught. The same thing
happened with the sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

The Holy Spirit has left the clear words of Christ lying around, and in
the meantime he has gone along with some dark and uncertain sayings of
the fathers and the old teachers. Therefore, it very soon happens that
one falls into error, where the Holy Spirit does not hold and guide us.

(34) After this, saith he, the Holy Ghost also shall prophesy, and
shall declare unto you things to come. For these things are also of his
works; as we have many examples in the stories of the apostles. Thirdly,
he says, he will transfigure me, that is, make your hearts full of the
knowledge of God, so that you will dare and suffer everything for my
sake, and have all your joy and comfort in me. Such and other things
will be the work of the Holy Spirit. But even if I tell you about it for
a long time, you will not understand it until you experience it.
Therefore I will leave it at this, that you may not be dismayed, but
rejoice at my departure, because then I will send you the Holy Spirit,
who will carry out this ministry of punishment in the world, so that you
may be freed from sin and be justified, and have eternal comfort.

35 This is the teaching of today's Gospel. May God the Father, through
Christ, send His Holy Spirit into our hearts and graciously establish
and complete this work in all of us, amen.

**On the fifth Sunday after Easter, Rogate. *)**

**John 16:23-30.**

Verily, verily, I say to you, if you ask the Father anything in my name,
he will give it to you. Until now, you have asked nothing in my name.
Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. These things have
I spoken unto you by proverb. But the time is coming when I will no
longer speak to you by proverb, but will freely proclaim to you from my
Father. In that day you will ask in my name. And I do not tell you that
I will ask the Father for you; for he himself, the Father, loves you,
because you love me and believe that I came forth from God. I came forth
from the Father, and am come into the world; again I leave the world,
and go to the Father. His disciples said to him, "Behold, now you speak
freely and do not say a proverb. Now we know that thou knowest all
things, and needest not that any man should ask thee. Therefore we
believe that you came from God.

*) Held in his home, 1533.

**600 L. 2, 262-264. on the fifth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1290-1293. 601**

1 Today's Gospel, as your beloved hears, is a splendid exhortation to
prayer. For after preaching, the highest service of Christians is to
pray. The Lord also gave this exhortation in the evening over the table,
soon after the sermon which your love heard fourteen days ago, when he
said to his disciples: "You will be sad because of my departure; but it
is only for a little, and I will see you again, and then your sadness
will become joy. This comfort is followed by the exhortation to pray.
And rhymes very well with each other. For where a Christian is in fear,
worry and anxiety, in trouble and misfortune, there is no other
consolation nor counsel than that he keep to prayer and cry out to God
for help.

2 The Lord here teaches his disciples and us that they should not forget
to pray when they are in mourning. And he comfortingly says that they
should be bold and undaunted in this work. "For," saith he, "I say
not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: for he himself, the
Father, loveth you, because ye love me, and believe that I came forth
from God." True, Christ does not leave it, he sits at the right hand of
the Father and represents us, as Paul says. So we know that his prayer,
which he made for his church and for us poor sinners at the last supper
over the table and afterwards on the cross, has been heard, and still
goes on and remains strong until the end of the world. But, saith
Christ, ye have no need of such prayer as this, which I make for you:
for ye can pray the Father yourselves: and doubt not, your prayer is
heard: for my Father loveth you, because ye love me. This is not to say
that we should not take comfort in Christ's prayer, but that we should
not despise our own prayer, because we love Christ. For this has been
decided, and we should be diligent to realize and learn that whoever has
a desire and love for Christ, the Father also wants to love him, and so
love him that he will hear him. Where then are the godless papists who
have pointed us to the intercession of the saints and put us off?

3) This means to comfort and entice us to prayer, that our dear Lord
Christ, through His death and departure from this world to the Father,
has given us such access to God, and that we can be wherever we want, in
church, in the house, in the cellar, in the kitchen, in the field, in
the workshop, if we are Christians and love Christ, so that we can come
before God in heaven with our hearts, talk to Him and pray for all that
concerns us.

4 For nothing else is needed for such prayer, but such a heart as this,
saying, Father in heaven, I know that thou lovest me, because I love thy
Son, and my Redeemer, Christ Jesus. In such trust and confidence I will
ask you now and comfortingly: not that I am so holy or pious, but that I
know that you will gladly give and bestow everything on us for the sake
of your Son Christ JEsu; in his name I now come before you and ask, and
do not doubt at all, that such a prayer (for my own sake, as I wish)
will be yes and certainly heard.

(5) For every Christian must beware lest he tarry so long in prayer,
until he think that he is altogether pure and skillful. As the devil
often troubles and hinders us with such thoughts, so that we think,
"Well, you are not skilled now, nor idle; you must first do this or
that, and then you can pray all the more quietly. Whoever follows such
thoughts and allows himself to be hindered and prevented from praying,
will certainly be like that farmer's wife who wanted to do something
before she began to wish, was thus prevented and never got around to
wishing. For the devil is a mischievous man, and always creeps up on us
to see if he can prevent us from doing this or that.

(6) Therefore we must prepare ourselves against him, and not allow
anything to hinder or hinder us; but as soon as the need is before us,
think thus: Now is the right hour of prayer; if I am not skillful or
worthy, God will make me skillful and worthy; for I know that he loves
me for Christ's sake, and not for mine, that I am so pious or holy.

7. this is what our dear Lord Christ wants here

602 **L. 2, 264-267.** on the fifth Sunday after Easter. **W. xm,
4293-4266.** 603

that we should pray, and not *) go, as the rude people do, saying, Eat
and drink, nevertheless, taste well to them, though they pray not an Our
Father in eight days. If you are a Christian, or if you want to be a
Christian, beware of such a crude life, and pray at least in the morning
when you get up, over and from the table, and in the evening when you go
to bed again, and say: Our Father, hallowed be your name 2c.

(8) For we Christians owe it to ourselves to pray without ceasing: if
not with our mouths (as we cannot always do), yet with our hearts. For
all hearts should desire every moment that God's name be hallowed, His
kingdom come, His will be done, item, that He may give peace in the
land, good weather, a healthy body 2c. This is what every Christian
desires in his heart every hour and every moment, even though his mouth
celebrates it, and even if he does not actually think about it, it is no
different in his heart. This means to pray spiritually and with the
heart. And we are in great need of such prayer, for the sake of the
constant journey that a Christian is not for a moment safe from the
devil and his own flesh, lest he fall into sin and disgrace.

(9) But beside such heartfelt prayer, oral prayer should also go. How
the same prayer should be arranged, the Lord teaches here and says:
"You shall ask in my name"; item: "The Father loves you, because you
love me, and believe that I came forth from God. When the person is thus
prepared to believe in Christ, then he is the right priest in his
chasuble and priestly adornment, and lacks nothing else, except that he
opens his mouth cheerfully, and takes up a certain piece, since it seems
to him that he and other Christians are most in need of it, and says:
"Lord, this is what I need, this is what they need; give it to us for
Christ's sake. 2c.

Now, however, we have fallen into such a time in particular that,
unfortunately, we are suffering from various hardships that occur daily
and become more and more difficult from day to day,

*) go there uninvited (*a b c*).

if we only prayed a lot. First of all, the devil is a liar and a
murderer. With lies he wants to dampen God's word; with murder he wants
to cause all kinds of unrest in the kingdom: Kingdom. That is why
neither the pope nor the Turk, along with other tyrants who oppose the
Word, celebrate. In this way, we learn about the needs of each one, even
if such common needs are not present. That is why we have enough causes
everywhere that drive us to prayer. But if anyone does not consider all
such needs, he need only take before him the holy Lord's Prayer, which
has seven parts in which all needs and all intentions are contained.

(11) In the first petition, "Hallowed be thy name," we pray for all
righteous preachers and against all heretics and unbelievers, against
Jews, pagans, Turks, and the pope; for all of these lust after the name
of God and unhallow it: that God may prevent them, give pious preachers,
and keep the word pure and clean, against all heresy.

(12) In the other petition, "Your kingdom come to us," we ask that
the kingdom of the devil and of death may come to an end. This is also a
very broad petition; that is, it includes the entire kingdom of the
devil, that God may put an end to it and establish His kingdom in us and
in all people through His Word and the Holy Spirit.

In the third prayer: "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven",
we ask that all wills be prevented that are against God's gracious
will. This is a very unpleasant request for the devil and the evil
people, and prevents a great deal of misfortune, which the devil and the
evil world would cause daily, if one did not defend oneself so nobly
with this prayer.

In the fourth petition, "Give us this day our daily bread," we pray
for our authorities, for our parents, for wife and child, for bread and
the fruits of the land, for peace, and for all that we need for the
maintenance of this temporal life, each in his own state, that God may
give him happiness and blessing in this and graciously protect him from
all misfortune.

15. in the fifth petition: "Forgive us

**604 L. 2, 267-269.** On the fifth Sunday after Easter. **W. XIII,
1296-1299. 605**

our iniquities as we forgive those who trespass against us," we pray
that God may have mercy on us, turn away from us the wrath we deserve,
not punish us for our sins, and also have mercy on us, so that we may
become more godly day by day and keep to His will, and live kindly among
ourselves, each forgiving the other's trespasses.

16) In the sixth petition, "Do not let us fall into temptation," we
pray that God will come to the aid of all hearts in particular, that He
will not leave them stuck in temptation, but will graciously help them
out through His Word and His Holy Spirit, and break the devil's power
and authority.

In the seventh petition, "But deliver us from evil," we ask for a
good, blessed hour, so that our Lord God may take us from this pit of
misery with grace and make us eternally blessed.

18 Thus in the Lord's Prayer, everything that may trouble us and
concern us, or serve us for the best, is very finely put together. All
such things are necessary for us to ask for daily. For there is enough
need, first of all in general, then in every house, station and being;
and it is only lacking in us that we do not open our mouths confidently
and pray. For the command is already there that we should pray, and the
promise is also there that it will be heard, yes, and certainly. And to
make matters worse, our dear Lord Christ has given us the form of prayer
himself, as you can see in the Lord's Prayer.

(19) Now we must confess that we are poor sinners, unworthy to come
before God and speak to God, and unworthy to receive anything from Him.
So that we may not let our unworthiness prevent us from praying, the
Lord commands us here in explicit words: We are to ask in his name; and
says to us: What we ask in his name, that shall be heard. With these
words, therefore, draw this service entirely out of the world into the
one person, Christ Jesus.

20 Therefore, all prayer that is not made in the name of Jesus is not
prayer, nor is it a prayer.

Divine service. As when a monk prays that God will be merciful to him
for the sake of Francisci or Dominici, to consider his or other merits,
fasting, praying 2c.: such is no prayer; for it is not in the name of
Christ, but in St. Francisci, Dominici or your name. Such a prayer is
the prayer of the Gentiles, Turks and Jews, yes, also the prayer of all
papists. For they do not want to have the name of Jesus alone in the
prayer, but add the names of the Virgin Marys, the apostles and other
saints. From such idolatrous prayer, nothing will come, God does not
hear it. And even though the things they ask for happen to them, they
happen to them only to their annoyance, to their great harm and
disadvantage, and it would have been better if it had not happened to
them.

(21) But Christians do not pray in this way; because of their name and
the name of other creatures, they despair and would never open their
mouths. But because they do not know that God is merciful through
Christ, and they are commanded to pray in the name of Jesus Christ, this
makes them bold and daring, so that even though they confess themselves
to be poor sinners and admit guilt, they still run before God, open
their mouths fearlessly and say: Father, we your children need this now
and that now; be merciful; look not on our sin, but on your Son Christ
Jesus; in his name we come before you now, and hear us. This is called
right prayer, when the prayer is made through and through in Christ
Jesus. And must follow what mau asks, that it be yea and amen in Christ
JEsu. This should make us happy and willing to pray, because we hear:
What one asks the Father in the name of Christ, that should penetrate,
and not rest until it comes before God's throne, and there Yes is
spoken over it.

22) On such a promise the Lord says to his disciples, "Hitherto have
ye asked nothing in my name." For they relied upon him; as those wicked
peasants relied upon their parish lord to pray for them, thinking they
thirsted not to pray. But, saith he, do it no more, but "ask, and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full." Such prayers

606 **L. 2, 269-271. on the fifth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1299-1302.** 607

We should consider the lack and the commandment and learn according to
them. Sadness, miserableness and temptation will not be absent.
Therefore, whoever wants to have constant, perfect joy and get out of
such distress, let him pray as Christ commands here, and do not doubt
that whatever he asks in the name of Christ will be done for him, if it
is otherwise for the glory of God and our salvation.

For there is a defect with us, as Paul says, that we do not always know
what and how we should ask. That is why many people ask God to help them
from this and that temptation. But nothing comes of it; for God sees and
knows much better what is good for us than we ourselves do. St. Paul
also asked that God would help him from his temptation. But what does
Christ say? (2 Cor. 12, 9.:) "Be satisfied with my grace, for my power
is mighty in the weak."

(24) So it may still be today that you would like to be free from this
challenge, and I from another: but God knows what is good for us, and
therefore leaves such suffering upon us, and does not help us from it;
for otherwise we would become too hopeful, insolent and sure. Therefore,
before we ask for our daily bread, we ask God to let His will be done.
And Christ himself, praying on the Mount of Olives, says: "Not my will,
but yours be done. So we should also ask, and always look to God's
will, and then not doubt that God will give us everything that serves
His glory and our blessedness.

25 After this, there is still a lack in us. God wants to help and give
us what we ask in the name of His Son Christ Jesus; there is no doubt
about that. But there is no time and way determined, how he wants to
help. Now our reason, flesh and blood does not let us celebrate. As soon
as it seems to us that the way we want to go does not want to go, we
think it is over, we have to go to the ground. It is the same with time:
it seems to us that if we are not advised in so many hours, days and
years, nothing will ever come of it. And will

Thus, through these two temptations, the faith is fiercely challenged
and weakened.

For this reason it is necessary that we keep God's word here and wait
for the help that is promised to us in the name of Christ, regardless of
time, manner or way, whenever it may be. For we are not to know such
circumstances, but God alone knows. For he has the name and is called:
Adjutor in opportunitate, a helper who helps at the appropriate time.
But because we are quite grumpy by nature, we always think that it is
now time for God to take too long. This is to say that we know the time
better than our Lord God Himself. We should beware of this, so that our
faith in the promise may stand firm, that God will hear us graciously
and in due time for the sake of Christ Jesus His Son.

(27) Now this is the doctrine of Christian prayer, which, as stated
above, we have great need of this day; neither have we any other comfort
on earth; as the Lord shows here, saying, "Ask, that your joy may be
full. For where there is no prayer, there can be no joy, or indeed no
perfect joy, but there must remain sorrow, anguish and sadness.

We have experienced this more than once during these years. For if our
prayers were effective, it would be impossible that the pope and other
tyrants would not have destroyed and exterminated us long ago. But
because the prayer is constant, that God will keep His word and His
church and defend the enemies of His word, we see that the more the pope
and other tyrants rage against the church, the more they fall. Therefore
let us henceforth continue diligently: we, to whom the word is
commanded, with preaching, and afterward every Christian for himself
with praying; so by these two things the Christian church will be well
preserved against the devil and all enemies of the word.

(29) Therefore, whoever loves the Christian church and would like to
see it prosper, he must also help to preserve it. But this is done only
through prayer, when you pray that the name of your God in heaven may be
sanctified, and that his kingdom may come.

608 **L. 2, 271-273. on the fifth Sunday after Easter. W. XIII,
1302-1305.** 609

and his will be done; again, that the devil's name be defiled, his
kingdom destroyed, and all his will and plots hindered. If you do this,
you and every Christian will stand as a warrior with his armor in the
field and in the forefront, helping to shield and protect the Christian
church against the devil and the world. For every Christian is a warrior
and is at war against the devil: we first with preaching, and then you
with us, with praying. These two things do the devil heartache when one
preaches diligently and prays earnestly; and if he is to be beaten and
broken, it must be done in this way alone. About this we also know that
our Father in heaven above likes it this way.

(30) I have no doubt that through our prayer many evil practices of
the persecutors of the word have been turned back and prevented; and if
anything good is to be done this day, and evil is to be prevented, it
must be done through prayer. Therefore, do not throw your prayer to the
wind, even if you think you are unskilled and unworthy of it. For
otherwise no one would pray. But let every Christian man speak to
himself thus: Because prayer is so pleasing to God, and so highly
necessary and useful to me and to the church and the government, I will
also go to the church and help to pray as much as I can; for I know that
it shall not be, nor can it be, in vain.

(31) It is a dangerous thought to think, 'Let others pray, your
prayer is not special. Therefore beware of it, and think thus: I have
ever loved Christ and his word, and would rather leave everything than
deny my Lord Christ; so it must follow that the Father also loves me and
will hear my prayer, as Christ here promises me. Therefore, I will not
let anything hinder me in praying, nor will I let it hold me back. So
that one may pray confidently in the name of Christ, and believe the
promise that we have here: "Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you
ask the Father in my name, he will give you"; then there is no need.

32 That now the Lord says further, "These things have I spoken unto you
by proverbs";

This has not the opinion as if the Lord had spoken with dark, hidden
words; because the words are ever louder and clear. But because the
disciples had no experience of this, and did not know what kind of
kingdom Christ would bring about, what he said to them was dark and
hidden, as if he spoke to them in an unknown language.

But, saith he, it shall be otherwise. The time is coming when I will no
longer speak to you through proverbs, but will freely proclaim to you
about my Father. For when the Holy Spirit comes, and sets hearts on fire
with a right trust in God's goodness and mercy through Christ, then it
follows that one can pray rightly, and is cheerful and willing to do so.
But without such a spirit, praying is impossible. Therefore Zechariah
calls him a spirit of grace and prayer. For both must be together. The
faith that one recognizes God as a gracious Father, since He gave His
Son to us; which faith is a gift of God that the Holy Spirit works in us
through the Gospel. Where there is such a spirit of grace, there also
follows the spirit of prayer, so that one cries out to God for help in
distress and temptation, and knows that God will not abandon us, but
will be with us and make us blessed for eternity for the sake of His Son
Christ Jesus.

34 Therefore the Lord says: "On the same day," when I will freely
proclaim the Father to you and teach you through the Holy Spirit that
you know him, "you will ask in my name," and such prayer will not be
in vain. For how could the Father deny you anything, since he loves you,
because you love me, and believe that I came from God? For true prayer
must flow from such faith and trust; otherwise it is not prayer, no
matter how good the words may be.

35. May God, our dear Father, give His Holy Spirit through Christ Jesus
into our hearts, so that we may also pray in all hardships and
temptations, and render this service to God, and be delivered from all
misery, both temporally and eternally, amen.

[**610 8. 2, 273-275.** On the day of the Ascension of Christ. W.
**XIII, 1305-1309. 614**]{.underline}

**On the day of the Ascension of Christ. *)**

**Luc. 24, 50-53.**)**

And he led them out unto Bethany, and lifted up his hands, and blessed
them. And it came to pass, as he blessed them, he departed from them,
and ascended into heaven. And they worshipped him, and returned to
Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising
and glorifying God.

(1) Today we celebrate the day of the ascension of our dear Lord
Christ, for the sake of the article in our faith, when we say thus: I
believe in Christ, who ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right
hand of God the Father Almighty, from whence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead. This article is one reason why this day is
celebrated, so that we may learn not only how such an ascension took
place, but also what Christ accomplished and meant to accomplish by it.

(2) Lucas describes the history in detail, so that one can know the
day, place and time, and afterwards also the persons who were present,
and how it happened. Namely, that the Lord, after he had been forty days
after his resurrection around his disciples, and especially in Galilee,
had eaten with them and preached to them about the kingdom of God, he
had gathered them to the Mount of Olives, near Jerusalem, and had given
the command, as Marcus says, that they should go to Jerusalem and wait
for the Holy Spirit, and then preach the gospel in all the world. After
such a command, Lucas says, he was visibly lifted up and went up into
the air, flesh and bones, as he stood before them, even to the clouds,
so that they could no longer see him. But when the disciples were
standing there and were astonished (for such a thing was never seen of
any man's body before, that it should rise above him into the air like
a bird), two angels came to them.

*From Luther's shorter sermons.

**Walch gives Apost. 1, 1-11. as text. D. Red.

They tell them to go home again, there is nothing more to see; the Lord
will no longer come on earth in such a form until he judges the dead and
the living. Then he will come down in a cloud, as he has now passed over
him in a cloud. This is not dangerous the Historia, so much of it is
reported in the Evangelists.

First of all, there is the miracle that the Lord miraculously takes off
from his disciples into the air like a bird and disappears into the air,
that is, he goes so high that his disciples can no longer see him. For
to fly in the air is an unusual, even impossible thing for men. A man's
body is by nature like a stone or other heavy thing that it desires
under itself. Now Christ, after his resurrection, has a real body, which
has flesh and bones, as he himself says, Luke 24, chapter 39, and can be
grasped; and yet it is such a body, which, because of its nature, can as
well rise up and go over itself as under itself.

(4) This is an indication that we may learn what kind of bodies we
shall have after this death. Now our bodies are heavy, clumsy, and slow:
but when we rise from the dead, and new bodies come to us, they will be
true bodies, of flesh and bone and all the limbs; but they will no
longer be so heavy and clumsy, but just as we are now nimble in thought
here and there, so will we be able to do with the body thereafter. As
can be seen in Christ after his resurrection: the

[612 **L. 2, 275-277. on the day of Christ's ascension. W. xm,
1309-1311.** 613]{.underline}

The stone on the grave does not hinder him, nor does the closed door; he
wipes through in an instant, so that we cannot know how he comes
through. So, when he wants, he lets himself be seen; when he wants, he
cannot be seen. In a moment he is in one place, in a moment in another
place, and can walk in the air as well as on earth. We shall also wait
for glory in our bodies after this life; besides that they shall
henceforth be immortal bodies, which need neither food nor drink, and
shall never lack health.

Now we must also see what our dear Lord Christ intended to accomplish
with such an ascension, and in what we can also enjoy such an ascension
here on earth. First of all, because we see that Christ is ferrying
himself to heaven, we must conclude that Christ does not want to have
anything to do with the world and its kingdom; otherwise he would remain
on earth and use what other worldly kings and princes use. But he leaves
all this on earth and goes up to heaven, where we do not see him. So he
wants to teach us that we should look at his kingdom in the right way
and recognize that it is not a worldly kingdom, as the disciples
thought, since he would distribute money and goods and great dominions;
but a spiritual and eternal kingdom, since he wants to distribute
spiritual gifts to those who are with him in this kingdom.

(6) For this reason no one may or should become a Christian, so that
he may obtain money and goods or great honors. For this reason baptism,
the ministry of preaching, and the sacrament were not instituted; nor
did Christ come from heaven to earth for the sake of such worldly,
transitory, temporal things, nor did he ascend to heaven for this
reason. There are other and higher things to be done, namely, that we
may be counseled and helped with eternal goods, such as the forgiveness
of sin, righteousness, and eternal life. We should expect such gifts
from our Lord Christ, who did not remain on earth, but went to heaven
and established a spiritual, invisible, eternal kingdom there.

7 These things were prophesied long before by the Holy Spirit, in the
68th Psalm, v. 19, which St. Paul refers to the Ephesians in the 4th
chapter, v. 8 ff. and points to the ascension of Christ and His
spiritual rule, where it says: "You ascended on high and caught the
prison; you received gifts for men, even for the apostates, so that God
the Lord would still dwell there. This is a short saying, but it covers
a great deal. Therefore, we must diligently consider and look at all the
words. Paul himself deals with the first word in a masterly and subtle
way, saying: "That he has ascended, what is this but that he first
descended into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is he
that ascended above all heavens, that he might fill all things." What
might Paul mean by such words? Nothing else, because we are to enjoy the
ascension of our dear Lord Christ so greatly, as we shall soon hear,
that we also learn the cause by which we have come to such grace and
blessedness. For it was not our good works, holy living, or obedience
that earned this; but he himself, the Lord, who gives such gifts, earned
it by descending from heaven, expressing his divinity, as Paul says in
another place, and becoming man for our sake, and dying for us on the
cross.

8 Paul wants to indicate such a benefit with these words, that he
remembers the descent. And this rhymes very well, for he who is
previously on high must not go up. Now that the Holy Spirit says of
Christ, "You have ascended on high," it must follow that he had
previously descended and humbled himself. This has happened for our
sake. Therefore such an interpretation of Paul rhymes finely with the
words of Christ, which your love heard the other day: "It is good for
you that I go; for if I do not go, the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, will
not come to you. But if I go, I will send him unto you," John 16:7; and
John 14:3: "If I go, I will prepare a place for you."

614 **L. 2, 277-279. on the day of the ascension of Christ. W. XIII,
1311-1314...** 615

(9) The other little word rhymes very well with this, that he says,
"You have ascended on high," because by this he wants to make a
distinction between Christ and others who also ascend to heaven. Enoch
is taken up to God. Elijah went to heaven in a fiery chariot. But Christ
did not go to heaven in this way; but He Himself, by His own power, went
over Himself, just as He Himself raised Himself from the dead, by His
own power and might, without anyone else's help. This is a very great
difference. For we will not raise ourselves from the dead on the last
day, but Christ will raise us, John 6:54. But Christ himself rises from
the dead by his own power, as he says, John 10:17, 18: "My Father loves
me, that I should lay down my life, that I might take it again. No one
takes it from me, but I take it from myself. I have power to let it go,
and have power to take it again; and Peter in his first sermon, Apost.
2, 24: "It was impossible that he should be kept from death." So the
difference here is the same with his ascension and ours. We go to
heaven, because Christ draws us to Himself. But it is he who goes to
heaven by his own power and ability, as he says in John 3:13: "No one
goes to heaven except he who has come down from heaven. The Holy Spirit
has shown this difference long before, and with it he wants to teach us
that we should accept Christ as a true, almighty, eternal God.

(10) But that the psalm says further, "Thou art ascended up on
high," this, as we have also said above, is nothing else than that
Christ says before Pilate, "My kingdom is not of this world. Therefore,
although here on earth we have to deal with food, with wives, children
and servants, with worldly government and other things, and have to deal
with them: but because we are also Christians and Christ does not lead
his kingdom down here on earth, we should lift our hearts and minds
above it, and strive for such a spiritual kingdom first and foremost,
and deal with it with our hearts and minds.

But what happens? Most of us are stuck body and soul, hands and heart
alone in this transitory life, and strive to have enough here, and take
little or no notice of the fact that Christ has ascended on high. The
Holy Spirit would gladly defend us, preaching that Christ did not remain
on earth, but ascended upward, so that, while our bodies are still here,
our hearts and minds may be lifted above them, and our hearts may not be
weighed down with the cares of this life. For this is how it should be
with Christians: the body and the old Adam should deal with this
temporal life and be burdened with it; but the heart should take care of
the eternal, as Paul says Col. 3:1, 2: "Seek the things that are above,
where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. Seek the things that
are above, and not the things that are on earth."

(12) What is Christ doing up there, or why did he go up and not stay
here? Is he idle, or is he doing something? Of such the psalm speaks
very finely, saying, "Thou hast gone up on high, and hast caught the
prison." This is spoken in an exceedingly comforting and blessed
manner, and it can be seen as if Christ had just thought of this psalm
at that time, when in the 11th chapter, v. 21 f., he gives Luke the
likeness of the strong-armed man who keeps his house in peace until a
stronger man comes upon him and overcomes him, who then takes from him
the armor on which he relied and divides the plunder.

(13) For we poor men are therefore under the tyranny of the devil and
of death; they hold us captive, and it is impossible for us to deliver
ourselves from such imprisonment. The devil drives and rules us, and
death strangles us; there is no salvation that we can have from
ourselves. But Christ, as the stronger, comes, first of all in all
humility he gives himself up and lets himself be strangled on the cross.
So he pays with his own death for the sin of the whole world, as a poor,
innocent little lamb. There is neither strength nor power, for that is
why he hangs there, because he wants to suffer death.

616 **L. 2, 279-281. on the day of the ascension of Christ. W. XIII,
1314-1317.** 617

14. When sin has been reconciled and removed by such death, and the
poor Christ lies in the grave, and no one has any hope or consolation
for him, he rises again from death in all power and glory, as your love
belongs to this Easter, and, as the Holy Spirit says here, he captures
the prison, that is, he breaks the power of the devil and death, and
takes away their rule, so that the devil no longer harms Christians, and
death no longer chokes them, nor sin accuses them.

Therefore, here is even an inverted essence. Sin has held us captive and
accused us before, the devil has chased us into sin according to his
will, death has strangled us. This shall never happen. For to this end
Christ ascended into heaven, that he might hold captive sin and death
and the devil, that they should no more hurt us, as they did before; but
though they hurt us, yet it shall be for our good.

(16) Sin does not let us; it tempts and entices us, if it could move
us against God's will and make us have an evil conscience. But we are
so weak that we often allow ourselves to be moved and deceived. So it
happened to the excellent, great man David, who fell into two horrible,
grave sins. But that he does not remain in such sin, but that it is
forgiven him and he does not die, this is the cause that sin should lose
its power through Christ and be caught. For this reason, David must not
only not be harmed, but must cause him to pray all the more fervently
and earnestly. For if he had not fallen into such sin and misery, he
would never have made the beautiful psalm, the Miserere.

(17) It is the same with death: it cannot refrain from it; it must
bare its teeth at us, and stand as if it would devour us. Again, when we
see such things, we cannot help being frightened and afraid. How is it
then that death does not do what it would like, and does not strangle
the Christians? So that death is a captive death, and cannot do such
harm and strangle as

if Christ did not hold him captive. Therefore, even though he rages and
rages the most and is the most cruel, he does nothing more for the
Christians than to drive them to God's word, so that they practice it
more diligently, form it in themselves and comfort themselves with it;
otherwise, if there were no such terrors of death, they would not accept
the word so diligently.

18 The same is true of the devil: he is an evil, persecuting enemy,
creeping after Christians day and night to see if he could fell them and
take away the treasure of eternal life. But he is a captive spirit, and
should not only not bring about such a thing, but the more he pursues
the Christians, the more cautiously he should make them pray, practice
the Word of God and entrust themselves to God's protection. Otherwise,
where the devil would not be so furious and persistent, they would
sometimes be safe and careless. But because the enemy does not give
peace nor can he rest, they must be brave, lively and careful.

19 Therefore, such temptations, terrors and journeys do not serve
Christians as if there is nothing harmful about them. By their very
nature and character they are very harmful, as can be seen in the world.
But the ascension of our Lord Christ is in its right use and practice,
so that such enemies are caught, and should not do to Christians what
they otherwise could not do. Sin would condemn, death would strangle,
and the devil would cast into all misery and distress; but they are
captive enemies. Therefore, though they mean evil, it shall not hurt
them. Now this is a glorious and great fruit of the ascension of Christ,
that the great enemies of sin, death and the devil, who held us captive,
have been captured by the Lord Christ, and we have been delivered from
them; for this is why he ascended into heaven and sits at the right hand
of God, that he might protect his Christians from such enemies.

20 But he will not leave it at that, for the psalm goes on to say, "You
have received gifts for men. That is, such gifts that you are to share
with people and help them through them. But what kind of gifts are
these? Christ

[618 **L. 2, 281-284. on the day of the ascension of christ. W. XIII,
1317-1320.** 619]{.underline}

says finely Joh. 16, 7. 8. where he says: "When I go, I will send the
Comforter to you. And when he is come, he will punish the world for sin,
and for righteousness, and for judgment." And Peter, Apost. 2:33:
"Having been raised up by the right hand of God, and having received
the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, He has poured out these
things which you now see and hear."

(21) Now the Holy Spirit accomplishes two things: first, through the
gospel, he brings us to the knowledge of Christ, that we may believe in
his name for the forgiveness of sins; and second, that we may amend our
lives, resist sin and put it to death, and commit ourselves to heartfelt
obedience to God. This means to make soul and body, heart and everything
in us pious. For although we can never here on earth, for the sake of
our sinful flesh, bring ourselves to become completely pure and without
all sin, yet such clinging sin, through faith in Christ, is not imputed
to us, nor can it condemn us. This is the first thing that the Holy
Spirit works in us.

22 Secondly, the Holy Spirit also needs us to bring others to such grace
and knowledge through the word and the ministry. That is why Paul
interprets this psalm to the Ephesians in chapter 4, vv. 11-13, to the
effect that this gift is given to us through the ascension of Christ,
that he has made some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some
shepherds and teachers, "that the saints may be sent to the work of the
ministry, by which the body of Christ may be built up, until we all come
to one faith and confession of the Son of God. For we see and experience
how hostile the devil is to the Word, and especially in our times he
incites Turks and Popes to dampen the Word and make Christendom
desolate, or at least thin. And yet, the more Turks and Popes rage, the
more God's Word increases; and it is impossible for them to even
eradicate baptism, sacrament and word. This is also a part in which we
feel the ascension of our Lord Christ;

For this reason he ascended into heaven, that he might send down the
Holy Spirit, and promote and administer his ministry on earth.

23) After these things also are called gifts, that God by all means
governs and guides his church, comforts in temptation, saves in
persecution, leads and sustains in truth against error, and especially
awakens it to prayer; as the Lord says in the next Gospel: "On the same
day you will pray in my name"; for such things cannot be done without
the help of the Holy Spirit. In sum, what we have and receive are all
gifts of Christ and the true fruit of His joyful ascension, for He
ascended to promote His kingdom and to beget and maintain a Christian
church through the Word and the Holy Spirit.

(24) Lucas shows this very well in the text which your beloved heard
at the beginning. For he says: When Christ ascended into heaven, he
lifted up his hands and blessed his disciples. He did not bless them in
this way, as we commonly do, that one gives another a good night's rest
or takes a vacation. But he wished them happiness and salvation in their
ministry, which he then commanded them to preach the gospel to every
creature, that is, to all classes throughout the world. For the gospel
is not commanded to be preached for the sake of trees, stones, birds, or
fishes, but for the sake of men; as soon follows: "He that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved." Stone and wood will never be able to
believe; so there is no command to baptize them, as the foolish papists
do. Therefore, as baptism and faith belong to men alone, so also the
preaching of the gospel belongs to them alone. But the Lord needs to
speak in this way, saying, "Preach to all creatures," so that he will
include all classes, so that no emperor or king on earth will be so
powerful as to hear, accept and believe this teaching of the gospel, or
he will be condemned. For these are called the creatures of men, that
is, such offices and estates as have been ordained by men. To such a
command the Lord lifts up his hands and blesses them, that is, he does
not wish alone.

**620** L. 2, 284,285. on the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ. W.
XIII, 1320,1321,1368. **621**

that they do much good, but he also helps such ministry, promotes it and
gives it prosperity.

(25) Wherever the holy gospel is preached, such lifting up of hands
and blessing of the Lord Christ is still necessary, so that it may bear
fruit and not be preached in vain. And in truth it is comforting that
the Lord, now that he is about to ascend, lifts up his hands in this way
and blesses his disciples. For in this way he wants to indicate that we
should take comfort in his ascension, and that he wants to use such an
ascension for our blessing and for our good. For what need would there
be of such a friendly gesture if he were angry with us and did not want
to take care of us in his kingdom? That he now lifts up his hands and
wishes them happiness and salvation in their new office is a certain
sign that the Lord means us faithfully and kindly, and that we should
always enjoy such lifting up of hands and blessings, because the gospel
is preached.

(26) Thus your beloved see how comforting and joyful a feast we have
at the ascension of our dear Lord Christ, and how in many ways we enjoy
it:

That henceforth, because our flesh and blood, the Son of God, sits at
the right hand of His Father, sin, death and the devil shall be deprived
of all power, and that they shall be strengthened, that they shall not
hurt us. For though they be our mortal enemies, and subject to all
manner of things against us, yet are they bound and captive enemies. For
this purpose Christ gives us his Spirit to guide us in all truth, to
preserve us against all error, to comfort us in temptation, to pray with
us and exhort us to pray, and then to adorn us with all kinds of gifts
and graces. For this reason Christ ascended into heaven and sits at the
right hand of God, so that, as Paul says, he may fulfill all things,
that is, give and bestow upon us everything we need for salvation and
eternal life. For this reason we should follow the examples of the dear
apostles, and, as Lucas says here, worship the Lord Jesus Christ with
them, be joyful and of good cheer; and in addition give thanks to God,
our gracious Father in heaven, praise and extol Him, and ask that He may
continue to preserve us in such grace, and finally make us blessed for
the sake of Christ Jesus His Son. May God grant this to us all, Amen.

**On the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ, Exaudi. *)**

**Joh. 15, 26. to 16, 4.**

But when the Comforter comes, whom I will send to you from the Father,
the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about
me. And ye also shall testify, because ye have been with me from the
beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended. They will put you under ban. But the time will come when
whoever kills you will think he is doing God a service. And they will do
this to you, so that they will not recognize my Father or me. But these
things have I spoken unto you, that, when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I have told you. But I did not tell you this at the
beginning, because I was with you.

In today's gospel there are two pieces: the first about the Holy
Spirit; the other about the future persecution that will befall those
who confess and preach the gospel before the world.

*) Held in the house after dinner, in 1533; according to Röhrer, in
1532. D. Red.

2) Of the Holy Spirit you know that we believe that he is the eternal,
almighty God. The Lord Christ gives him a special name here and calls
him a comforter. This is to indicate that if we want to be Christians,
we must dare something and suffer over it. For what need is there of
consolation,

622 **D. 2, 285-287. on the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ. W.
XIII, 1369-1372.** 623

where suffering and sorrow would not be on our necks? But the suffering,
the Lord indicates, will not only be that Christians will be killed,
which would still be small, but they will be killed, and those who do it
will still want to be right, and the Christians who suffer must be
wrong. That is to kill shamefully and ignominiously, since everyone will
say: Well, it is right for the heretic, one should not want it to be
otherwise for him 2c. So that there is no comfort in the death of
Christians, for the world strangles them as heretics. Their conscience
is also weak, so that they often think, "Who knows whether you have
done right and not done too much to him? They must therefore be wrong
before the world, and sometimes also before their own conscience.

3 This is the purpose of this name, that the Lord calls the Holy Spirit
a Comforter, as if to say, "I know how you will fare, that you will
find little comfort in yourselves and no comfort at all in the world. I
will not leave you in such distress, nor will I lead you into the mire
to drown you in it; but when there is no more comfort in the world, and
you are utterly terrified and stupid, then I will send you the Holy
Spirit, who is a Comforter, and shall promise you in your heart that you
shall not despair, and that you shall keep the things which he preaches
to you.

(4) Now here the two consolations are divided. One is a worldly
comfort, which is false and lying, because it is based on the fact that
a man relies on goods, honor, power, on the friendship and support of
great princes and lords, all of which is uncertain and deceptive, since
nothing certain can be built on it. For this reason, says Christ here,
you, my disciples, will have none of these, but everything will still be
against you and not with you, so that the world will use its power,
honor, goods and wealth against you and will want to dampen you with
them. Do not be dismayed that you have no such comfort, for it is a
miserable, poor comfort that lasts no longer until a fever, a
pestilence, a headache or a stomachache comes, and then it is already
comforted. But I will give you another comforter

the Spirit of truth, which shall comfort you when you are afraid, when
you are wretched, when you are miserable, when you are miserable, both
before men and in your heart before yourselves. For this is why the Holy
Spirit is called a Comforter, and not a Comforter. For where there is
sadness and affliction, the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, is not at home.
This Comforter is also called the Spirit of truth, because he does not
comfort like the world, where there is no continuance, but his comfort
endures forever and no one can deceive him.

005 But there is another conflict: for the conscience saith, Thou
tellest me of a consolation, but I feel it not: I see the contradiction,
that the world hath joy and consolation, whereas the Christians suffer
themselves. John the Baptist must give up his head; meanwhile Herod and
his whore bank with each other and have good courage. It is the same
with us: the world does not grant us dry bread, and everyone makes
himself believe that what he does evil to a Christian is well done. On
the other hand, the pope, cardinals, bishops, and everything that is
hostile to the Gospel have good, peaceful days and sit in the rose
garden without any challenge. Now does this mean comforted? Yes, says
Christ, it is called comforted; but you must make a distinction between
comforting. The world also has its consolation, it is true; for
otherwise it could not be so secure, cheerful, and of good cheer. But it
is not a comfort that comes from the Spirit of truth, but it is a lying
comfort; for very soon it may come to pass that such things as the world
comforts itself with can no longer comfort or help.

(6) But this Comforter, whom Christians have, is a Spirit of truth,
who puts a continual comfort into our hearts. Therefore, although the
dear John does not have the comfort that Herod and his whore have, but
because of them he must lie miserably in the tower and remain
unconsoled, and finally lose his head, yet the Holy Spirit cries out to
him and speaks into his heart, saying: "Hans, dear Hans, do not turn
away from the terror that you lie there so miserable and that the wicked
world exercises its will of courage on you.

**624 L. 2, 287-290. on the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ. W.
XIII, 1372-1375. 625**

become long with her. It is called a short joy and infinite suffering.
On the other hand, your suffering shall be short, and eternal joy shall
follow, since a moment is more and better than a thousand years here on
earth, even if there were joy in all the world and no suffering. This
consolation fills John's heart to such an extent that he is not only
not afraid of death, but also thanks God that he will be taken from this
poor sinful body and life and thus be promoted to eternal life.

But from where does the Holy Spirit take such comfort? "From the
Father," says Christ here; for he, the Holy Spirit, proceeds from the
Father. This is an excellent saying, so that we can prove the article of
our faith, the holy Trinity. For if the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father, it must follow that such a Spirit is eternal; for nothing can
proceed from the Father that is not like and according to His nature and
essence. Therefore, just as God the Son is eternal, so it follows that
he is born of the eternal Father; for God cannot give birth to anything
that is not like him: therefore it must also follow that the Holy
Spirit, proceeding from God, is also eternal. But we want to leave such
an article for now and talk about it further in its time.

But with what does the Holy Spirit comfort? "Of me," says the Lord,
"he will testify." As if to say, "My dear child, you are being
frightened, worried, caught, killed; you must wait for it, it will not
be otherwise. But the Holy Spirit shall be a witness, who shall awaken
thee, and make thee remember me; he shall not give thee baptismal cups
of Jochim, as the world doth; but he shall testify of me, that thou
mayest say: Though all is gone, wife and child, house and home, goods
and honor, and now it is that life and limb must go; yet he liveth
above, who is called Jesus Christ, who was made man for my sake, died
for me, and rose again, and ascended into heaven, as I pray daily in my
faith. Is this true? What do I want to be afraid of? Truly, the Son of
God, who suffers death for me, will not be my enemy, he will not be my
enemy, he will not be my enemy, he will not be my enemy.

will mean it faithfully and well with me. But if he loves me, I will
never have cause to be afraid of him or to think anything evil of him.

9 This is Christ saying, "He will testify of me." Apart from this
testimony of the Holy Spirit concerning Christ, there is no certain,
constant comfort. Therefore the words, "of me," should be written in
large letters, and diligently remembered; for in this we may be sure
that the Holy Spirit is not to come with any other doctrine, and neither
Moses nor any other preach to comfort the consciences with it. But if
the consciences are to be comforted, the preaching of Christ and of his
death and resurrection alone must do it; it alone comforts. On the other
hand, all other preaching of the law, good works, holy life, commanded
by God or man, is not able to comfort a man in distress and death, but
only to make him stupid, to frighten him; for God Himself, if one wants
to deal with Him apart from Christ, is a terrible God, since one finds
no comfort, but only wrath and disgrace. But he who preaches about
Christ proclaims and brings true comfort, since it is impossible that
hearts should not rejoice in it and be of good cheer.

(10) Therefore it all depends on this, that one grasps and holds this
comfort firmly, and says: I believe in Jesus Christ, who died for me,
and I know that the Holy Spirit, who is called and is a witness and
comforter, preaches or testifies of no one else in Christendom, to
comfort and strengthen all who are afflicted, but of Christ; I will
remain in this and hold to no other comfort. For if there should be a
better or more certain comfort than this, the Holy Spirit would bring it
also. But he shall do no more than bear witness of Christ.

But why does the Lord need the word "testify" here? Could he have
spoken differently? It is so that we may have all the more respect for
the word.

12 For it is true that the Holy Spirit works inwardly in the heart. But
he does not want such an effect in a proper, common way, except through
the verbal communication.

**626 L. 2, 290-292. on the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ. W.
XIII, 1375-1378. 627**

Word. As St. Paul says in Romans 10, v. 14: "How shall they believe, of
whom they have not heard?" Therefore Christ calls him a witness. But
now he testifies through the mouth and word of the apostles and all
preachers who preach the gospel of Christ purely and truthfully.

(13) Therefore no one who desires comfort should wait until the Holy
Spirit presents Christ to him personally or speaks to him from heaven.
He bears his testimony publicly in the sermon; there you must seek him
and wait until he stirs your heart by such a word as you hear with your
ears, and thus also bears witness to Christ inwardly in your heart by
his effect. But such inward testimony does not come sooner, unless the
other public and oral testimony of the word has gone first, when it is
heard that Christ became man for our sake, was crucified, died, and rose
again.

14 That therefore this is the summa summarum of this present gospel,
that we should willingly enter into it, if we would be Christians, that
we should not get great money and goods, joy and glory here on earth
from it; but that we should have the world above as our enemies, and
bear sin, death and an evil conscience. Now when a Christian suffers
such things, that the heart is troubled and saddened, and thinks,
Behold, how is it with thee? What have you done? You could have been a
Christian, and yet you should not have gone to such a place. If you are
in trouble, it is only your fault 2c. Where then the terrible examples
strike, in which one sees how easily even great people fall and are
stuck in temptation: then, says Christ, it is time for the Comforter to
come, and he will certainly not stay outside, but come and teach you
that such thoughts are not from him, but from the evil spirit. Cause,
such thoughts frighten and lead into despair. But the Holy Spirit is not
to frighten, but to comfort and to give courage, and so he shall do,
that he may testify of me. Therefore other thoughts, which bring sadness
and gloom with them, are of the devil, apart from me and without me. But
the Holy Spirit

brings and gives comforting, joyful thoughts, in that he testifies of me
that I laid down my life for you, died for your sins and rose again for
your righteousness. From which testimony you will then be able to
conclude that I am not hostile to you, nor do I devour or condemn you,
but want to make you blessed. Therefore it all depends on the little
word, "He will testify (of me)."

(15) This is to be especially noted against the false spirits and
false preachers. For here it is decreed that the Holy Spirit, if he is
to comfort, should do nothing else but testify of Christ and form him in
the hearts. Since, on the other hand, the evil spirit frightens the
consciences and holds up death and sin to them, the Holy Spirit must
counter this with his testimony and speak and speak into our hearts
through the Word: Ah, man, what are you doing? Can you think of nothing
else but dying, sin and damnation? Turn away thine eyes from this
dreadful and horrible sight, and behold hither: Knowest thou not a man
whose name is Jesus Christ? Of whom it is thus written: He was conceived
by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, died and was buried, went to hell, and on the
third day rose again from the dead and ascended into heaven. Why do you
think this happened? Did it not come to pass, that thou mightest be
comforted against death and sin? Therefore cease from fear and
trembling, for thou hast no cause. If Christ were not with thee and
about thee, and had not done these things for thee, thou wouldst have
cause enough to fear. But he is with thee and about thee, as he saith,
"I am with thee alway, even unto the end of the world." For this
purpose he suffered death for you, and sits at the right hand of his
heavenly Father for your comfort and protection 2c.

16 Where this sermon resounds, there one hears the voice, testimony and
teaching of the Holy Spirit. But what does not sound on this beat may,
where it is best, be Moses' testimony, or it may be the wretched devil,
who, through his works-saints, hypocrites, and heretics-is the cause of
all this.

[628 **L. 2, 292-294. on the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ. W.
XIII, 1378-1381.** 629]{.underline}

also testifies and preaches. But nothing else follows from this but
fear, terror and despair. May God protect us from this and keep us with
this testimony of the Holy Spirit in our last hour, amen.

17) This is the first part of today's Gospel, about the Comforter, the
Holy Spirit, and how he will comfort Christians. Now we want to
continue, and also say a little about the other part, namely, about the
cross and persecution. There it is to be noted, first of all, that
Christ says to his disciples, "They will put you under ban," or, as
the words are, "cast you out of the synagogue and assembly, and shut
you out." Which words testify that those who put Christians under ban
and exclude them from the church will use the title and boast that they
are the synagogue or the true church, for which they will also be
gloriously praised, who serve God with special earnestness. Serve God
with special earnestness. Otherwise Christ would not have said: "The
time is coming when he who kills you will think that he is doing God a
service.

18 Therefore it is necessary to make a distinction and learn that there
are two churches in all places. One is the false church, which has the
name, and is called the church and the people of God, but it is not. The
other, the right church, does not have the name, but it is.

(19) These two churches are very difficult to distinguish. For here we
are hindered by the fact that we must confess that the false church also
has a true ministry, as can be seen. We freely confess that the pope and
his congregation are not the true church; nevertheless, when they
baptize, ordain ministers, unite spouses, the ministry and divine word
is right and powerful; therefore they confess that their baptism is
right, and do not baptize again the children who were baptized by them,
as Cyprian did. He was under the delusion that if the heretics had
baptized someone, it was not a true baptism, and therefore he baptized
them again. And this was his reason: The heretics, he said, are not in
the unity of the Christian church; therefore they cannot hold a
Christian office. But

*) From a sermon preached publicly in 1531.

This reason is wrong. For one must divide office and person. One who is
in deliberate sins that are against his conscience is not in the unity
of the Christian church; nevertheless, the office he has in the church
should not be despised. Cause, it is not his, but the Lord JEsu
Christ's office. But if he would break the command of the Lord Jesus
Christ, otherwise than Christ commanded, baptize, preach, and administer
the sacrament, then one would have cause to abandon baptism, preaching,
and other things. But if he does not change anything in the order of
Christ, even if he is evil and a sinner because of his person, this does
not take anything away from the ministry.

20 Therefore, whoever wants to distinguish and judge these two churches
correctly, must not look at the ministry alone; for even the false
church can have and lead the ministry correctly, and yet is not a
church; as one can see that the false church leads and praises the name
of God quite gloriously. One should not turn away from this. For there
is the other commandment, which teaches us that the name of God should
also be used uselessly. For this we ask in the first petition in the
Lord's Prayer that God's name be hallowed, which is a certain
indication that the same name is unhallowed by many. Therefore, where
the false church approaches and wants to banish and condemn with the
name of God and the church, it is important that you do not let yourself
be frightened, but make a distinction and say: I hear God's name well,
I hear well that you praise the church: but the unbelievers can also do
this. Otherwise there would be no need for the prohibition that one
should not use God's name in vain. Therefore, one must seek judgment in
a different way, and first of all see whether one is also leading God's
name rightly and not misusing the glorious name of the church.

Now, for such a judgment serves the rule, which the Lord gives here, so
that he paints the false church very actually and finely; because the
right church does not take up the sword and worldly power. But the false
church takes the sword in its hand and persecutes the right church, as
Christ says here that "they will put you under ban, and whoever kills
you" 2c. Thereby you can certainly mer-

[630 **L. 2, 294-297. on the Sunday after the Ascension of Christ. W.
XIII, 1381-4384.** 631.]{.underline}

which is the false church. And even more surely you can see that Christ
says: "They will do this to you, so that they will not know me or my
Father. This means that the false church is correctly depicted. It can
have the office and boast of God's name and adorn itself with it; but
besides the office and the name of God, it has the misfortune that it
knows neither Christ nor the Father.

What does it mean to know Christ and the Father? It does not mean saying
mass, putting on a cap, fasting, giving alms, and the like. Rather, to
know Christ means to believe that he is the Lamb of God who bears the
sin of the world, who became man for our sake, suffered death for us on
the cross, died and rose again, and ascended to heaven. That we may take
comfort in this, and have such confidence in God that He will be
gracious and merciful to us for the sake of His Son. For this means to
know the Father: to know that he will be merciful and will not let our
sin be repaid for the sake of his Son Christ JEsu. Where there is such
knowledge, there is the true church. Where there is no such knowledge,
there is no church, although the ministry and God's name are there.
Therefore, one should and must pay special attention to this knowledge,
so that one cannot err.

(23) The division that is in the church today is making many people
confused, so that they do not know to which part they should adhere. But
they lack that, that they do not want to look at this rule. So we preach
that nothing can help us against sin and death in the sight of God, but
only the death and resurrection of Christ. Whoever grasps this with true
faith will be saved. Whoever does not grasp it, if he otherwise does
what he wants, he cannot be saved (but how powerfully such a doctrine is
founded in the Old and New Testaments, your love hears at another time);
but what happens? It is precisely because of such teaching that the pope
and his crowd persecute us, banish us, call us heretics and strangle us;
for he teaches that whoever wants to go to heaven must do enough for his
sin himself; Christ has only

But what we sin after baptism, each one must do for himself enough to
put away such sin with good works and appease God's wrath. But how does
such a sermon rhyme with the knowledge of Christ? For this must follow:
If Christ has done enough for sin, we cannot do enough for it. We should
do good works, but from a different point of view, because by doing so
we would put away sin and go to heaven.

(24) So you see clearly from this rule which is the right church. We
are condemned because we place all righteousness and grace in Christ
Jesus alone, in his death and resurrection. On the other hand, the pope
and his church place salvation on their own works, merit and
satisfaction, which is a sure sign that they know neither Christ nor the
Father. If we now have this, that we know Christ (praise be to God
always!) correctly, but they do not know Christ, then let us be
undaunted and ask nothing about it, although they, who do not know
Christ and his Father, banish us, call us heretics and a devil's
church. We are much more concerned about this, that we know the Son and
the Father; therefore, let us not be deceived by the useless bluster
that the pope flaunts the name of the church so high and gives us to the
devil.

(25) But we can comfort ourselves and wait for another judgment, since
not men with their false judgment, but God Himself with His right, true
judgment will lift us out of the ban, and glorify us for His church on
the last day before God and all His angels. For it must happen on earth,
as Christ says here, that there will be two churches, and one will
banish the other. But the ban will never go publicly against the false
church, because it has the sword in its hand and can protect itself
against it by force. As we see in the case of the pope, which is a
certain indication that he cannot be the right church, for it says here
of the right Christian church that it is to be banished. "You," he
says, "they will put under ban." Who are these "you"? They are not
ours.

[**632** 8.2, M7. M8. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xni, 1334. i3W.
iM. **633**]{.underline}

Lord Christ's dear disciples and apostles? They will be banished and
killed. Who? Those who have the name of synagogue and church.

26 This is still the case today. Therefore we should not be frightened
by such banishment and strangulation, but accept it with joy, and learn
that it is the right color and the most certain mark of the Christians
and the right church. But so that the knowledge of Christ and his Father
is above all things. For Anabaptists and other sects are also persecuted
and suffer much, but they do not have the knowledge of Christ and His
Father, for they deny the promise that God made to them in the first
baptism, and establish a new monasticism, by which they think to enter
heaven and have a gracious God.

to have. On the other hand, the true church knows Christ and his Father,
that is, it takes comfort in God's goodness and mercy through Christ
alone; and for the sake of such comfort and hope it must be persecuted.
She suffers this gladly, for she knows that Christ has prophesied it
here; therefore she willingly submits to it, letting the pope and his
bunch cry out for heretics and the devil's church. But it is enough for
her that she knows Christ and his Father, and knows that the pope and
his mob, however highly they may be shorn, do not know Christ and his
Father, but persecute them; for this reason she suffers gladly with
Christ, and is hopeful that she will also sit with him in honor and live
forever. May our dear Father in heaven, through his Son and the Holy
Spirit, grant this to us all, amen.

**On the holy day of Pentecost.**

**The first sermon.**

**Apost. 2, 1-14.**

And when the day of Pentecost was fulfilled, they were all with one
accord. And there came a swift sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it filled the whole house where they sat. And there was seen
in them the dividing of tongues, as if they were fiery. And he sat upon
every one of them, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and
began to preach with other tongues, after that the Spirit had given them
utterance. Now there were Jews dwelling at Jerusalem, men who feared
God, of every nation under heaven. When this voice was heard, the
multitude came together and were confounded, for every man heard them
speak in his own language. And they were all amazed, and said one to
another, Behold, are not all these that speak of Galilee? How then hear
we every man his language, wherein we were born? Parthians, and Medes,
and Elamites, and we who dwell in Mesopotamia, and Judea, and
Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and at the
ends of Libya near Cyrene, and foreigners from Rome, Jews and fellow
Jews, Cretans and Arabs; we hear them speaking with our tongues the
great deeds of God. They were all disgusted, and went astray, and said
one to another: What will this be? But the others had their mockery,
saying, They are full of sweet wine.

**From the feast and Holy Spirit.**

1. the little word "[Pentecost]{.underline}" is not German, but taken
from the Greek, they are called Pentecost the fiftieth.

Day. For the day of Pentecost is the fiftieth day after Easter, and was
a peculiar feast among the Jews, because they feasted on the fifth day
of Pentecost.

634 **L. 2, 298-300. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. XIII, 1398-1402.**
635

The first day after they ate the paschal lamb in Egypt and went out of
Egypt, they received the Ten Commandments on Mount Sina. Because this is
a great blessing, that God Himself revealed His will to them from
heaven, so that they could know whether God was pleased or displeased
with what He wanted or not: Therefore, God commanded that such fiftieth
day after Easter be kept holy, that such benefits be remembered, and
that they learn to do God's will all the more diligently when they hear
and remember with what earnestness God has opened His will, and that
they, on the other hand, have pledged themselves to keep such will with
diligence, as the history in the other book of Most in the 19th and 20th
chapters shows. and 20th chapter.

2 Now in the histories of the Old Testament, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 10:6,
we see what happened to the Jews, that it was all a model of the stories
that were to happen in the New Testament in the time of grace.
Therefore, just as in the New Testament we have a different and better
paschal lamb to eat (for there in Egypt the blood of the lamb helped to
coat the posts, only so that the angel, the destroyer, would not harm
the body and kill the firstborn fruit: (Whereas the blood of our paschal
lamb, Christ Jesus, is for our deliverance out of the right Egypt, that
is, out of the tyranny of the devil, from sin and eternal death): so
also in the New Testament we have another and better Pentecost than that
which was in the Old Testament.

They received the Ten Commandments at Mount Sina. This in itself is a
good, necessary, delicious sermon, since one should thank God for it.
But such preaching does nothing to help us against the devil's kingdom,
sin and death; rather, the law only helps us to become even greater
sinners, and our own consciences accuse and blame us against God,
because we do not fully do what we are commanded to do.

004 Therefore, as there was a terrible appearance in mount Sina, when
God spake, and there were lightnings and thunderings by one

The law still does this: where it strikes the heart, it frightens and
makes one stupid and timid, so that one does not know where to stay
because of fear. For to know what God wants and to feel that one has not
kept it is impossible, so that it should not challenge a man or make him
fearful. For what God threatens the transgressors of His word, that is
before our eyes, namely, eternal death and all misfortune. Therefore,
such Pentecost for the Jews and Pentecostal preaching is a terrible,
unkind Pentecost and preaching, where there cannot be much joy. For it
has had a horrible, terrible appearance beyond measure, so that the Jews
themselves had to say and ask: Oh, speak thou with us; for if the Lord
should speak with us, we must die.

5 What kind of Pentecost do we have in the New Testament? An exceedingly
glorious and friendly one, where there is no terror, but only joy,
gladness and joy. For thus the evangelist says, as your love has now
heard in the text, that on the day of Pentecost, when the Jews were
going about giving thanks for the Ten Commandments and praising the
story at Mount Sina, the apostles and other Christians were with one
another in one house. Suddenly there arose a roar from heaven like a
mighty wind, and filled the whole house, so that everything sounded
against each other. And next to such a blowing and roaring were seen
divided fiery flames, like the flames of fire blazing above them; so
that the Holy Spirit let himself be heard and seen publicly. For in the
roaring he was heard, and in the flames of fire he was seen; as Christ
had promised before, and John the Baptist also prophesied, that they
should be baptized with the Spirit and fire.

(6) Now this has its special meaning and cause, for the tongues
signify the ministry of preaching, which is not to be in vain; it is to
blow on the hearts and kindle a new light or fire in them, as we will
say later. Soon after such roaring and flaming, the Holy Spirit sits
upon each one of them, and

**636 L. 2, 300-302. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xm, 1402-1404.
637**

so sets their hearts on fire, he softens them that in a moment they know
God and his Son Christ, and understand all the Scriptures, and have such
courage that they cannot keep such understanding to themselves, but may
freely confess it in public. And there is also the marvelous miracle
that they can speak all kinds of languages, when they could only speak
their mother tongue before this moment. For it had to begin at
Jerusalem, but not remain there; but, as the prophets had foretold, the
gospel would soon go forth and sound in all languages at the first
beginning. The Holy Spirit taught the apostles all languages to testify
that it would not remain in the Jewish land, but would be preached in
all the world and in all languages. This is our Pentecost in the New
Testament, when one knows God rightly, when one is not frightened before
God, but becomes joyful and a good conscience overcomes one, with such
courage that one is not afraid of anything, and suffers everything
gladly for the sake of Christ, as can be seen in the apostles.

(7) Not only Christ prophesied of such a Pentecost in his last sermon,
but also the prophets David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Joel, Zechariah, and
others. Therefore we want to spend this day preaching about the Holy
Spirit, what He is, what His work and ministry is, and how we should
prepare ourselves if we also want to come to such blessed Pentecosts and
receive the Holy Spirit.

8 For the first, your love should not think as if the Holy Spirit was
not before in the church and among the people. For he is eternal,
almighty God, as Christ says: He proceeds from the Father. Therefore, he
must be of the very nature and essence that the Father is. Thus we have
certain testimonies that he, the Holy Spirit, has always had his effect
in people, enlightened their hearts, governed and guided them according
to God's will. For Christ himself says, as does Peter, that the Holy
Spirit spoke through the prophets. Thus the evangelists testify of the
old Simeon, of Hannah, of Zacharias, Elizabeth and Johanne that the Holy
Spirit dwelt in them.

(9) Therefore we must think and believe here of the Holy Spirit just
as we do of Christ, the Son of God: he was from eternity, and soon after
the first promise in paradise he began his work of opposing the devil
and trampling on his head. The Son of God then publicly completed this
work, which he had begun long ago and always practiced, when he became
man, died on the cross and rose again on the third day. Thus, the work
of the Holy Spirit has been in the world forever, leading people's
hearts to faith through the Word of God, enlightening them,
strengthening them, comforting them and guiding them into all truth.

(10) But on this holy day of Pentecost he first did this work
perfectly and publicly, so that it was no longer done secretly as
before; but everyone who saw it felt and confessed the Holy Spirit and
his miracles. For that there are some here who think it is not an effect
of the Holy Spirit, but say that the apostles are full of Moses, this is
a deliberate lie. Their heart convicts them that foreign, unknown
languages cannot be learned when they are full of the Spirit.

(11) And what cause is there that such a manifestation of the Holy
Ghost is delayed until this day of Pentecost? None other, than that we
should learn how we have such treasure only through our Lord Christ, who
has purchased such gifts for us, and through him alone are they given to
us; as your beloved heard on the day of his ascension, from the 68th
Psalm, v. 19, that he ascended on high, and received gifts for men. For
so Peter himself interprets this saying in today's sermon, saying,
"Now that Christ is exalted by the right hand of God, and has received
the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he has poured out these
things which you now see and hear."

This is the first thing we should learn, that the Holy Spirit did not
begin his work and ministry on the day of Pentecost. He has always
practiced it in his church, but only publicly on the holy day of
Pentecost.

**638** L. 2, 302-305. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xm, 1405-1407.
**639**

and with special power; so that we may learn from this revelation what a
wonderful treasure our dear Lord Christ Jesus has acquired and earned
for us through His death and resurrection.

(13) Secondly, we must also learn that just as the Scriptures give a
special name to the Lord Christ and call him the Word of God, so they
also give a special name to the Spirit of God and call him the Holy
Spirit, who soothes hearts with his grace and sanctifies them when they
were previously unholy and in sin. Such a name is very comforting to
Christians, for they see that they are too weak for the devil and cannot
always resist his influence. Just as they are terrified by the fact that
they have the evil spirit against them, they are comforted by the fact
that through Christ they have the Holy Spirit, who forgives their sins
and drives them to right obedience to God.

14 But how the Holy Spirit works these things, your beloved heard John
in the sixteenth chapter, v. 8: That he would punish the world through
the gospel for sin, for righteousness, and for judgment. For thus the
works of the Holy Trinity are distinguished in our faith, for the
instruction of the young and simple, that God the Father has given us
body and life, and created us for His kingdom. But when our parents fell
into death through sin and inherited such punishment upon us, the Son of
God became man, and by His death brought back such fall and redeemed us
from sins and eternal death. This redemption is presented by the Holy
Spirit to all the world through the holy gospel, and it so purifies the
hearts that they accept and believe it; that is, they take comfort in
the fact that Christ died for them, and they do not doubt that they are
thereby reconciled to God, that He no longer remembers their sins, but
wants to remit and give them for Christ's sake. This means to sanctify
the hearts, or as St. Peter calls it in the stories (Apost. 15, 9.): to
purify through faith.

(15) Wherefore if there be forgiveness of sins by faith, that, though
one have already

Nevertheless, we do not despair, but take comfort in the death and
resurrection of Christ, which is followed by another sanctification of
the Holy Spirit, that He also sanctifies our bodies, so that we no
longer lie in sins, nor have pleasure and love in them as before, but
abstain from them, and on the contrary, make every effort to do what is
pleasing to God. As Paul teaches, Eph. 4, 28: "He who has stolen, let
him steal no longer, but let him labor, and with his hands let him
create something righteous, that he may have something to give to the
needy" 2c. Such is the ministry and work of the Holy Spirit, that He
raises up in us a new, right and heartfelt obedience to God, and we
resist sin, and kill the old Adam, and through faith receive forgiveness
of all sins.

16 But such sanctification is not so perfect as the first, which, if it
were not there, we could not get on with it. For flesh and blood is too
weak; so the devil is too strong for us; also we have received only the
firstfruits of the Holy Spirit: therefore this obedience cannot be
perfect. But what such imperfect obedience and sanctification lacks,
that is made up for by the first sanctification of faith, that we
believe forgiveness of sins, and are thereby justified and sanctified
perfectly; for what sin and filthiness is still in us, that is forgiven
as if it had never been there. So you see why the Holy Spirit has this
name, namely, that he should and will sanctify believers, that is,
awaken faith in Christ in us through the Word, so that we may obtain
forgiveness of sins through him.

(17) In addition to this work of sanctification, the Holy Spirit has
other works as well, just as he has other names. For Zechariah calls him
a spirit of prayer, because he stirs up the hearts, so that they turn to
God for all good things and cry out to him for help in all troubles.
Christ calls him a Comforter, who encourages hearts to suffer all things
gladly and willingly, and not to be afraid of any calamity, as your
beloved heard in the Gospel of the next Sunday. Item, he calls him a
spirit

[640 **L. 2, 305-307. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. XIII,
1407-1410.** 641]{.underline}

of truth, which comfort is not only true and certain, but which will
also protect us from lies and heresies, and keep us in pure word and
right faith; otherwise the devil, through our reason and false doctrine,
would lead us into error and put us in lies. These are the works of the
Holy Spirit, besides the fact that he adorns believers with all kinds of
virtues and gifts, and is such a comforter, as Christ says, who abides
with us forever, since otherwise all the comfort of the world is only a
temporal comfort that does not last.

18 Therefore, because the Holy Spirit is to work such glorious and great
things in us, it is also necessary that we learn how to obtain such a
gift, and how to obtain the Holy Spirit, so that He may also work such
things in us, and that we may be sanctified and blessed by Him. Of this
our dear Lord Jesus Christ himself teaches us, Luc. 11, where he says v.
13: "So then you who are bad can give good gifts to your children; much
more will the Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask
him." Notice very well this saying, that first of all God alone gives
the Holy Spirit, and gives Him to those who ask Him for it, and sigh for
such a gift, and would gladly have it. Therefore, if your heart now
opens up and you think: Oh God, give me the Holy Spirit too, continue
with such thoughts and prayers, and do not doubt that this is the
nearest and best way for you to come to the Holy Spirit. For Christ
himself teaches that you should do this and ask the heavenly Father.

19 Now this prayer, like others, must be made in the name of Jesus
alone: that we ask God to give us such a gift for the sake of Christ,
His Son and our Savior. There we have a special great advantage, as your
love heard on the day of Christ's ascension, namely, that Christ went
to the Father and ascended into heaven to receive such a gift from the
Father and to send it down to us. We can ask for this without doubt. For
there is not only the command and the promise that we should ask for the
Holy Spirit; but there is also the will that Christ should therefore be
at the right hand of the Father.

God is seated, that He will bestow such a gift upon us; for He also
received it from the Father, as it says in Psalm 68, v. 19, not for His
own person, but for the people, that He might give it to them and bestow
it upon them.

20 Nevertheless, prayer alone is not enough. For if you sit down in the
corner and ask for the Holy Spirit, and at the same time do not
diligently attend to the Word and the holy sacraments, prayer would
slowly bear fruit. Cause, the Holy Spirit wants to have its effect only
through the word and the holy sacraments. Whoever would keep away from
such things, the Holy Spirit would never come to him. Therefore, we are
baptized, we go to the Lord's Supper, we hear God's word, we seek
absolution; for we know that all these are the instruments through which
the Holy Spirit does his work in us. As the examples show. The three
thousand souls whom Peter converted with the first sermon to this day
would not have been converted in their lifetime if they had not first
heard the word. But when they hear the word, and their hearts are
smitten thereby, then they are also baptized. For so Christ commanded.
So the chamberlain of the queen in the land of the moors could not
obtain the Holy Spirit; Philip must preach to him and expound the
Scriptures. Since the heart was struck by the Holy Spirit through such
preaching, the Holy Spirit did not want to carry out his ministry, so
Philip also had to baptize the eunuch with water.

Therefore, if you want to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, you must
first of all ask for such a gift in the name of Jesus the Father, and
then diligently attend to the Word, earnestly remembering your baptism,
what God promised you there and what covenant He made with you through
baptism, and often going to the Lord's supper, seeking absolution 2c.
For through Word and Sacrament the Holy Spirit wants to set our hearts
on fire with the new light of faith, so that we not only hear the Word,
as the hardened Jews heard it, but also understand it, and

**642** 2.2, 307.308. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xm, ma-m3.1384.
**643**

thereby become other people and get new hearts.

(22) Besides this, the third thing must be that we do not hinder the
Holy Spirit in his work or drive him away from us through reckless,
wild, desolate fiefdoms and through wanton sins. For the Holy Spirit
cannot dwell where the devil dwells. Therefore, when the devil attacks
you with avarice, anger, fornication, and other sins, quickly keep to
prayer that God will protect you from them and keep you in His
obedience. For if the Holy Spirit is to come to you or remain with you,
you must beware of such outward sins; or if you have fallen through
weakness, you must pick yourself up again and stand up, and not remain
in such sins. Then the Holy Spirit will come to us and, as we pray, help
us to fight against the devil and the flesh along with sin. On the other
hand, those who willingly burden themselves with sins become more and
more possessed by the devil, and outside of repentance can never come to
the Holy Spirit, whose work is, as I said above, first to sanctify us
through faith and forgiveness of sins, and then to help us resist sin
and live in obedience to God.

23. but above your love has also heard that we are only the firstfruits
of the Holy Spirit.

and on the other hand remains flesh and blood and lives as long as we
live. Therefore, even those who have the Holy Spirit are weak and fall
very often; so that no one may be offended here and think, as the
Anabaptists did, that he who has the Holy Spirit cannot fall. True, if
we followed the Holy Spirit always, we would not fall; but this is
impossible: the devil is too strong, the world too evil, and our flesh
and blood too weak. Therefore, we must always pray that God will not
take His Holy Spirit from us, that He will graciously keep us in His
grace, and that He will increase such a gift of the Holy Spirit every
day, and, as we pray in the Lord's Prayer, that He will forgive us our
sins. For without such guilt even the saints cannot live. But through
faith in Christ they are forgiven and shall not be harmed.

(24) So your love has the true Pentecost, which we Christians should
rejoice in with all our hearts, as it is far more glorious than the
Pentecost of the Jews, because the Holy Spirit was poured out on all
flesh through Christ, so that we may know God through the gospel and
become holy and devout in soul and body through the Holy Spirit, if we
want to do otherwise in a truly Christian way with prayer, hearing the
sermon and an unruly way of life. May the Holy Spirit help us to do this
through Christ, amen.

**On the holy day of Pentecost**

**The second sermon. *)**

**John 14:23-31.**

Jesus answered and said unto him, He that loveth me shall keep my word;
and my Father shall love him, and we will come unto him, and make our
abode with him. But he that loveth me not keepeth not my words. And the
word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me. These
things have I spoken unto you, because I have been with you. But the
Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom my Father will send in my name, he will
teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I have said
to you. I leave you peace; I give you my peace.

*) Held in the house after dinner, 1532.

[644 **k.2,M8-3io.** On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xm, **1384-1389.**
645]{.underline}

you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your heart be
troubled or afraid. You have heard that I said to you, I am going away,
and I will come to you again. If you loved me, you would rejoice that I
said I was going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I am. And
now I have told you before it comes to pass, that, when it shall come to
pass, ye may believe. Henceforth I will not speak much unto you: for the
prince of this world cometh, and hath no part in me. But that the world
may know that I love the Father, and that I do even as the Father hath
commanded me: arise, and let us depart.

This gospel is also a part of the sermon of consolation, which the Lord
preached over the table on Green Thursday, and is a text that is
especially good to work with. For the Lord wants to teach us that it is
a lost labor to strive to know God and to come to God, if one does not
begin and undertake it in such a way that one loves Him, the Lord
Christ. If this is not done, all that one thinks or hears about God is
an uncertain flutter; one will not meet Him, nor grasp Him, nor be able
to come to the point that He loves us. "But whoever loves Christ will
come to the point where the Father will also love him.

(2) But what opinion is it that the Lord remembers love, and does not
say thus, as he usually does? He that believeth on me? Does not love,
and faith, say, He that loveth me? But it is one thing; for you cannot
love Christ, but believe in him and be comforted. And the little word
"love" is somewhat clearer in this case, that it finely indicates how
one is to withdraw the eyes and the heart from everything else that is
in heaven and earth, and turn them solely to this man, Jesus Christ. For
this is the true nature of love: if it accepts Himself, it accepts
Himself alone, then it abides and rests, and pays no attention to
anything else in the wide world. In the same way the Lord wants us to
love him and set our hearts on him. But this can never be done except by
faith. Therefore, this saying does not take anything away from faith,
but rather serves to make it easier to recognize the nature and right
effect of faith.

3 After that he also needs the word "love" so that he can see who
wants to accept his word and persevere with it, that he will suffer much
over it and it will come to him sore. For there are many things

Temptations that can arouse impatience and displeasure, and finally this
also strikes when things go so badly that one thinks: What am I blaming
myself for, *) that I have preached the word and publicly confessed it?
If only I could have kept silent and believed for myself what God would
have given me, others would have appeared who would have been more
fortunate. Now I am stuck, and not only do I have nothing, or even
little, to show for it, but I will probably lose my life and limb. If we
are to endure such trials and not fall under them, but hold fast to the
word, it is necessary, as the Lord says here, to love him and to have a
hearty affection for him beforehand. So that a preacher and every
Christian may say, "As God wills, I will stand firm and not deny my
dear Lord Christ; for it was started for His glory alone, and not for
the people; therefore it must be endured and something suffered over it.

(4) But where such love is not, there shall no man continue in my
word, saith Christ: for I do not divide thalers or crowns, but eternal
life. This is not received here on earth, but only after this life.
Therefore it all depends on this, that you have desire and love for me.
If love is there, you will keep my word and stick to it, and it shall be
like life and limb to you. But if love is not there, you will not keep
my word. For there will be a great deal of driving, temptation and
adversity, which will drive you all to impatience and despair.

5 But he that knoweth Christ aright, believeth on him, and loveth him,
shall not suffer any thing to be disputed, and shall go through fresh;
for he

*) What or white do I show myself? - what do I want? D. Red.

**646 8.2, 310-313.** On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xin, **1339-1392.
647**

knows and takes comfort in the fact that Christ died for us, was buried
and rose again. It must follow that Christ does not mean us harm. So
love must flow from faith, which then penetrates through all kinds of
trials and misfortunes, and asks nothing of it, although the world
grumbles and is angry; for it is more interested in Christ and his word
than in the world's wrath.

6th Now this is that he saith, He that loveth me shall keep my word."
"My word," of my dying and rising; not Moses' word, or the Ten
Commandments. The same word also we ought to keep, and not to do
contrary to it; for God hath long before commanded such things: but in
such a word Mosi is not the consolation that is in my word, we get no
good conscience from it; but the more we see that we lack such
obedience, the more we are afraid of God's disgrace and wrath. But the
word of our dear Lord Christ, the holy gospel, in which we hear how
Christ died for our sins and rose again for us to righteousness, is the
highest and best treasure; whoever has it, says Christ, holds fast to
it, and puts all things above it before he lets it be taken from him:
only be sure that my Father also loves him.

(7) This is rightly spoken by John, who has his own special way, which
the other evangelists do not have, of first drawing people to Christ,
and then bringing them to the Father through Christ. For this is how
Christ teaches here: that we should first recognize Christ, love him,
and believe that he is kind and means us with all faithfulness. Where
there is trust in Christ and love for Christ, it follows that we should
believe that the Father also loves us. So that a man should put all
things out of his sight, and through Christ expect neither wrath nor
disgrace from God, and fear neither sins nor the devil nor death,
because God loves us, because we love Christ.

8. this is a great and strong comfort in all temptation, if only one
could grasp it rightly and firmly believe that god will not be angry
with us, but will smile kindly on us if we love Christ and firmly
believe in him.

hold to his word. But it does not want to enter our hearts, especially
in times of temptation. We think that God is hostile to us, that He does
not respect us and wants to strike us with a club. But such a thought is
wrong. For Christ is certainly not lying when he says here: "If you
come to love me and keep my words, that you may have your highest
pleasure and joy in the fact that I have delivered you from the power of
the devil, and that henceforth sin shall not hurt you and death shall
not devour you, and that now you may be sure of eternal life and
blessedness, as my word teaches: It is certain that the Father will also
love you, and thus prove his love toward you, that he, the Father, will
come to you with the Son and the Holy Spirit and make his dwelling with
you.

(9) This is a good comfort, that a Christian may not think how he will
go up to heaven. Let him stay in Jerusalem, in Rome, wherever he may be
on earth, in the field or in the house, and he shall be in heaven; for
God the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit will be with him and dwell
with him. We have this here on earth in the Word and feel it in our
hearts through faith. But in the life to come it shall finally follow
with the deed.

(10) For God to dwell with us here on earth means nothing else than
that everything we do, speak, think and suffer should be done well: we
eat, drink, work, get up, lie down, we pray, study, sing or read, so God
will put up with everything. This may well be called the kingdom of
heaven, if only we had the grace to open our eyes and believe it. For
heaven itself shall not have the honor that a Christian has. For God
does not say of heaven that He will dwell in it, but says that it shall
be His throne and the earth His footstool. But a Christian's heart
should be the proper dwelling place where God wants to dwell, if only it
can take hold of Christ in such a way that it knows that he suffered and
died for us and loves him for such a good deed.

11. so it is all because of this that we are

648L . **2, 3i3-3i5. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xm, 1392-1395.**
649

If we put up with Christ, there shall be no need. For such love will
make everything gentle and easy for us, which we must suffer for his
sake and for the sake of his word. Otherwise it would be impossible not
to become fainthearted, sad and impatient, and fall away from the word,
as Christ soon says:

**But he who does not love me does not keep my word.**

(12) He that loveth Christ hath here again the consolation, that the
Father will not only love him for Christ's sake, but will himself come
unto him, and dwell with him, together with the Lord Christ and the Holy
Ghost. This is a glorious, blessed consolation, which we should hold on
to and willingly put ourselves into what we are entitled to suffer
because of it.

013 But where this love to Christ is not, and men accept the gospel,
that they may, as great lords do, get spiritual goods for themselves, or
in other ways profit themselves, and gratify their lusts, as the world
doeth almost in all things, and beginneth all things for the profit of
it: there the word is not kept long. For that one can exist in the
journey, love belongs to it. That one should do it out of compulsion or
for the sake of money, nothing comes of it.

(14) If we want to be true Christians and hold fast to the gospel, we
must only say, "It was begun in the name of my Lord Jesus Christ and
was done for his service; therefore it must go forth in the same way, as
God wills. Therefore we are to hold steadfastly to the word of Christ,
and not let any misfortune or driving drive us away from it. For as
Christ goes on to say, "The word that he speaks is not his, but the
Father's who sent him.

(15) Christ often speaks in this way, because it is very important.
And this is the sum of it, that Christ wants to say: If you take hold of
me, and hold fast to me, that is, to my word and my promise, then you
are sure that you meet the right God, and you cannot miss him, since
otherwise it is impossible for you to meet him.

could find or recognize without the word of Christ. Cause: "The word
that I speak is not mine, but the Father's word." If then you accept
it, you accept the Father; if you believe it, you believe in the Father.

(16) Therefore, the account of this day is easy to make. The Mahomet,
Turk, Pabst and Jews boast much about God, pray much and want to be his
best servants. But it is certain: Mahomet, the Turk, the Pope and the
Jews have missed the Father and know nothing of Him; for they do not
have the word of our Lord Christ, which is not Christ's, but the
Father's, in which He promises us how we shall come to forgiveness of
sins and eternal life through Him. Yes, they still follow such doctrine,
and call us heretics who point to Christ, and not to merit and our own
works.

Therefore the Lord wants to warn and teach his disciples with these
words. As if to say: If you want to hear God, to have God with you and
to be with God, you must not turn your eyes and ears elsewhere but to
me. If you hear me, you hear God; if you see me, you see God; for this
is decided, either through me God is heard and seen, or God is never
heard nor known. But it must follow that when Christ speaks a kind word,
the whole Godhead says yes to it, let alone that the world or the devil
could make a no out of it. The reason is this: for Christ's word is not
his word; it is the Father's word, as he says, "The words which ye
hear are not my words, but the Father's which sent me."

(18) These words are so simple that they cannot be recovered.
Therefore, when worldly people come upon such words, they think they are
sleepy words; for of such things, in which so much is at stake, one
should speak more powerfully. But what life and consolation there is in
such sleepy, simple words, as reason judges, is found when the right
features come on.

19Therefore the Lord here thus turneth, and saith:

**These things have I spoken unto you, because I have been with you; but
the Comforter, the Holy One**

**
**650 **L. 2, 315-317. On the holy day of Pentecost. W. xm, 1395-1397.**
651

**Spirit, whom my Father will send in my name, he will teach you
everything and remind you of all that I have said to you.**

For even though many words are spoken about it, if the Holy Spirit is
not present, it will not be understood.

(20) What follows in this gospel is the conclusion of this whole
sermon of comfort, which the Lord preached to his disciples in this
chapter, that they should be joyful and of good cheer, and not be
grieved or distressed at his shameful death, for it was for their good.
Your love heard of this on the day of Philippi and Jacobi.

(21) Therefore, let us leave it at this teaching, which the Lord has
specifically stated in today's lesson: that we keep God's word when we
love the Lord Christ and do not turn away from His word by any means.
And that this is the only way by which we come to know that God loves us
and draws near to us, so that he makes his dwelling with us. On such a
way one should remain. But he that seeketh or taketh any other way to
God than this, that he love Christ, lacketh the Father, and never cometh
to him; and though he do and suffer what he will, yet is it all in vain
and lost.

22 Forasmuch then as our dear Lord Christ saith, The words which he
speaketh are not his, but the Father's; let every man take heed, and
take heed that he speak no other word, neither let him speak any other
word.

If you accept the teaching that comes through this man's mouth, then
you will surely meet our Lord God, and you cannot fail to meet Him.

(23) But now it is as it was with the Jews in the Old Testament: they
had the mercy seat in the tabernacle of the congregation, where they
were to pray and wait for certain answers, and nowhere else. But what
did they have to do? When God pointed them out, they did not want to go
there, but chose other places as they pleased. It is the same now.
Christ says: "If you want to find God and come to the place where he
loves you, find your way here to me, love me and accept my word. But
what do the pope, the Anabaptists, the Jews, the Turks and the like do?
They forsake Christ and his word, and in the meantime go about with the
ordinances of men: the pope holds to his mass, vows, celibacy; an
Anabaptist holds to his outward discipline, that he wears a gray skirt
and no knife; the Jews and the Turks also have their special things.

(24) But let us be diligentlyware of this, and hold us here unto
Christ and his word alone. For there is God's command, "This is what
you shall hear." And Christ speaks here: "The words that I speak are
my Father's." Therefore, it is impossible for anyone who does not love
and hear Christ alone to hear God or to come to His love. May the same
gracious Father also grant us such grace, that we may love Christ and
abide in His words, and keep them through His Holy Spirit, and thus be
eternally saved, amen.

[652 D. 2, 317.318. Am Pentecost mont. W. xm, 1450-1153.
653]{.underline}

**On Pentecost assembly. *)**

**John 3:16-21.**

Thus God loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
For God did not send His Son into the world to judge the world, but that
the world through Him might be saved. He who believes in him is not
judged, but he who does not believe has already been judged, for he does
not believe in the name of the only begotten Son of God. Now this is the
judgment, that the light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their works were evil. He that doeth evil
hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest his works should be
punished. But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his works
may be made manifest; for they are done in God.

(1) This gospel is one of the most glorious sermons that can be found
in the whole New Testament, so that it would be good if it could be
written on the heart in letters of gold; and every Christian should know
such a text by heart at least, and recite it to his heart once every
day: so that such words would become familiar to us and we would learn
them the better. For it is such words that can make a sad heart cheerful
and a dead man alive again, if only one could hold fast to them by
faith. But since it is impossible to fathom such glorious preaching with
words, let us earnestly beseech God that He may declare such words in
our hearts by His Spirit more clearly than we can speak them, and make
them so light and bright that we may feel comfort and joy from them,
amen.

The sum of such a glorious and comforting sermon is this: that God so
loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that we men should
not die an eternal death, but have eternal life. As if Christ, our dear
Lord, wanted to say: "Listen, man, I want to present to you an
unheard-of, strange painting, where the giver, the taker, the gift, the
fruit and the benefit of the gift are so great that you cannot imagine
it with your thoughts.

*) Held at home in 1534, in the presence of some citizens of Leipzig
who had been expelled from there because they did not want to take Holy
Communion under One Form.

can reach out, let alone talk out, with words.

(3) For first of all, look at the Giver: you do not hear it said of
emperors, kings, or other people who are great in the world; but you
hear it said of God Himself, who is incomprehensible and almighty, who
created all things together by His word and sustains all things, who is
everything, and against whom all creatures, heaven and earth, and what
is in them, are as grains of sand. He is the giver, and may well be
called a great giver, so that when one hears that God gives something,
we should consider all emperors and kings with their gifts and persons
to be nothing at all, and our hearts should swell and blow out so much
for the sake of such a giver that everything that can be conceived
should be considered small and nothing in comparison. For what can be
called or conceived greater or more glorious than God, the Almighty
Himself?

4 The same God, who is infinite and ineffable, gives in a way that is
beyond measure. For that which he gives, he gives not as a reward earned
out of merit nor out of equity, but, as the words say, out of love. Is
therefore such a giver who gives from the heart and from causeless and
divine love, as he says: "God has loved the world."

Now there is no greater virtue among all than love, as we see: What one
loves, one stakes life and limb on.

654 **L. 2, 318-320. Am Pentecost mont. W. XIII, 1453-1456.** 655

and gladly and willingly dares all that one has. Patience, chastity,
temperance 2c. are also fine virtues; but they are nowhere equal to
love, which is the one that includes all the other virtues in itself and
brings them with it. So he who is pious and just does wrong to no one
and gives to each his own; but where love is, man gives himself entirely
to each other, and is willing and cheerful for everything for which he
is needed. So Christ also says here that our Lord God gives us, not out
of patience, nor right, nor merit, but out of the highest virtue, love.
Our hearts should grow and all sadness should disappear if we were to
take such causeless love of the divine heart into our eyes and believe
with all our hearts that God is the highest and greatest giver and that
such giving flows from the highest virtue.

(6) Giving in this way, if it comes from true love, also makes the
gift more delicious and greater; as one is wont to say: It comes from a
dear hand, if one knows that one means one with heart. Again, where one
doubts the heart, one does not pay much attention to the gift. So, if a
man had only one eye or one foot, and if he knew that it had been done
out of divine and fatherly love, he would prefer such an eye or foot to
a hundred eyes or feet.

Now Christ says in clear words that God loves us. Therefore, according
to such love, we should esteem all his gifts worthy, high and glorious,
but especially that which has been instituted by him for our blessedness
and strengthening of our faith, as holy baptism, the reverend sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ 2c. For though these things do not
appear in the sight of the world, yet they should be to us as the
kingdom of heaven, and make us joyful and of good cheer, because they
are ordained for our good out of the Father's love. Therefore Christ
not only teaches us that his Father wants to give us something, but also
tells us in what way he wants to give, namely, out of fatherly and
divine love.

8 But in the same way, as we have heard so far, that the giver and the
heart of the giver

great and unspeakable: so the gift or present is also unspeakable. For
here you hear that God, out of such love, does not give a florin, a
horse, a cow, an eye, a kingdom, the heavens with the sun and stars, nor
the whole creature; but He gives His only begotten Son, who is as great
as He Himself.

(9) Such a gift should make fire and light in our hearts, so that we
will never cease to dance and jump for joy. For as the Giver, God
Himself, and His heartfelt love are infinite and inexpressible, so also
is the gift that He gives His Son. For there he gives himself with all
that he has; as Paul says to the Romans Cap. 8, 32: Because God has
given us his Son, he has given us everything with him, be it devil, sin,
death, hell, heaven, righteousness, life; everything must be ours,
because the Son, as a gift, is ours, in whom all things are together.

(10) Therefore, if we believe aright, and receive and accept this
precious gift by faith, all creatures, whether good or bad, life or
death, heaven or hell, must be for our good; as St. Paul says in another
place, "All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos, whether Cephas
or the world, whether life or death, whether things present or things to
come, all things are yours; but you are Christ's; but Christ is
God's," 1 Cor. 3:21-23. 3, 21-23. For if we want to look at and
consider such a gift, we must confess that it is a gift above all things
in heaven and earth, whereas all the treasures of the whole world are
like a poppy seed compared to a golden mountain. But there is the
grievous unbelief (as Christ himself afterwards complains) and the great
and dreadful darkness, that we hear of such a noble gift and treasure,
and yet do not believe; and such comforting words rush past our ears,
and yet the heart does not realize them. Where there is a fine purchase
of a house or castle, one runs after it so earnestly, as if our life
were set on temporal goods. But here, where it is preached that God gave
His Son to the world out of pure love,

**656 L 2, 320-323. Am Pentecost mont. W. XIII, 1456-1459. 657**

We are so lax and lazy that it is a sin and a shame. Who is it, then,
that we regard such a gift and present so lightly, and that we do not
take such words to heart, and constantly remember them, and let them be
our highest joy and comfort? No one does it, but the wretched devil, who
so blinds our hearts that we let such a glorious sermon pass by, and in
the meantime worry ourselves with other temporal worries.

That is why I said at the beginning that we should get up and go down
with these words every day, so that we might form it a little in our
hearts and also thank God at times for such unspeakable benefits. For it
is all in the highest, the giver, the heart, and the gift, which is
given to us out of pure love, not out of merit, and so given that it
should remain a gift, and not be called borrowed, lent, or paid for,
since one gives nothing for it, and does nothing more than hold out
one's hand and accept such treasure willingly and gladly. But let it be
lamented to God that there are not hearts and hands that accept such a
gift as it is offered to us, that it should be and remain ours until
eternal life.

(12) But what is the name of the people of whom it is said that
nothing can be given in return for thanks? If there were a poor beggar,
who had neither clothes nor clothes, and could not help being hungry,
and a great prince, out of mercy, gave him a castle with a large annual
income, and appointed him lord, saying, "I will give you all this for
nothing;" and the beggar turned his back on him, and said, "He would
not: would not all the world cry out against the beggar, and say, "They
never saw a more mad man; he should not be a man, but a beast? That is
what one would do in front of the world. But now the world is not
offered a castle or a principality, but God's Son Himself. And God says
and says that one should only accept his gift and keep it as one's own.
But those who do not want to have it and turn their backs on God are we
ourselves. Now count what a great and horrible sin unbelief is. For it
is ever not human that one should

should resist a gift and do not want to have it.

(13) Therefore, one can see how the whole world is mad and foolish,
because it does not rejoice in such gifts, and only lacks that it does
not grasp and take what is offered to it. If it were a florin or a new
skirt, one would grab it with both fists and be happy. But because it is
God's Son Himself, everyone acts as if he does not need it.

That is why the taker here is also painted with a name and is called the
world. This is a terrible taker, especially if one wants to count it
against the gift. For where does the world deserve such love and gift
from God, which is the devil's bride and God's enemy, and the greatest
blasphemer? For after the devil, God has no greater enemy than the
world. Still, it says here: "God so loved the world that He gave His
only Son."

Write this piece also in your heart. And because you have heard what God
is, and the gift that He gives out of pure love, listen also and learn
what the world is, namely: a great multitude of people who believe
nothing at all, who speak lies against God in His word, who blaspheme,
revile and persecute God's name and word; then those who disobey their
father and mother, murderers, adulterers, traitors, thieves and
scoundrels, and so on, as we see and experience every day, that the
world is full of unfaithfulness and blasphemy. To the same dear bride,
the golden daughter, that is, to the greatest enemy of God and
blasphemer, God gives His Son out of pure love.

(16) This part also makes the gifts great, so that our Lord God does
not take offense at our being such bad boys, but swallows up in one bite
all vice and sin, so that the world reviles his name and word and lives
in all disobedience to him. For because the Giver is so great, and the
gift so noble, vice should cheaply drive him back. But God overcomes
Himself and puts aside all the sins of the first and second table and
does not want to know them; yes, for the sake of such sin, for the sake
of such sorrow and misery, in which we poor sinners have to live.

**658 L. 2, 323-325. Am Pentecost mont. W. XIII, 1459-1462. 659**

If we are stuck in a place where we would have to perish forever without
God's help, He will show us such love and grace.

(17) Should one not then love such a gracious God again from the heart
and provide for all good things to Him, who forgives sin and does not
repay the wicked, ungrateful world with all sins, which are innumerable?
For since every man's own sins are innumerable, who would count the
sins of the whole world? And yet it says here that God wants to give and
forgive everything to the world. For where God's love goes, there must
actually be forgiveness of sin as well. We should open our hearts and
continue to think about such love, because God can give so much to the
world, which is His natural enemy, that He gives Himself to it; that
there is nothing else to wait for or hope for, but pure grace and
kindness, whatever happens in this temporal life, for better or for
worse, that one nevertheless adheres to this love and gives oneself
everything good to God for Christ's sake.

(18) From such thoughts a heart should become joyful and of good
cheer, as I and all Christians must confess that we have lived in all
kinds of abominations and idolatries in the papacy and have defiled
ourselves with many sins. God did not punish this ungodly life according
to our merit, but let His love shine forth, and revealed the Son, whom
He gave to the world before, again through the Gospel, so that we might
hear this glorious sermon again and understand that God is not angry
with the world, but loves it because He gives it His Son. But God have
mercy on us for being so ungrateful and for not feeling such joy in
ourselves. For if we could think of it rightly and were not so cold, our
hearts should be so overflowing with joy that we should not only gladly
serve God, but also gladly suffer everything for His sake, and yet laugh
at it, because we have such a treasure from Him. But thanks be to our
unbelief, which prevents such joy, and looks for other joy in the world,
in the devil's name, which is all in vain and lost. So far we have told
these four pieces in brevity, who is the giver,

and the gift, and how, and to whom it is given. Such four pieces are not
possible to be sufficiently explained in words.

19 Now follows the end of what God means by such a gift. Namely, that it
is not given for us to eat, drink, clothe and nourish ourselves with;
much less that it should be a poison or other harm to us; as we also
teach about baptism and the sacrament of the altar, that it should all
be considered beneficial and useful: but it should serve and be given
"so that all who believe in him may not perish, but have eternal life.

20. Here you hear that it is not that we should have great money or
goods, honor, power, or even the whole world here for a little while and
be lords over it; for if we had all this, we would still be under the
devil's power: but that we should be free from sin, death and hell and
be eternally undestroyed. This is what this gift, that is, God's Son,
given to us out of pure love, is supposed to work and accomplish, in
that he has crushed the devil's head, stripped him and taken away all
his power, murdered sin, devoured death eternally and extinguished hell
to the ground, so that now and forever they cannot rule over us, cannot
frighten us, strangle us and condemn us. Let this be a rich, glorious,
yes, unspeakable gift, for which praise and honor shall follow the
great, merciful Giver forever, Amen.

21. Whoever could blow out his heart would have reason enough to do so,
since we hear here from the mouth of the Lord Christ Himself that He has
given us the gift that hell is closed, and that instead of a stupid,
despondent heart we shall have a secure, joyful heart; yes, which is
even more, that eternal life shall be and remain ours, and death shall
never be seen, but shall be joy: Through this certain confidence, that
we have a gracious God in heaven, who loves us, and out of pure love
giveth his Son, that we should not perish, but have everlasting life.

22. these are ever words we use in this

**660 D 2, 325-327. Am Pentecost mont. W. XIII, 1462-4464. 661**

We cannot learn or comprehend them sufficiently in our lives. Therefore,
a Christian should pray daily that God would press these words into the
heart through His Holy Spirit and set them on fire in it; then we would
become true theologians who speak rightly of Christ and judge all other
teachings, and could willingly suffer everything God sends over such
faith. But because this does not happen, and we hear such preaching
badly with our ears, but do not take it to heart, so that it could
properly clothe and bear fruit, we remain as far away this year as we
were last year, today as yesterday, that it is a shame and a disgrace
that we are so blind with our seeing eyes and deaf with our hearing
ears. And no doubt the damned will miserably lament and cry out at the
last day that they have had such comforting words preached into the air
in vain and have not accepted them.

(23) But let us see further what is the manner of taking such a gift,
what is the bag or box in which this precious and noble treasure is to
be placed and closed. For this is of great importance. Christ indicates
the same with the word, when he says: "So that all who believe in him
will not perish.

(24) This is a clear and bright testimony that faith alone, that is,
confidence in God's grace and mercy through Christ, is the right bag or
sack that we should hold out and receive and grasp such a gift in. For
just as God gives such treasure through love and mercy, so we receive it
and can receive it through faith alone. There is no work or merit that
makes one run to a monastery and do this or that. For our works do not
belong to such a great treasure. But it is necessary to hold up our
hands through faith, and as God becomes a giver through love, so we
become takers through faith in Christ; that is, that we believe, as we
hear here, that God is gracious and merciful, and demonstrates such
mercy and love toward us by allowing his only begotten Son to become
man, and by casting upon him all our sins; as John the Baptist says from
the prophet Isaiah, "This is the way we are to take it.

is the Lamb of God who bears the sin of the world"; that we should
still our hearts against sin and evil conscience on the basis of such a
gift and love of God, because God does not exercise wrath or
displeasure, but only love and grace towards us for the sake of His Son
Christ Jesus. Whoever believes this is certainly blessed. For this gift
is ever so great that it devours death and sin and all misfortune. For
as a great fire is to a drop of water, so all the sins of the world are
to be counted against Christ. As soon as they touch Christ and accept
this treasure by faith, they are swallowed up and eaten up, like a straw
in a great fire.

For here you hear it from Christ Himself: "God so loved the world, that
He gave His only Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. He speaks:' "who believe in him"; does not
speak: who do this or that work and thereby want to reconcile themselves
to GOD. Faith alone shall and must contain such treasure. Therefore let
our adversaries cry out against this doctrine as they will, for it is
said, "They that believe on him shall not perish, but have everlasting
life." Let it remain so; otherwise you will master the Lord Christ in
his word and prove him false.

These are comforting words of grace and life. God grant only grace to be
rightly grasped with the heart. For whoever has grasped them, neither
the devil nor sin nor death will be able to frighten him, but he will
have to be joyful and say: I am undaunted, for I have God's Son, whom
God has given me out of love; and there is God's word, the holy gospel,
which testifies to this. But your word, O Lord, and your Son Jesus will
not deceive me; in them I trust and rely. But if I am not yet strong
enough in faith, give me grace to believe more firmly; for otherwise I
can do nothing for such a great gift and love. So that everyone may
learn the longer the more to take comfort in this gift, for it must be
believed, as you have heard from Christ himself. But the firmer the
faith is, the more joy, pleasure and

**662 8.2, 327-329. Am Pentecost mont. W. XIII, 1464-1467. 663**

One is certain in one's heart that one will gladly do and suffer
everything that one knows God demands and wants. But all because God is
gracious and wants to show us love.

(27) Yes, you say, if I were as pious and holy as Peter, Paul, or the
Blessed Virgin Mary, I would gladly believe and take comfort in such a
gift, for they are holy and such a gift is undoubtedly meant for them;
but how could I, a poor sinner, be certain that I should accept the
gift, since I have offended God in so many ways and so often? Such
thoughts do not remain outside, if during such a sermon the heart looks
right at itself and thinks of its mistreatment. Be careful not to go
outside the word of God and dwell on such thoughts too long, but soon
turn back to the word and judge according to it. For such thoughts are
nothing but true unbelief, which wants to draw us away from such gifts
and comforting preaching.

Now nothing else can be used to ward off unbelief, except the word of
God. The same is preached to us by our dear Lord Christ himself, so that
we have no reason to doubt such preaching and word, and says: His Father
in heaven, the true eternal God, so loved the world that he gave it his
only begotten Son. Now you and all men must confess that the world is
not called Mary, Peter and Paul; but the world is called the whole human
race in one heap, through and through. Do you now believe that you are a
man? Or if thou canst not believe nor know this, take hold of thine own
bosom or nose, whether thou be not more flesh and blood than other men.
Why do you want to exclude yourself from this little word "world",
because Christ says in clear, clear words that God did not give His Son
only to the holy virgins Mary, nor to St. Peter, nor to St. Paul, but to
the world, so that everything should be accepted, which is only called
the children of men. Now if I did not want to accept him, as if I had no
part in him, and you had no part in him, I would not be able to accept
him.

If you would not accept him either, it would have to follow that these
words of Christ are not true, since he says he was given to the world.

Therefore, from such words you should conclude the contradiction that
this gift belongs to you as well as to St. Peter and St. Paul, because
you are a man as well as to them, and a part of the world. Lest you give
the lie to God in His word and think: Who knows whether I am also among
those to whom this Son is given and eternal life is promised? For this
means that our Lord God has made a liar. Therefore, if such thoughts
occur to you, put the cross in front of you as if the devil himself were
there, so that such thoughts do not deceive you, and say: "Why do I ask
that I am not Peter or Paul? if God had wanted to give such treasure to
those who were worthy of it, he would have given it to the angels, who
are pure and undefiled spirits, or to the sun and moon, which always
keep their certain course according to God's order. But here it says:
He gave it to the world, which is worthy, as we have indicated above.
Therefore, even though I am neither Peter nor Paul, I still want to be
excluded from this gift and have as much of it as David and all the
apostles. For what was David? Did he not also sin grossly and
grievously? Who have the apostles been? Were they not all sinners and
unworthy enough?

Therefore, let no one follow this argument: I am a sinner, am not as
holy and pious as St. Peter: therefore I must not accept nor take
comfort in this gift. Not at all; but say thus: Be I what I will, yet I
must not prove my God false; for I still belong to the world also.
Therefore, if I would not accept such a gift, I would be doing this sin
above all other sins, that I would be lying to God.

(31) Yes, you say, if God promised me in particular, I would believe
it, and I could be sure that it would be true for me. No, dear friend,
he is saying in general that this Son and eternal life are promised and
given to all the world, so that he may not exclude anyone at all.

**664 2, 329-331. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII,
1467-1469.1506-1S09. 665**

exclude themselves. But he who excludes himself will have to answer, as
Christ says: "I will not judge them, but their own mouth will judge
them, because such a gift is supposed and given to the whole world, that
they still do not want to accept it out of their own unbelief, against
God's word. However, if one wants to understand it correctly, the
sacraments of baptism and of the body and blood of Christ were
instituted by our Lord Christ for this very reason, so that each one in
particular should appropriate such a gift and consider and use it as his
own.

32 Let this be preached in a nutshell in the most simple way from this
glorious and beautiful text, which can never be sufficiently learned.
For it is the main doctrine on which one should die and be saved, in
which Christ is presented to us in the purest and most lovely way, that
he is our own, given by the Father out of pure love, which love he has
as a gracious God toward the evil, ungrateful world. Then everyone may
learn what treasure and comfort we Christians have, what the world and
God are, and how we can come to such grace.

come by faith alone; as Christ says, "that whosoever believeth in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life." For the preaching of
good works, which are to follow after such faith through the Holy
Spirit, belongs to another place. Here we are dealing only with what we
receive from God and how we should take it.

But what a Christian should do, so that he may be a faithful child of
God and grateful for such great gifts of eternal life and God's love,
Christ does not preach here. Therefore, let us leave it at this: that we
may be saved by mercy alone, and receive such grace by faith alone,
without any action on our part or merit on our part; that what is
necessary for eternal life and the forgiveness of sins is entirely
included in the love and mercy of God through Christ. May God grant us
His grace, so that we may believe and happily suffer all things and die
and become eternally blessed. May our dear God help us all through His
Son and our Lord Jesus Christ, amen.

**On the Sunday of Trinity.**

**The first sermon.*)**

**From the feast of the Holy Trinity.**

(1) There is much to preach about today's feast. For first of all,
the gospel is very rich in itself and teaches us of great things; so
necessity also requires that we say something of the feast and act on
the highest article of our faith, that we Christians, and no other
people on

*) The beginning of a publicly held sermon from 1535.

Earth, believe in God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit.

(2) This article is the highest in the church, which was not devised
by man, nor did it ever come into the heart of man in his lifetime, but
was revealed to us only through the Word of God. Therefore, just as the
other feasts of the year clothe and wrap our Lord God in His works,
which He has done, so that one's heart and will may be known.

**[666 L. 2, 331-334. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1509-1512.
667]{.underline}**

On the day of Easter, Christ the Lord, true God and man, raised himself
from the dead by divine power; on the day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit
visibly descended and began his work in the apostles and other
believers, and so on; that all other feasts clothe and reveal God with
some work; so today's feast is instituted for the purpose of learning,
as much as possible, from God's Word what God is in Himself, apart from
all clothing or works, only in His divine essence. Then one must rise
above all creatures, above all angels and heavens, and leave everything
here that we are accustomed to, and listen only to what God says about
Himself and about His inner nature. There then is found the foolishness
of our Lord God and the wisdom of the world. For when the world hears
that the one, eternal God is three different persons, it wants to become
foolish about it; therefore it considers all those insane who preach or
believe such things.

For this reason, this article in the New Testament, since it is the most
clearly stated, has always been the most vehemently contested, so that,
as the histories testify, the holy evangelist John had to write his
Gospel to confirm this article. For soon the heretics Cerinthus, Ebion
and others were found, who had learned from Moses that there was only
One God; therefore they concluded that Christ could not be God, just as
God could not be man. So they talked out of reason, and thought: how
they could grasp such a deal with themselves, so it had to happen above.

4 But fie on you, you shameful reason, we cannot know ourselves rightly,
what we are. For there has never been a man on earth who could have
known how it is that a man should see with his eyes and speak or laugh
with his mouth: and yet we want to be so sacrilegious and presumptuous
that we want to speak and argue about God and his divine nature out of
our own heads, without any help. Is not such a foolishness about

all foolishness? I cannot say what seeing or laughing is, and yet I dare
to know and speak of it, since I know nothing at all about it, and since
God alone must speak of it? The world still considers such a thing a
great art. And both Turks and Jews consider us Christians to be great
fools for believing that Christ is God. But I, if such should be wisdom,
could well say it and think: There is only One God, Christ is not God.
But when the Scripture and the Word of God comes, it does not hold the
sting.

(5) But we should and must speak of such things. Therefore, even
though we cannot speak of them sufficiently, let us stammer away like
young children, as the Scriptures tell us, namely, that Christ is truly
God, that the Holy Spirit is truly God, and that nevertheless there are
not three gods nor three divine beings, as there are three men, three
angels, three suns, three windows. No, therefore, God is not distinct in
His essence, but is only one divine being. Therefore, even if there are
three persons, God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit, they
cannot be divided or distinguished according to their essence, for there
is only one God in a single, undivided, divine essence.

For thus says St. Paul of Christ, Col. 1:15-17: "He is the image of the
invisible God, the firstborn before all creatures; for by him were all
things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, both thrones and dominions and principalities and
authorities. All things were created by him and in him, and he is before
all things, and all things consist in him."

(7) Here you hear that Paul puts all creatures below Christ. If then
Christ is above all creatures, it must follow that there is only God.
For apart from the creature there is nothing but God. Therefore he also
calls him an image of the invisible God. But now he cannot be the image
of God, unless he is equally omnipotent, equally eternal, equally wise,
just, benevolent 2c., otherwise Christ would not be such an image, which
corresponds to the

668 **2, 334-336. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1512-1514.** 669

Father, but would have to be an unequal image, where he lacked one of
these things. Therefore, both of these things force themselves out with
power: first, if the Son of God is the image of the Father, then he must
certainly be in one divine essence with the Father; secondly, this
difference of persons must nevertheless remain, that the Son is not the
Father, nor the Father the Son, but that there are distinct persons; for
that which is born cannot be that which is born. And yet is one divine
being: otherwise the Son could not be the image of the Father. We must
leave it at that; for it cannot be said more clearly, we can only
stammer about it, the things are too high and cannot be spoken louder
here in this life.

(8) For the Turks and the Jews to mock us, as if we had set three
brothers in heaven to rule with one another, we might well do so, if we
would depart from the Scriptures. But they do us wrong. We do not make
three men, nor three angels; but one divine being, et simplicissimam
unitatem (and the simplest unity), against all that may be called one
here on earth. For even body and soul are not so much one thing as God
is in Himself. But whoever then asks: What is the name of this one God?
Then we answer according to the Scriptures, and say: He is called God
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. For thus the Scripture
teaches us that God begat a Son in eternity before all creation, before
the world and before the foundation of the earth was laid, who is like
Him in every way, eternal, almighty, righteous 2c. Therefore Paul calls
him an image of the Father.

(9) Paul also saith, 1 Cor. 10:9, But let us not tempt Christ, as some
of them tempted him, and were killed of serpents. Mark such a saying
diligently, and hold it to the history as Moses writes it; then you will
see wonders how finely and sweetly Paul and Moses kiss each other and
offer their mouths to each other. Moses speaks 4 Mos. 14, .22. that the
Lord said: This people has tempted me a tenth time. There is the word

Tetragrammaton *), which is attributed to God alone, that the right,
one, true God has thus said. Now Paul comes and says freely who the God
was, namely Christ; whom, he says, let us not tempt, as some of those
tempted him.

(10) Make a hole through it, whoever can; I cannot. For Paul says that
Christ is the God whom they tempted; but Moses says that it was the
true, one God. Now at that time Christ was not yet born, neither was
Mary, nor was David yet born; and yet, regardless of all this, Paul
says: "The Jews, who were then in the wilderness and not yet in the
land of Canaan, tempted Christ. And warns us to beware lest we do
likewise, lest we also come to evil. These words certainly prove that
Christ must be the man Moses writes about, that he is the one, eternal,
almighty God. Thus Moses and Paul confess at the same time with one
mouth, but with different words, that Christ is the true, eternal God.

(11) There are many such testimonies in the New Testament, which
cannot be denied, but one must immediately conclude that Christ is God
and, because he is born of the Father, is a distinct person from the
Father. You may call this what you will, but we call it a distinct
person. Although it is not spoken enough, but more stammered. But we
cannot do anything about it, we have no better word. That therefore
Father and Son are not one person; and yet are one, inseparable being
and nature; that all that is said of God the Father may also be said of
the Son, apart from the one thing, that the Father begets the Son from
eternity, and not the Son the Father.

12 Thus Paul speaks in Acts 20. 20, blessing the Ephesians at Mileto, v.
28: "Take heed to yourselves, and to all the host, among whom the Holy
Ghost hath made you bishops, to feed the congregation of God, which he
hath purchased by his blood."

*) Jehovah

**670 L. 2, 336-338. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1514-1517. 671**

(13) This is also a clear statement that Christ, who purchased the
church through his blood, is God. For it is certain that the church has
one Lord, who is called God, and whom alone it recognizes as its Lord.
If Christ acquired it through his own blood and it is his own, then he
must be God. But now that he has acquired it through his own blood, it
must follow that Christ is true God, born of God the Father in eternity,
and also born of the Virgin Mary in time or bodily into the world. For
so Paul says here to the elders, that is, the pastors: "Behold, you are
commanded to shepherd the church or community that God has purchased
through His blood. You understand the little word "God". But how does
it rhyme that God sheds his blood? Is it not true that it entails that
he became man and died on the cross?

14 There are many such sayings, especially in the Gospel of John, where
it cannot be said that Christ is the true, natural, eternal God, and yet
the Father and the Son are two different persons. In the Old Testament
such testimonies are also much, but somewhat darker than in the New. As
John in his Gospel looks particularly finely at Moses, since he calls
the Lord Christ the "Word" because of his eternal birth. For there
Moses enters that God had a Word with Himself before all creation, which
was almighty like Him, and that God created everything through the same
Word. There must be a divine essence between God and the Word, for both
God and His Word are eternal and omnipotent, and yet He who speaks the
Word and the Word who is spoken are two different persons.

15) After that the patriarch Jacob distinguishes the persons, Gen. 48,
15. 16: "The God who has nourished me all my life until this day, the
angel who has redeemed me from all evil, bless these boys, that they may
grow and become many" 2c.

16 Here he gives the name of the Lord Christ and calls him an angel, not
that he is an angel by nature or essence.

for that would be public idolatry, that he should call upon an angel and
ask for his blessing. So he confesses with the invocation that this
angel is real, natural God. For this reason, however, he calls him an
angel, so that he should not lead his being everywhere, like the
invisible God; but he should be sent on earth, clothed in our flesh and
sacrificed for our sin. As Christ also used to say in the New Testament:
"The Father who sent me"; item: "As the Father sent me"; and in the
prophet Isaiah 61, 1.: "The Lord sent me to heal the brokenhearted";
item Is. 63, 9.: Angelus faciei ejus salvavit eos: "The angel who is
before him helped them." Thus Malachi calls Christ an angel of the
testament, Mal. 3, 1. So that the two names, God and angel', give two
different persons; and yet the essence is quite one and without all
difference. For the angel is also eternal, natural God, otherwise Jacob
would not call upon him; but he is called an angel because of his office
and command, which he has as the Son from the Father.

(17) Here belong all the sayings in which the promised seed of the
woman is promised by the prophets to bring blessing to us, to establish
an eternal kingdom, to make atonement for sin and to create eternal life
for us. For these are vain works, which no creature can do, but only God
Himself can do and accomplish. Since such works are attributed to Christ
in the prophets, it must follow that Christ is eternal, almighty God; as
he says to Philippians, John 14:11: "If you do not believe that I am in
the Father and the Father is in me, believe because of the works that I
do.

(18) Thus saith Isaias, Cap. 9:6, A child is born unto us, and a son
is given unto us. Then everyone can know what it is: a child is born and
a son is given, that it is spoken of a man who has a natural life and
body. But the prophet says further of such a man: "The peace which he
shall make," he says, "shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and
upon his kingdom, from henceforth even unto

**672 D. 2, 338-340. Am Sonntage Trinitatis. W. XIII, 1517-1520. 673**

for ever and ever." And signifies peace, that he will be: judgment and
righteousness, that this man will forgive sin, and in all affliction,
against all calamity, protect and save his people. Now I ask you: Is it
not true that just as that indicates a true, natural man, that he is
called a son and is born a child; so that follows: how he has an eternal
kingdom, which he establishes and strengthens with righteousness and
judgment, and there is no end to his peace, gives a sure sign that this
man is also true, almighty, eternal God? Where else would he get an
eternal kingdom, eternal justice and other things?

19) Now the excellent sayings in the prophets serve this purpose, as
they publicly give the great name of God to the Lord Christ, Ps. 68,
Jer. 23, item 31, Hos. 3, where it is written in v. 5: "After this the
children of Israel will turn and seek their Lord God and their king
David, and will honor the Lord and his grace. There he sets with
expressed words the two distinct persons, God and King David, that is,
Christ, who was promised to David to sit on his throne forever. And yet
he makes David and God one thing as soon as he says: The house of Israel
will seek them. For that David should be sought as God, that is,
honored, trusted in, and served: such must either be a public idolatry,
or God and David (that is, Christ, the Son of David according to the
flesh) must be one God, as the prophet afterwards finely intertwines,
saying, "They shall honor the Lord and his grace."

20 Thus Christ Himself introduces the 110th Psalm, Matt. 22:44, and
thereby wants to maintain against the Pharisees that it must be
concluded from such a Psalm that Christ is not only the Son of David,
but that He is also the Son of God, that is, the true and eternal God,
since David himself calls Him Lord, and the reign is proven by the fact
that God calls Him to sit at His right hand. These and such other
testimonies we should diligently and carefully remember, so that we may
be able to withstand the devil and the heresies.

> 21. equal now as we now the testimonies

of the Son of God, our Lord and Savior Christ; so let us also consider
several testimonies of the Holy Spirit, that he is eternal God, and yet
a separate person, that is, neither the Father nor the Son, although he
is by nature and essence absolutely equal to the Father and the Son. So
that our faith may remain fine and certain everywhere, that we worship
only one, eternal, almighty God, and not three gods (as the Jews and
Turks lie against us), and yet not lose the distinction of the persons,
nor deny that the one God is God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Spirit.

(22) Again, we Christians should thank God from the bottom of our
hearts that we have such glorious, clear, beautiful, undeniable
testimonies of such high articles in the Holy Scriptures, since we can
base our hearts on them and defy the devil and all the world. For we
must not believe men here; Christ, our blessedness Himself, testifies
and preaches to us in the very finest way that the Holy Spirit is
eternal, almighty God, otherwise He would not put His command of holy
baptism in such a way that one should baptize in the name of the Father,
the Son and the Holy Spirit. But because he puts the command with
expressed words in this way, it must follow that the Holy Spirit is
true, eternal God, in equal power and authority with the Father and Son,
from eternity. Otherwise, Christ would not place him next to himself and
his Father in such a work, where forgiveness of sin and eternal life
stand.

23 Thus saith Christ also Joh. 14:16, 17: And I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever; the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
beholdeth him not, neither knoweth him.

Mark well this saying, for thou shalt see the difference of all three
persons in the most subtle manner. "I," he says, "will ask the
Father." Here you have two persons. Christ, the Son, who asks; and the
Father, who is asked to give another Comforter. But if the Father is to
give such a Comforter, such a Comforter cannot be the Father Himself.
Chri-

**674L . 2, 340-343. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. xm, 1520-1522. 675**

stus, who asks for such a comforter, cannot be the same comforter, as he
says: "He will give you another comforter." That therefore the three
persons are here in the most proper way pictured, that one cannot pass
by. Just as the Father and the Son are two different persons, so the
third person of the Holy Spirit is a different person from the Father
and the Son, and yet is only one, eternal God.

(25) Now what this third person is, the Lord teaches in John chapter
15, where he says v. 26: "But when the Comforter comes, whom I will
send to you, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will
testify of me. Here Christ speaks not only of the office and work of the
Holy Spirit, but also of His nature, saying that He proceeds from the
Father. This is ever so much as to say that his going forth is without
beginning and eternal. For the Father, from whom the Holy Spirit
proceeds, is without beginning and eternal. Therefore the holy prophets
give him the name and call him the Spirit of the Lord; as your love
heard on the holy day of Pentecost, you Peter lead the saying of Joel,
who thus speaks: "It shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I
will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy" 2c. (Joel 3:1.) The word behold diligently,
which GOD saith, "I will pour out of my Spirit." For if this Spirit is
God's Spirit and proceeds from God, and there is nothing in God that is
not eternal, omnipotent, holy, wise, good and incorruptible as He is: it
must follow that the Spirit of God is eternal God, and yet a distinct
person from the Father and the Son.

(26) Other such sayings of the Holy Spirit are many more, with which
the holy fathers have preserved this article against the devil and the
world, and have brought it down to us, that we believe in only one God,
and yet confess that the same one God is God the Father, God the Son,
and God the Holy Spirit. Not as the heretics have fooled us, as if such
three names should only mean one person, who has revealed himself
differently in time.

For the Father can never be the Son, nor the Son the Holy Spirit, and
yet there is only one God. These things, even if we do not understand
them, we should still believe them. For if it were true here, I would be
able to do it very well, and I am neither a Turk nor a Jew. But I thank
my God, who has given me grace, that I do not dispute about such an
article, whether it is true and rhymes; but because I see that it is so
actually conceived and founded in Scripture, I believe God more than my
own thoughts and reason, and do not care at all how it can be true that
there is only one Being and yet three different Persons in such a
unified Being, God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. For
it is not a matter of disputing whether it is true, but whether it is
founded in the Word of God. If it is God's word, do not doubt it, he
will not lie.

Since God's word, as we have now heard, stands clear and loud, and such
an article has been so gallantly fought for by the holy fathers, then
stick to it and only do not dispute much how Father, Son and Holy Spirit
can be One God. Can you, poor man, even if you use all the arts of the
world, not know how it is that your eyes can see a high mountain for ten
miles; item, if you are asleep, how it is that you are dead in body, and
yet you live? If we cannot know the smallest thing about ourselves, is
it not great foolishness and presumption that we climb up with distant
thoughts (the devil's name), and with our reason want to grasp God in
his majesty and to speculate what he is. But why do we not first do this
to ourselves? and ask, where our ears, eyes and other limbs remain with
their effect, when we are asleep? One could argue and speculate without
driving.

(29) But here it is not at all fitting for us to try to find out with
our reason how it is that three are one, but we are to remain most
simply with the Word, which says of Christ that he is the image of the
Father and his firstborn before all creatures, that is, that he is the
firstborn before all creatures.

676 **8.2, 343-345. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1522-1525.** 677

He is not a creature, but an eternal God. As there are many such sayings
in John: "All things have the Father delivered unto me"; "He that
beholdeth me beholdeth the Father"; "Believest thou not that I am in
the Father, and the Father is in me?" Such sayings do not suffer a
piercer. God Himself has said that there is no difference between the
Father and the Son, except that the Son is born of the Father. But how
this happens, we cannot know; that alone we know, as the holy scripture
says, that he is the firstborn before all creation and the image of God
in the invisible being. So the Scriptures also teach of the third
person, the Holy Spirit, that he is God's Spirit and proceeds from the
Father, that is, he has the essence of the Father; that therefore there
is nothing of divinity, wisdom, power and might in the Father that is
not also in the Holy Spirit. But how these things come to pass, I cannot
tell thee; for it is incomprehensible above the understanding of all
angels and creatures. Therefore it is impossible to think and have more
of it than the Scripture tells us; we must keep to it if we want to be
saved in any other way. But to understand the essence does not belong to
the life here, but to eternal life; there we must save it, and in the
meantime not dispute, but simply believe what the Scripture tells us
about such an article.

(30) This article is particularly fine in the symbol, that is, in the
faith of children; so all the world must bear witness that we have not
invented such faith. Neither did the fathers invent it, but it is drawn
together from the holy prophets and apostles' writings in the finest
and shortest way, just as a bee draws honey from many little flowers.

31 First of all, we say: I believe in God the Father. There you have the
first person in the Godhead, namely, the Father, who in eternity begat a
Son, through whom he made and still maintains heaven and earth and all
that is in them. By such a work you know the Father.

32. after this we say: I believe in Jesus Christ 2c. who is eternal God
with the Father. For one should believe in no one but God alone. What is
called

now the same person? His only begotten Son, Jesus Christ. Thus all
Christians have prayed and believed for more than fifteen hundred years,
even from the time when God said to Adam and Eve, "The seed of the
woman shall bruise the serpent's head"; although this article has been
taught and explained more clearly at one time than at another, and the
promise of Christ has always been more closely drawn in and made
clearer. For from Adam to Abraham the Son of God was called the seed of
the woman; after that he was called the son of Abraha, Jacob, David, and
so on, but the only man is Jesus Christ. Now the angels are also called
children of God, item, all Christians are also children of God; but
there is neither angel nor saint, who is called the only begotten.
Therefore our Lord Christ alone is born of God the Father, as a Son, the
like of which he has not, neither among the angels nor other creatures.
It must therefore follow that he is the same God. This we and our
children and all Christians believe and confess.

33) Following this confession, we also remember his works and ministry,
which the Son of God did in particular: that he was conceived by the
Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, died, was buried, rose from the dead, ascended into heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God, his heavenly Father. Here he comes
again into the Godhead, so that he may be recognized and believed by
everyone as being the image of God his Father and equal to God in all
things. These words, I say again, we did not make ourselves, but they
came upon us and took them from the early church.

34. For the third time we say: I believe in the Holy Spirit. Here we
place the Holy Spirit in equal honor with the Father and the Son, as we
confess: I believe in the Holy Spirit. Thus this article is so brief and
simple in faith that it could not be more subtle. And for this reason
such a symbolism has the name that it is called Apostolicum. For it is
not well possible that outside the apostles

**[678 L. 2, 345-348. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. xm, 1525-1528.
679]{.underline}**

someone could have put together such articles so finely simple-minded
and clear.

(35) Now the works of the Holy Spirit are also finely indicated,
namely, to gather together holy Christians from all tongues, and to make
them like-minded in one faith, and to sanctify them through the
forgiveness of sins, and to kindle in them the hope of another and
eternal life; as we say: I believe forgiveness of sins, resurrection of
the flesh, and life everlasting.

Thus the three persons are actually and finely composed in the symbol,
in a single divine being, and each person is differently adorned with
his own work. To the Father is given the creation, to the Son the
redemption, and to the Holy Spirit the power of sanctification, that is,
to distribute forgiveness of sins, to make joyful, to strengthen, and to
bring from death to that life. These are like different garments, so
that the persons are not mixed together, and so that one may be known
before the other: that the Father is Creator, Christ becomes man, and
the Holy Spirit comes like a flame, so that it is to be seen as if
everything is full of fire, and makes people happy. These are all works
of the one God. But with the difference of the works one should also
understand the difference of the persons: for God the Father did not
become man, but the Son; so the Son did not let himself be seen in fiery
tongues, but the Holy Spirit.

So this article came down to us, we did not invent or make it ourselves.
Thus, we see in the histories that God held sway over it and punished
the heretics who challenged such an article. Therefore we are to hold
fast to it and abide by the word alone, and not be prudent nor argue
much about it. For so we read that John had to write his gospel mostly
because of the heretic Cerinthi, who blasphemed Christ and did not want
to let Christ be God. Now it happened at a time that John came with his
disciples to a bathhouse, and when he saw Cerinthus and his crowd, he
and his disciples soon departed, saying, "Let us go.

We do not stay long around this shameful blasphemer. As John leaves the
bath with his people, and perhaps Cerinthus and his crowd mock him and
begin to blaspheme, the bath collapses and kills them all. This was his
deserved reward.

The same happened to the heretic Ario. He made a terrible noise in the
church, so that it took longer than four hundred years, and still the
sparks do not want to leave the heart of the godless people. He admitted
that Christ was begotten by God before all creatures, but nevertheless
he was also a creature, although far more glorious and beautiful than
all others. When the pious bishops everywhere, as if by necessity,
opposed such blasphemy, and much disruption and unwillingness arose from
it, Emperor Constantine had to intercede, and gathered a great multitude
of learned and pious bishops, who condemned such error of Arii. But when
he soon died and his son Constantius, who had been very favorable to
Arius, came into the regency, the Arians made an effort to bring Arius
out of the ban by force and to give him justice in his matters. When the
day was called and Arius and his group set out early in the morning for
church, he was struck by a stomach ache on the way, so that he asked for
a secret chamber, and died.

(39) Thus this article of the Holy Trinity has been preserved, first
with Scripture, then with the struggle of the apostles and holy fathers,
and lastly also with miraculous works against the devil and the world,
and shall be preserved still, if God wills; that we believe in One God,
who is called God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit.

The Father is our Creator, the Son is our Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit
is our Sanctifier. By such special works we can make a distinction
between the persons, and yet the nature or the divine essence is not
separated or divided. This is what is preached today at this feast, and
Christians alone believe such an article, which seems foolish in the
sight of reason; as Paul says that God is so

**680 L.2, 348.349.** On the Sunday of Trinity. **W. XIII, 1528-1530.
681**

that he was pleased to save those who believe in it by a foolish sermon.
For reason will never be able to agree that three are one and one is
three, that God becomes man, that when we are put into baptism we are
washed from sins by the blood of Christ, that we eat the body of Christ
in the bread and drink his blood in the wine, and thus receive
forgiveness of sins.

received by faith. Such articles are all considered to be foolishness by
the worldly wise. Therefore Paul calls them so and says: "It is a
foolish, foolish sermon, but whoever believes it shall be saved. May God
the Father grant us this through His Holy Spirit for the sake of His
dear Son, our Savior Christ Jesus, amen.

**On the Sunday of Trinity.**

**Second Sermon.**

**John 3:1-15.**

Now there was a man among the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler among
the Jews; who came to JEsu by night, and said unto him, Master, we know
that thou art a teacher come from GOD: for no man can do the signs which
thou doest, except GOD be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born
when he is old? can he also go again into his mother's womb, and be
born? JEsus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
GOD. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit is spirit. Do not be surprised that I said to you: You must
be born again. The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the
sound thereof; but knowest not whence it cometh, and whither it goeth.
So is every one that is born of the Spirit. Nicodemus answered and said
unto him, How can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him, Art
thou a master in Israel, and knowest not these things? Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, we speak that we know, and testify that we have seen; and
ye receive not our testimony. Do ye not believe when I tell you of
earthly things; how would ye believe if I told you of heavenly things?
And no man goeth up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven, even
the Son of man, which is in heaven. And as Moses lifted up a serpent in
the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever
believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

This is an excellent, beautiful gospel, in which we see what is the
right, single, certain way to eternal life. It seems, however, that it
was placed on this very feast of the Holy Trinity, so that the
difference between the persons is so finely and actually shown in the
highest and greatest work that God does with us poor people, that he
makes us free from sins, righteous and blessed. For it is written here
of the Father that He loved the world and gave it His

I have given you an only begotten son. These are the two different
persons, the Father and the Son, each with its own work. The Father
loves the world and gives it the Son; the Son allows himself to be given
to the world, and, as Christ clearly says here, he allows himself to be
lifted up like the serpent in the wilderness on the cross, so that all
who believe in him may not perish but have eternal life. To such a work
comes the third person, the Holy Spirit, who through

**682 L. 2, 349-351. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1530-1533. 683**

the water of blessed baptism kindles faith in the heart, and thus
reborns us to the kingdom of God.

This is a very comforting sermon, which should ever make our hearts glad
toward God, since we see that all three persons, the whole Godhead,
turns and deals with helping poor, miserable people against sin, death
and the devil to righteousness, eternal life and the kingdom of God. How
can we fear God because of our sins? How can we have an evil heart
toward Him? For if He had wanted to condemn us because of our sins, as
we are always concerned, especially when the hour comes, the Father
would not have given His only begotten Son, the Father and the Son would
not have promoted us to the bath of regeneration and under the wing of
the Holy Spirit. So this article of the Trinity is indicated here in the
finest and kindest way. But enough of this will be said in the next
sermon, so let us now take the Gospel from piece to piece, in which we
hear how the Lord has a long disputation with Nicodemo, the scribe, in
which the good old man cannot judge himself at all. First of all, we
have to see what prevented him from knowing what the Lord is saying and
what he wants.

3 It is a good indication that he follows the Lord, and because he is
not allowed to do so publicly, he finds his way to him at night. His
words also show that he does not mean the Lord Christ badly, but thinks
much of him, as of a special preacher, whom God has sent into the world
and has testified to his teachings with wonderful miracles. He does not
speak such words from a false heart, like the Pharisees, Matth. 22, 16:
"Master, we know that you are true, and teach the way of God rightly."
No, as Nicodemus speaks, so he also means in his heart that our dear
Lord Christ must be a special and precious teacher, since God sends him
such excellent miraculous signs and testifies to his teachings.

4 Such a thought pleases the Lord Christ. Therefore, just as Nicodemus
praises him as the highest teacher, so he also now wants to preach the
highest sermon to him, about the highest and greatest work that can be
preached, namely, how one can see the kingdom of God, that is, how one
can be freed from sins, come to God's grace and attain eternal life.
For this is the preaching which the Son of God alone has brought with
Him from heaven among us on earth, as John says: "The only begotten
Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He has preached it to us."

(5) It is true that all the world has ever troubled itself with this,
and has planned and made special ways and means to become blessed. For
Nicodemus himself comes with the thought that he knows, praise God, even
without Christ, how he should and could be saved. He thinks that because
he is a Jew and has the law, he has the advantage that he can know what
he should do if he wants to live to please God and show the best
obedience. He is content with such things and does not think that there
are many other opinions, as he will hear from Christ 2c. As we also see
in our papists. If a monk could bring himself to do enough for his
order, he would let himself think that he was already sitting in God's
lap, like the Pharisee Luke in chapter 18, who praises his fasting,
tithing and other good works. In sum, all men's hearts are thus
skilful. Just as they fear and are terrified when they feel their sin,
so they trust and hope that they are at ease with God when they are
outwardly pious and have no evil deeds on them that could frighten their
conscience and make them timid. Therefore, the one chooses one thing and
the other another, as he thinks best, so that he can stand before God.
The Jew has his Moses, a monk his order. And indeed we are all under the
delusion that if we kept the toes of the commandments diligently, there
would be no need for us. Nicodemus thinks the same. But because he
considers Christ to be a high and special preacher, Christ wants to
prove himself against him and first gives him this teaching:

684 **L. 2, 351-353. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1533-1535.** 685

**Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God.**

(6) Well, there is the deal with clear, round words, and Christ lets
himself be heard here as a special teacher; for Nicodemus has not heard
such things, therefore he does not understand either. That alone he
understands, that he is not yet born again. But how he is to be born
again, he knows nothing about.

(7) Now consider what the Lord means by this saying. For if one cannot
see the kingdom of God, unless one is born again, it follows that we, as
we are born of father and mother in this world, with reason, free will,
the law and all good practices, both of which reason and will can
perform, must be damned; there is no help for it. But what a wretched
thing is this, that people are taught nothing about such regeneration,
but are merely directed, as the pope does, to their own works, so that
they may be saved by them? How does such teaching rhyme with Christ
here? They say: Good works make blessed. Christ says: If you are not
born again, you will not be saved.

(8) Now it is true and undeniable that a man by himself and by his own
efforts, as is seen in the heathen, can become accustomed to discipline,
respectability and virtue. As one can see, not all people are murderers,
adulterers, fornicators, thieves, wine drinkers, idlers, but are much
more pious, honorable people before the world. These are glorious,
beautiful virtues and good works to which everyone should be exhorted,
for God requires them in the Ten Commandments. But there it is decided,
let virtues and good works be what they will, if the rebirth is not
there, then it belongs nowhere but to the devil in hell. It cannot go to
heaven and the kingdom of God. Christ himself says this and no one
should doubt it.

9) Reason is caught up in it, which wants to hold it against each other
as soon as possible and conclude: stealing, murdering, adultery
displeases God and he punishes; so it must ever follow that such

It is true that it pleases God to avoid sin and to reward it; otherwise,
she says, God would have to be unjust. Now it is true that it pleases
God to avoid such and other sins and to do good; so He will not let them
go unrewarded. But to see the kingdom of heaven, something else and
greater belongs to it, namely, that one is born differently, as it says
here. Therefore God is not hostile to the Pharisee, Luc. 18, because he
is not a robber, an adulterer or an unrighteous man, like other people,
because he fasts and tithes; God would put up with such things if it
were not for the shameful sin that he thought he would enter heaven by
doing so and thought himself much better than the open sinner.

(10) Therefore it is concluded here: Reason is a noble, delicious
thing; the will to do good is also a noble, delicious thing; the law and
the Ten Commandments, a fine, honorable, unruly conduct are all
glorious, great gifts, for which one should thank God: But if one says
of the kingdom of God how one is to come to it, neither reason, will,
law, nor all good works help; only that one is born anew; otherwise one
cannot see the kingdom of God, but must be and remain damned with
reason, free will, law and ten commandments, nothing helps for that.

(11) Yea, saith thou, then will I rather do no good at all? No, that
is no good either, and the judgment of God will only be more severe for
you in that way. Therefore, do both, be diligent to keep the Ten
Commandments, and yet confess with right earnestness that you are a poor
sinner who must be eternally condemned because of his deeds. After this,
listen to the Lord Christ as he comforts us again, after he, because of
our first birth, has so ardently denied us salvation.

Nicodemus feels the harsh judgment very well, therefore considers what
the rebirth is, and realizes that he cannot be born again from father
and mother in a bodily way; therefore asks how it must happen? For it
will not end, he says, that I should crawl again into my mother's womb
and be born again.

**686 8.2, 353-355. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. LIII, 1535-1538. 687**

to be born. With such a question he brings the Lord to teach how the
rebirth must take place and says:

**Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born
of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.**

13 Here he speaks the judgment against the first birth for the second
time, that it is carnal and full of sins, and does not belong to the
kingdom of God. As if he wanted to say: You ask whether you should be
born differently from your mother. If you were born of your mother a
thousand times differently, you would be and remain the same as
Nicodemus before. From flesh nothing but flesh can be born. Therefore,
this rebirth does not include father and mother, both of which are flesh
and full of sin; but it includes water and the Spirit. Whoever is born
again is a new man and will enter the kingdom of God.

14 This will no doubt have been a very ridiculous bargain for Nicodemo
to have thought: Well, let my reason and will, and after that the law
and Moses cannot, and the water can: what opinion may that have? So the
good man is so completely wrong that he does not know what to say, and
must freely confess that he does not understand a word, even though he
understood Moses and the Ten Commandments well, and for that reason made
himself a high, learned doctor.

15 Let us now diligently remember the words and finely summarize the
deal. It is decided that we should do good works and practice obedience
to the law, but by doing so we will not see the kingdom of God. But if
we are to see it, we must not do other works, but become a different and
new person. This is not through bodily birth, but through water and the
Spirit, which are the true father and mother of this newborn fruit.

Now water is nothing else but holy baptism. For thus Christ speaks,
Marci at the 16th chapter v. 16: "Who

believes and is baptized, he will be saved. But water does not have such
power by its very nature. For water is water, that is, an element and
creature, which by itself cannot move the heart, nor change, nor wash
away sins. Clothes, and what is unclean in the skin, can be cleansed and
purified with water; but the soul cannot be moved nor purified by water.
But this water, which the Lord speaks of here, and which we call
baptismal water, is not merely natural water; it is water in which
God's word, command and promise are contained. There two things come
together, water and word, and are mixed with each other in such a way
that you cannot tell one from the other. If you take the word from the
water, you have no baptism; if you take the water from the word, you
have no baptism. But if the word and the water remain together, then you
have such water that the Holy Spirit will be with you, and through it
will bring you back to the kingdom of God, that is, forgive your sin and
make you blessed.

(17) Therefore we should diligently keep this saying in mind,
especially against the blind people, the Anabaptists, who consider
infant baptism unprofitable and unfruitful. But how can this same
baptism be unprofitable if you hear here that Christ ordains the water
to help in regeneration through the action of the Holy Spirit? Now if
the children need to be born again, and otherwise cannot see the kingdom
of God, why would anyone want to deny them baptism, or think that such
water, which is contained in God's word and connected with God's word,
should not be useful for them to be born again? Is it not true that the
words of Christ are urging that whoever is to be born again must be born
again through water? So, even though the water does nothing without the
Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit will not have its effect in us without the
Master.

18 Therefore it is an abominable, terrible error that in some notable
places some preachers have taken upon themselves to baptize infants
without water. For

**[688 L. 2, 355-358. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1538-1541.
689]{.underline}**

If baptism is to be right and a person is to be born again, not only the
Word, not only the Spirit, but also water must be present. For so Christ
ordains here, and no one shall break such an order.

(19) Water baptism is seen with the eyes, but the effect of
regeneration, which the Holy Spirit produces in the heart through such
baptism, is not seen. But because of this secret, invisible effect of
the Holy Spirit, one should not despise the outward, bad, unsightly
water baptism:

**Do not be surprised that I told you: You must be born again. The wind
blows where it wills, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but knowest
not whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth. So is every one that is born
of the Spirit.**

20 These are very simple words, just as the work is simple and bad. For
it has no special standing in the eyes of reason: that one brings a
child or an old man and confesses that he is in the bondage of the devil
because of his sins, and that he cannot deliver himself, and yet in such
great, great need he should do no more than dip him a little in water or
sprinkle him with water in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
But, says Christ, let no one despise this work because of such a bad
reputation. For the Holy Spirit does his work secretly; faith belongs to
him who grasps the words, and does not doubt them, unless the words are.
For with the eyes you will never be able to see, understand or grasp it.
Just as with the wind, you hear it blowing; but that you should grasp it
in such a way that you could say: Here it rises, there it stops, that is
not possible. This is also the case here. The outward work with the
water is seen, and the word is heard sounding or sounding, that it may
be done in the name of Jesus, for the washing away of sins. Whoever does
not keep to the word, and wants to grasp or seek the spirit and its
effect by other means, would be lacking. For if he is to be born of the
Spirit, more does not belong to him.

For this, that he be baptized with water, and hearken unto the sounding
(that is, the word), and receive the same with faith; and he shall be
born again into the kingdom of God, and by nothing else.

(21) Where then are the blasphemous mobs and enthusiasts, who can do
no more than cry and boast of the Spirit? But he is the evil spirit, the
devil himself, who has possessed them bodily, because they have rejected
baptism, sacrament, word, which Christ Himself has honored (earned) for
us, as unnecessary, useless things for salvation. God punishes the
blasphemous spirit. Christ does not teach in this way, but points us to
holy baptism and the sounding of the Spirit, that is, to the Word, and
warns that if we are not satisfied with water and the sounding of the
Spirit, we will not retain anything of the Holy Spirit and will never
come to the new birth. Therefore, let our baptism and the Word be our
highest treasure, since we know for certain that if we continue in them,
we will be born again into the kingdom of God.

(22) This is the doctrine of how to come to the new birth, that is, to
the kingdom of God; a new, unheard-of doctrine in the world, but the
only one that is certain and righteous and does not deceive us. Since,
on the other hand, all other teachings are false and deceptive, they
seem the same before the world as beautiful as they always want to be.
It had a great appearance both with the Pharisee life in Judaism and
under the papacy with the monastic order and the clergy; and is a
special beautiful ornament, where a man keeps himself finely chaste,
honorable and according to the toe commandments: but by this one is not
born again. But the water and the spirit must do it, which will not be
seen or noticed in any other way, but as the wind by its whirring.
Whoever accepts the sound, that is, whoever believes the word and is
baptized, is born again and is saved.

(23) But Nicodemus is so deep in his thoughts about the law and good
works that he cannot grasp or understand this sermon. As we see in the
case of the papists, who mean well and are not wantonly wicked, this
always lies in their way, that they think, "Well, shall our deeds be
nothing?

**690 L. 2, 358-360. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1541-1543. 691**

Is it not pleasing to God that we pray so much, fast, serve Him day and
night, and lead such a strict life? For this reason, Christ is a little
harder on him, because he does not want to believe him and does not want
to be instructed, and says:

**Are you a master in Israel and don't know it?**

(24) As if to say: You are a master among the people of God, whom you
should teach and show the way to salvation. Oh your teaching and showing
the way! You have not yet come so far that you can rightly recognize
yourself and your own nature and being, and you are thinking that you
want to go to heaven, if you are not born again! Will therefore reject
Nicodemum and all preachers who cannot preach more than the law and good
works, as erroneous and seductive preachers: not because it should be
wrong to teach good works and exhort people to them; for God Himself
does this through the law, therefore it is right and well done: but it
is wrong to let people rest on such teaching, as if they no longer
needed it for eternal life. For it is clear here that even if the law
and good works are kept to the best of their ability, they cannot help
one attain the kingdom of God, unless one is born again through water
and the Spirit.

(25) It is the Spirit, then, who makes other men and new hearts
through the water and the word. The law and works change nothing in men
and hearts. Therefore, if any man would instruct men aright unto the
kingdom of heaven, let him look here, and begin not at works and law,
which cause the old heart to remain; but rather let him instruct men
unto baptism and the Spirit, that is, unto the word, by which the Holy
Ghost reviveth and begetteth new hearts. For just as we do not have or
know more of the wind than the sound, so we do not have more of the Holy
Spirit than the word. Now what this word is, and how the Holy Spirit
blows, the Lord teaches further, saying:

**No one leads to heaven except the one who came down from heaven, the
Son of Man, who is in heaven.**

(26) This is the beginning of the sermon, when the Lord says: "If you
do not believe me when I tell you about earthly things, how will you
believe if I tell you about heavenly things? For this sermon never came
into any man's heart, but the only begotten Son, who is in the
Father's bosom, has preached it to us. Now such a sermon has two parts.
The first part is very hard, for it is briefly concluded: "No one goes
to heaven unless he comes down.

(27) This is as much said as above: "Unless a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God"; that is, no man can come to forgiveness
of sins, righteousness, blessedness, and eternal life by the law, good
works, reason, or free will; indeed, though the law, good works, reason,
and free will be at their best, yet it is of no avail, we are and remain
poor, damned sinners, and cannot enter heaven. This is a bright, clear
saying that should take away all confidence in one's own works and
piety from the Jews and papists who believed it. For, tell me, what man
came from heaven? None, not Adam and Eve themselves; the only Son of God
and Mary is, as John says here. For no man shall ascend into heaven, but
he that came down from heaven; so it is decreed, and no man can ever do
otherwise: All men, as they are born of father and mother in this world,
must abide here, and shall not enter into heaven: but if they enter not
into heaven, where shall they abide? On earth they have no certain,
permanent home, because they die. But if they do not go to heaven, they
must remain in death. This is the judgment that Christ passes on the
whole world, no one except Adam, Eve, Abraham, Moses, David, all of them
must remain down and can go to heaven by themselves.

**692 L. 2, 360-362. On the Sunday of Trinity. W. XIII, 1543-1546. 693**

mel will not come, for he alone goes to heaven who has come down from
heaven. Where then are the good works, merit, law-free will? All of
these belong in hell, and will not help us to heaven, that is certain.

028 Yea, sayest thou, shall all men then be damned and perish? Yes,
because of them it is impossible that it could be otherwise: they do and
leave whatever they want or can, they will still make no way nor hole
into heaven. But a certain way is not made by us, but by the Son of God.
Christ continues to preach about this? and says:

**As Moses lifted up a serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man
be lifted up. That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life.**

(29) This is the other part of this heavenly sermon, and the right
soughing of the Holy Spirit; and is as comforting as the first part is
terrible. For it is a terrible judgment that no one shall go to heaven
and be saved. But such a terrible judgment serves to show how our first
birth is sinful, and how there is nothing in us worthy of eternal life,
so that we not only do not become secure or hopeful, but also strike at
ourselves, humble ourselves before God, and desire mercy. Then the right
consolation begins, that, just as you heard before, no man goes to
heaven: so you hear here, that all who believe in Christ shall not
perish, but have eternal life. This is the sweet sound of the Holy
Spirit being felt and grasped.

(30) For both sermons must be preached in Christendom. The first,
about sin and our corrupt ways and natures, that we must despair of our
works, lives, deeds and actions, so that we will never reach heaven.
Wherever hearts are struck and frightened by such a sermon, the
consolation shall follow: how Christ Jesus, the Son of God, came down
from heaven to earth to take our flesh and blood to Himself.

and suffered death for our sins, so that we might be freed from sin and
restored to the inheritance of eternal life. Whoever accepts such a
sermon, believing it to be true, and is comforted, has recovered that
Christ will not leave him here on earth and in death, but will take him
up with Him to heaven.

(31) This is the preaching of heavenly things, which still today will
not enter into the people, and especially not into the Nicodemos, that
is, into those who come with the thought that if one has the law, then
one needs nothing more for salvation. For these are the ones who first
of all do not know, although the law is right and good, that it cannot
be of any use to us because we are evil by nature, and for the sake of
such innate, inherited wickedness cannot do enough for the law, even
though we do the outward works in appearance. On the other hand, they
know much less that we must go to heaven through this man, the Son of
Mary, who alone came from heaven. There grows up another innumerable
great harm, that they not only rely on their works and their own
righteousness, but they despise and persecute the righteousness that
comes from faith in Christ. As we see in the papists, who can tolerate
nothing less, indeed, oppose nothing more vehemently, than that we teach
that we must be saved by faith in Christ alone; we will not achieve it
by good works. We have not devised this; we repeat it after Christ our
Lord, who is the truth himself: let him who will not believe it.

In the 21st chapter of the fourth book of Moses, there is a story that
the people of Israel became displeased in the desert and grumbled
against God and Moses, and especially despised the glorious blessing
that God had given them in the desert, the bread of heaven. God punished
such sin by sending poisonous serpents among them, which bit them.
Immediately their bodies became inflamed and burned like infernal fire,
so that they fell down and died in a great heap. Then they recognized
their sin, that they had

694 **2.2, 362-364.** On the Sunday of Trinity. **W. XIII, ISIS-1549.**
695

had done wrong, and they went to Moses and asked him to pray to the LORD
that the plague might be removed from them. The Lord told Moses to make
a bronze serpent and set it up in the desert; then whoever saw the
bronze serpent would recover and not die.

The Lord introduces the story here and rhymes it with himself, that he
also must be lifted up like the serpent. Whoever then looks at him, that
is, as he himself interprets, believes in him, shall not perish but have
eternal life.

(34) Here let us first learn the cause of the terrible judgment which
the Lord twice before pronounced upon all men, saying, No man shall go
up to heaven, except the Son of man, which is come down from heaven; and
unless a man be born again, he shall not see the kingdom of heaven.
Where does this misery come from for man, that he must remain outside
heaven and be lost for eternity because of it? Nowhere else, because the
old serpent, the devil, has bitten the first man and poisoned him
through sin in such a way that he has death on his hands; and it is
impossible for him to cure himself and help himself. As you can see at
the Jews: what was bitten was dead, nothing helped for it. So it is with
all of us. For the wages of sin is death; and where sin is, death must
also follow. Since all men are born sinners in the first birth of father
and mother, they must also bear the judgment and suffer death because of
it. As the Lord threatened Adam and Eve with expressed words:
"Whichever day ye shall eat of this tree, ye shall surely die.

35) But God shines His mercy, so that He will not let such poor,
poisoned people, condemned to death, perish; and just as He is called to
set up a bronze serpent there, which looked like other serpents, but had
no spirit, and was to help against the poison: so He lifts up His Son on
the trunk of the cross, so that all who look at Him shall not perish,
but be healed from death and have eternal life. This leads

on the cross also the form of the poisonous serpent; but there is no
poison, but only the mere appearance. For Christ, though he took on our
flesh and blood, yet is it flesh and blood without poison and sin; yea,
it is for the remission of our poison and sins.

This is the right soughing of the Holy Spirit, by which he brings about
the new birth in the heart, so that one believes and looks at such a
brazen serpent with certain confidence and comes to life. But it will
hardly have been lacking among the Jews, some of whom will have despised
and said: Dear, do you think that this sight will help you? If one had
this and other medicines, what power would the bronze serpent have? Or,
if there were power in it, would such power ever be more effective if
one attacked the serpent and pressed on its bite, because it would be
powerful and help only by looking at it.

(37) So it is still today with the right serpent of brass, the Lord
Christ. All men make themselves believe that if they are to be helped,
mere appearance or faith need not do it. He who does good deeds and does
not sin would have all the more advantage in the sight of God.
Therefore, preach what you will, but it will not help. This one preaches
this, another another; for faith is not everyone's thing. And so we
want to find another way to health, other than reputation, which is
faith in Christ. But learn this: It is decided, the devil has so
poisoned you through sin that you have eternal death by the neck; you
cannot escape from it, but only have to stand badly. But if you want to
be helped from such poison and death, think of no other medicine than
this sight: that you look at the exalted Christ on the cross with right
eyes, that he died for you, sacrificed his life, paid for your sin with
his death, and thus reconciled you to God. If you believe this and are
baptized, then you are truly born again through the Holy Spirit into the
kingdom of God, have no doubt about it. For you have heard above that
this rebirth takes place in such a way that there is no other means but
this.

696 2.364-366. 384. first Sunday after Trinity. W. xm. 1649-1551. 697

To be sure is to keep the word, and to believe as he tells us, that it
is true and amen.

(38) So your love has the most simple teaching of today's gospel:
that first of all we human beings are sinners by nature and worthy of
eternal death; but by this we are to be redeemed from eternal death,
when we look upon the man Christ Jesus on the cross, that he paid for
us, strangled death, and reconciled us to God and brought us to eternal
life.

39. This teaching is what makes other people and even new hearts, so
that we can say in sins, in death and other temptations: "Well, I
cannot deny it, the old serpent, the devil, has bitten me badly and
poisoned me horribly; but I am comforted by the fact that I know:
Although my Lord Jesus Christ, because of his humanity, also has the
appearance of being full of poison like a lower serpent, that he not
only does not have any poison in himself, but that he hangs there
because he wants to cleanse me from such poison and help me against sin,
death and the devil. Therefore let the devil come, and let him devour
me, and put all my misfortunes upon me: I will cleave unto my Lord
Christ, and be comforted.

He is exalted for this reason, so that those who believe in him may not
perish but have eternal life.

(40) Therefore, where there is comfort in the heart against this
eternal poison, there will also follow a fine, friendly life toward
other people: that just as we expect help from the Lord Christ against
eternal misfortune, we will also gladly prove help to others with what
we can. For such a man looks far around; and though other people wrong
him, yet he is not moved to anger, but has compassion on them. For he
sees that such things come from nowhere but from the poison that we have
all received from the devil's bite; therefore he seeks means how he may
also bring others to come to this remedy and be delivered from the
harmful poison. Thus this teaching is the right fountain and source from
which all virtue, all comfort, all joy and security grow. May God, the
almighty, merciful Father, for the sake of His dear Son Christ JEsu,
keep us in this teaching and let it grow from day to day, so that we do
not lose this sight, and thus, through right faith in Christ, be done
with eternal death, amen.

**On the first Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 16, 19-31.**

Now there was a rich man who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
lived all his days gloriously and joyfully. But there was a poor man
named Lazarus, who lay at his door full of sores, desiring to be
satisfied with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table; but the
dogs came and licked his sores. And it came to pass that the poor man
died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man
also died and was buried. And when he was in hell and torment, he lifted
up his eyes, and beholding Abraham afar off, and Lazarum in his bosom,
cried out, saying, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarum,
that he may dip the uttermost part of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue: for I am in torment in this flame. And Abraham said, Remember,
son, that thou hast received thy good in thy life, and Lazarus, on the
contrary, hath received evil: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. And

*This sermon is included in the edition we follow under the second
Sunday after Trinity. All editions give as text: Luc. 16, 1-9; however,
the correct text is obviously that of the first Sunday after Trinity,
Luc. 16, 19-31, which Walch also prefaces the sermon with, which he then
reports as being from the first Sunday after Trinity. D. Red.

[698 L. 2, 384-386. on the first Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
I55I-I55S. 699]{.underline}

For all these things there is a great gulf fixed between us and you,
that they which would go down from hence unto you cannot, neither can
they go over from thence unto us. Then said he, Then pray thee, O
father, that thou send him to my father's house: for I have yet five
brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this
place of torment. And Abraham said unto him, They have Moses and the
prophets: let them hear the same. And he said, Nay, father Abraham; but
if one of the dead should go unto them, they would repent. And he said
unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they
believe, if any of the dead arise.

This is an excellent gospel, the like of which is found nowhere else in
all of Scripture, of the judgment that will come upon men after this
life. And it is not necessary to argue whether it is a historia or only
a similitude. For since Christ names the two persons, and says what was
their life in both parts, and what judgment came upon them after death,
how the rich man was tormented in the flame, but poor Lazarus was in
joy, we believe that it happened in this way. And we must also believe
that the same judgment will be passed on all those who follow either the
rich man or poor Lazarus here on earth.

(2) For these two examples of the rich man and the poor Lazari are set
forth by the Lord to all the world. The first is of the rich man, who
for a short time lived happily and joyfully, and there is lost and
eternally sad; and the other is of the poor man, who here for a time is
poor and miserable, but there is eternally rich and blessed. That
everyone may learn to follow this example; for both parts require that
one have a certain instruction and keep himself right; if not, eternal
life is lost.

3 Therefore whoever is poor and miserable here on earth, like Lazarus,
may learn not to be offended by such a miserable being, and not to draw
his comfort from this temporal life, but to hope for the future and
eternal.

(4) For no Christian, when he is in trouble, should think that God has
forgotten him or is hostile to him. For this is God's way, that like a
pious father with a rod he is always after his children, so that by such
punishment they may be admonished and kept from sins; otherwise, where
the punishment would not be, they would be safe and persist in sins.
Therefore, a Christian should not be distressed by his misery.

but trust that God loves him, remembers him, and seeks his best. As the
wise man also says: "If a father loves his child well, he will
discipline him.

Therefore, it is a great mistake to count God's goodness and grace only
by how you are doing here on earth. It is true that money and goods, a
healthy body and the like are God's gifts and blessings, but such
blessings do not last forever. For in the end one must leave money and
goods and everything behind. In addition, there is the misfortune of not
keeping oneself particularly in the fear of God and having good regard
for the word that such blessings, because of our sinful nature, give
rise to many sins.

(6) Hence it is seen that God places upon rich people many a cross and
trial, sickness and other misfortunes. Not only because they deserve it
because of the sins they have committed, but also because God wants to
prevent future sins and thus keep them in His fear, since otherwise,
apart from the temptation, they would decrease in prayer, faith and
diligence against the Word from day to day and even get away from it.

(7) The true, highest and best blessing, from which one can and should
really and rightly feel God's goodness, is not temporal good, but the
eternal blessing that God has called us to His holy Gospel, where we
hear and learn how God, for the sake of His Son, wants to be merciful to
us, forgive sin and make us eternally blessed; in addition, He
graciously protects us against the tyranny of the devil and the world.
Whoever considers such blessings, even though he lacks temporal
blessings, being poor, sick, despised, unhappy, and burdened with all
kinds of adversity, yet all this is a small thing to him, for he sees
that he always keeps more than he has lost. If money and property are
not there, then

700 **L. 2, 386-388. on the first Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
IMS-E.** 701

he knows that he has a merciful God; if the body is weak and sick, he
knows that he is called to eternal life and that this is promised to him
in baptism and the Word. The same is true of other trials and
tribulations. If it is up to him, as God wills, his heart always has the
consolation: "If it is about a little thing, it should be better, and
so better that no one should take my joy from me; for I have a gracious
God through Christ, who is my Father and wants to place me in the
eternal inheritance through Christ.

8 So this poor Lazarus also comforted himself. The pain hurt his body,
so that he often wept and cried over it. His heart will also often have
softened and gone out of control because he was so desolate in addition
to the illness that he had no food and drink, since the rich godless man
lived in abundance. Woe, I say, was this to him; for it is not possible
that a man's heart should not grieve over this. But on the other hand
he kept this comfort firmly in his heart, that he said: I see that my
God in heaven wills it so; therefore I will gladly suffer such things
for his service, knowing that they cannot be eternal. It is to be done
for a short time, then sickness and all plagues must cease, and the
blessed change must take place, so that instead of temporal suffering
there will be eternal joy and comfort. For I have ever had the promise
that God would be merciful to me for the sake of His Son Christ, that He
would forgive my sin, set me free from the curse and accept me with
grace. Therefore, let it go as it goes. If people do not respect me and
do not give me the crumbs they give to the dogs, I take comfort in the
fact that God will take care of me and will not let me live in want for
eternity; for this reason I will suffer and be oppressed for a while and
wait for something better.

(9) That Lazarus had such thoughts and thus comforted himself in his
suffering is evidenced first by his name. For "Lazarus" is the Hebrew
name "Eleazar", and means as much as: God helps; that he put all his
trust in God's eternal help alone.

not on men. The evangelist also testifies to this in that he says how
Lazarus was carried into the bosom of Abraham by the angels. This is
nothing else than that Lazarus put his trust in the promise made to
Abraham, when God promised him that in his seed all generations of the
world would be blessed. Lazarus kept this promise and was comforted by
it: Although all the world considered him a cursed man, because he was
so poor and miserable; yet he would enjoy the blessed seed, and not
remain under God's curse, but under His eternal grace. And such faith
sustained him that when he departed here on earth, the angels carried
him into the bosom of Abraha.

(10) Now Christ, our dear Lord, would have us diligently observe and
learn this example. For his Christians must fear that they will be in
want on earth with poor Lazarus, and that they will suffer all kinds of
misfortune. Whoever does not have or know the comfort that Lazarus has
cannot help, becomes impatient and finally despairs. For flesh and
reason do not leave their kind. Where God's word does not increase,
everyone thinks, when he is in trouble, that God has forgotten him and
does not want him; otherwise he would help and not leave him so mired in
misery. That one should look to the future and take comfort in it,
nothing comes of it. That is why many an untried man becomes impatient
and thinks: If God will not help, let the devil help and whoever else
can. This means to fall away from God, to become an enemy of God and to
do nothing good for Him, and to incur God's eternal wrath and damnation
in addition to temporal suffering and sorrow. One should be on guard
against this and not forget poor Lazari. He is a poor, miserable man;
but because he holds firmly to the promise of Christ and the life to
come, and gives himself into a willing obedience to God, he is
abundantly refreshed by such suffering, and instead of a little
suffering has an exuberant, eternal joy and consolation. This is the
example of poor Lazaro,

702 **L. 2, 388-3S1. On the first Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
issr-isso.** 703

since all Christians are to conform to it and thus comfort themselves in
their affliction.

(11) The other example is the rich man, who is well here on earth and
according to all his will and desire, but in that life he must lack and
be damned for eternity. Here again we must believe that our Lord Christ
tells us the truth about such judgment and condemnation, that the rich
man lies in the hellish flame and suffers horrible torment, the like of
which cannot be spoken in words. And that such suffering is also a great
cause, that he sees poor Lazarum in eternal joy, whom he so miserably
despised before, and cannot enjoy his as much as a drop of water, and
must remain in such misery without some hope of help in eternity.

12. But what is the cause of the poor man's eternal misery and
torment? It is not that he is rich and has much money, that he clothes
himself, eats and drinks; for these are God's gifts and ordinances:
only that you keep a measure in it and do nothing in excess, then God
will gladly grant money and goods, food and drink, joy and splendid
clothing and other things. But this is the reason that this rich man has
money and goods, dresses himself deliciously and lives splendidly, and
does not think about the future life when he passes away today or
tomorrow, how he will fare in the future life. All his care and concern
is that he may have here enough and a good chamber; just as if he needed
nothing else. As Christ warns in the Gospel that one should not weigh
down the heart with eating and drinking and worrying about food. This is
a cause that promotes him to condemnation, for it follows that God's
word has not gone to his heart; he has not allowed himself to be
challenged that God promises or threatens whatever he wants, if only he
has no lack here.

13) The other cause is that he sees poor Lazarum lying before him: but
there he does not grant him so much in all his trouble and hardship as a
dog; so that the evangelist says that the dogs had more compassion on
him and served him more than

the rich man. He does not think that God has given him more to help
others who lack; but like a sow, if she could eat it all alone and leave
nothing for others, so this rich man also thinks, if he only has enough,
and does not worry about the poor people's lack. Such sins cause the
ghastly judgment that here he has a little time for pleasure and
courage, but there he suffers eternally.

14 For this reason the Lord sets such an example before us, so that we
may learn from it and beware of such sins and judgments, and not be sure
that there is no other life than this temporal one here on earth, and
that we should especially let poor people be commanded to us. For to
whom God has given it that he may help poor people, and yet does not do
it, to him this will be a severe torment and torture on the last day and
in eternity, that he will see the poor, whom he despised and did not
help, living before him in joy; just as the rich man here did to
Lazarum. Again, whoever has served many, done good and helped, it will
be a joy for him in that life. But is it not a pity above all pity that
this rich man desires only a cold drop of water, but it cannot prosper
him for eternity?

(15) Therefore let us not forget poor people, and gladly help and give
to them: not only with the common alms, that one gives a penny, penny or
guilder, according to our fortune and his need; such help is owed to
poor people in all ways. But after that there is another alms, where
each one can serve and help his neighbor in his position and profession,
and the same all days and all hours, namely: that each one conduct his
trade, handicraft and business in such a way that he does not deceive
anyone, does not cheat anyone with false goods, is satisfied with a fair
profit, and pays people their pennies well; that one gives right measure
and weight, and neither in buying nor selling seeks such an advantage
that comes to the disadvantage of others. For what is unfaithfulness in
all dealings is evident. But he who acts faithfully, even though he may
be

704 **L.2, 391-3S3.** On the first Sunday after Trinity. **W. XIII,
1560-1563.** 705

If a man gives nothing for free and takes a good profit, he gives alms.
Others, on the other hand, who spend their goods for profit and seek
their own gain, steal money from people's pockets.

16. as when a baker makes the bread too small, or falsifies the stuff,
a butcher gives too small a weight, a wine-giver gives or falsifies the
wine too dear; and who will tell it all? No trade is so small and small,
if you deal with it faithfully, that you let right goods happen to
others for a right penny, then it is a charity. Again, if you take
people over or pay them badly, it is theft, and you are a thief before
God, and on the last day you will see poor Lazarum before you, to whom
you have denied such alms of your trade, and on top of that have stolen
from him by your avarice and taken away what was his; as you hear here
that it happened to the rich man. So everyone could make all his
business, whether large or small, a right alms, pleasing to God, and
surely not only would temporal blessings follow with abundance, but, as
Christ says, we would also make friends here on earth from unrighteous
mammon, whose testimony we could have and enjoy in eternal life.

But the world is and remains the world; it can neither be advised nor
helped. He who has much wants to give nothing and have more. He who has
little thinks that however he gets something, it will harm whoever wants
it. For this reason, God must inflict all kinds of punishment on the
wicked world here, and then punish it with hellish fire. And yet,
although the world partly learns about this and hears about it in the
sermon, it does not turn away from it and does not improve. But is not
this a terrible, horrible blindness and hardening? We can use this
caution in other things. If it happens that there is a theuria to worry
about, whoever is able to do so will stock up for one, two or three
years, so that he will be ahead of the shortage. But why don't we do
the same here, since we know that a perpetual shortage must follow if we
don't get ourselves into it right?

> 18. but such a judgment is so much the more

Once you enter it, you will never be able to come out again for
eternity. For all help is cut off. Abraham and Lazarus, as you have
heard, not only do not want to help with a drop of water, but also
cannot help. How then do we poor people get into this misery, that we
take so little notice of such eternal journeys, and do not seek to be
insured against them, when we can otherwise keep ourselves so well and
take care in very small matters, which often do not amount to one or two
florins? Is it not true that the devil takes our sense and wit;
otherwise should we ever look more to such eternal harm than to
temporal? But everyone goes along and worries only about how he may have
enough, how he may leave plenty for his children and how he may keep
himself well off. He who has this, lets himself think that he has
enough. He who does not have it cannot rest, for he also overcomes it.
So the hearts are weighed down with cares of food, that their judgment
comes upon them like a snare, and they are sooner in death and
condemnation than they know it.

19 This is the reason why the Lord presents this example of the rich man
to us and has it preached, that he would like to make us worry so that
we do not worry about the temporal alone, but rather about the eternal
and imperishable; but deal with the temporal and perishable in such a
way that we do not give cause for our own condemnation. For this rich
man, if he had not had so much, and had suffered and tried something
besides, he would not have come into such distress. But money and goods
make him brave, so that he thinks he needs neither God nor his word, so
he lives in ease and does not let himself be challenged. He is not
concerned about eternity; and because he has enough of everything, he is
not concerned about the temporal either, without thinking how he can
create good days and pleasure for himself, and spend the time in joy.
Christ warns us against this and says: "Watch, if you, like the rich
man, want to strive here alone to live gloriously and joyfully, this is
how it will be with you.

[706 **L. 2, 393-M5. On the first Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1563-1565.** 707]{.underline}

The first is that such short, fleeting, and uncertain joy will be
followed by eternal, unending sorrow and suffering.

(20) These are the two examples which we should never forget
throughout our lives, so that we may have some consolation in suffering
and temptation, and so that we may walk in the temporal, that we may not
thereby come to the loss of eternal goods.

21) For such a lesson the Lord Christ further tells how the rich man,
since no help can be hoped for him, thinks of his brothers, and asks
Abraham to send Lazarum to them, so that they do not follow the rich
man's example and are also condemned. But Abraham refuses such a
request, saying, "They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear the
same." But when the rich man continues, thinking that it would be more
fruitful for them if a dead man came and preached to them, than if they
heard it in the church, Abraham answers again, saying, "If they do not
hear Moses and the prophets, neither will they believe if one of the
dead rises up."

22 The rich man sees that if one is to escape such a judgment, one must
repent and behave differently from him; he also considers that it can
happen to other people just like him, that even though they have God's
word and the sermon, they still despise it and do not particularly
improve on it. Therefore, it seems to him that his brethren could not be
better advised, because a reputable preacher would come, whom one knew,
and would know that he had died and was now in that life, and could
certainly give an account of how things were in the same life. And it is
true that we ourselves think that such a sermon would not be despised,
as otherwise we hear and despise the sermon that is preached by men. But
Abraham rejects such things altogether, saying, "If anyone wishes to
escape such eternal judgment and be saved, he should neither look nor
wait for any other warning, but only listen to Moses and the prophets;
this is the only way to escape eternal damnation.

escape and come to salvation. But whoever does not want to listen to
Moses and the prophets, it is in vain: even if a dead man stood up, even
if an angel or God himself preached, they would not believe it. This
means that the ministry of preaching is highly praised and the people
are faithfully exhorted to preach, since there is no other means by
which one can protect oneself from the terrible judgment of eternal
damnation.

(23) What do Moses and the prophets preach? Primarily these two
pieces: the first, that they point to the promised woman-seed, which
shall crush the serpent's head, that is, take away the devil's power,
and turn away the damage, which he inflicted on all of us in paradise.
Moses and the prophets deal with such a woman-seed, who is the Son of
God and brings divine power and righteousness to us on earth, and teach,
admonish and prophesy when he will come and appear, that one should hear
him, keep his word and believe his promise.

(24) He that heareth thus Moses and the prophets shall first despair
of his life, works, and estate, and shall comfort himself only of this
seed, which alone is a blessed seed, and bringeth blessing upon us, who
are cursed and damned for our sins. So faith in Christ Jesus is the only
and right way, by which one can escape from sins and death and come to
salvation. This rich man did not accept such salvation and comfort, he
considered himself pious. As he must have been outwardly pious before
the world; for the gospel does not blame him for being an adulterer,
robber, etc.. Therefore he will have thought: If I were not so pious,
God would not give me so much happiness and blessing.

(25) For it is natural to every man that, when things go badly, he
soon thinks: God is angry with you, does not take care of you, you must
perish without counsel, help and consolation. Again, is it well with
him, is everything fully there and goes to him according to his desire,
then he lets himself think, he is well with God; otherwise

708 L. 2, 395-397.366. On the second Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1565-1567. 709

he would not be so gracious to him; yet, as said above, such temporal
blessing is a very small and bad thing. For this reason the wicked have
more advantage on earth than the pious. But let there be money and
goods, as much as there may be; take heed that thou consider thyself not
saintly, but put thy trust and comfort only in those things which Moses
and the prophets preach of; otherwise it shall be unto thee as it was
unto that rich man, which heard Moses and the prophets, and yet took no
comfort of the Lord Christ.

The other thing that Moses and the prophets teach is this: After we have
established our righteousness and happiness from the promised seed
alone, that we also obey God, and in this temporal life do and keep that
which He has commanded us; again, avoid and refrain from that which He
has forbidden us. For this is to fear God and to have Him before our
eyes. But he who will not do this, and will not follow the law of God,
but his own will and desire, that is, sin, cannot boast that he is a
child of God, or that he has God before his eyes.

For this reason, he must be on the alert at all times that God will come
and attack him and, as He finds him, judge him; so that both faith and
obedience to God must be together. Faith serves to make us free from
sins and become children of God. Obedience, or love and works of love,
serve to make us

show ourselves to be obedient children and not anger God any further,
and have a good conscience; which those cannot have who lie in
deliberate sins and continue in them without amendment or repentance. In
sum, fear God and be pious, and yet do not rely on such piety, but take
comfort in our Lord Jesus Christ alone, and you will have no trouble.
For such faith helps you against sin and death. And because God has
commanded obedience, he will also put up with it, and does no harm, even
though such obedience is imperfect. For it is not alone, but depends on
faith, through which we are forgiven that which such obedience still
lacks.

(28) Thus shall men hear Moses and the prophets, that they may learn
therefrom to believe in Christ, and to be godly. The rich man did not do
this, and for this reason he must be damned for eternity and suffer,
along with all those who hear Moses and the prophets, and yet do not
follow their preaching. But those who hear and follow, that is, those
who believe in Christ and know that God, for His sake, will be merciful
to us, will not impute sin to us, and will make us blessed, and then
keep themselves in the fear of God, not following the devil and their
flesh, but looking to God's word and will: these are the ones who
belong to Lazaro in the bosom of Abraham and shall be eternally blessed.
May God grant us this for the sake of His Son Christ Jesus, through His
Holy Spirit, Amen.

**On the second Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 14:16-24.**

And he said unto him, There was a man that made a great supper, and
invited many. And sent forth his servant at the hour of supper, to say
unto them that were bidden: Come, for everything is ready. And they all
began to excuse themselves one by one. The first said unto him, I have
bought a field, and must go out and see it; I pray thee, excuse me. And

*Walch does not share this sermon here, since it is very similar to the
one contained in the church postilla (see Vol. XI, 1216). - In the
edition we follow, it appears under the title of the first Sunday after
Trinity. D. Red.

[710 L. 2, 366.367. On the second Sunday after Trinity. L. 2, 367.-368.
711]{.underline}

the other said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go now to see
them; I pray thee, excuse me. And the third said: I have taken a wife;
therefore I cannot come. And the servant came and told his master again.
And the master of the house was wroth, and said unto his servant, Go out
quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in the poor,
and the crippled, and the lame, and the blind. And the servant said,
Lord, that is done which thou hast commanded; but there is yet room. And
the LORD said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and by the
fences, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. But I
tell you that none of the men who are invited will taste my supper.

(1) This Gospel was placed on this Sunday because the feast of Corpus
Christi was celebrated this week, as it is still celebrated among the
papists. For they have extended the Lord's Supper, as this Gospel says
of it, to the Sacrament, and thus confirmed the one form of the
Sacrament; which, as you know, is one of the noblest parts, about which
we disagree with them.

2. Since the young people grow up and know nothing about such
festivities or pageantry, and we old people also forget it, it would be
good that they preach about it, so that when our youth comes into their
churches and sees such idolatrous pageantry, they will not be offended
by it, and could say that it is not right that they perform such a false
service and spend so many indulgences with it: not of the opinion that
they intend to honor the sacrament with it, for otherwise they would
carry around the whole sacrament or both forms: but to the Sacrament's
shame and disgrace, but to themselves to the highest honors; for by this
they have wished to maintain the distinction that the priesthood is a
special and higher estate before God than the other common Christians,
because (as they think) they have the whole Sacrament or both forms, and
the other Christians, as lesser people, have to be satisfied only with a
few pieces of the Sacrament.

(3) They wanted to bring this difference to the people with such a
feast, and to praise their state before others, as they said, to shame
and disgrace the holy sacrament and the Lord Jesus Christ, who has not
instituted such a sacrament, to make a distinction between the spiritual
(as they have invented) and the common Christian state; just as he did
not suffer and die for this or that state, but for the sake of the holy
sacrament.

Consolation of His Christian Church, which is not divided, but is one
body of the one Head JEsu Christ, since all the members are equal as far
as life and essence are concerned, although the profession and the works
are unequal and different.

4 This abuse, which is very great and dangerous, is not to be forgotten,
but to be stirred up in the pulpit and well struck out, because they
insist so obstinately and impenitently on their ungodly nature. For how
does the holy sacrament come to be used to make a distinction among
Christians, when the Lord Christ instituted it primarily for the
consolation of the conscience and the strengthening of the faith? Then
that it should be like a bond in Christianity, so that Christians are
joined together: that they are like one loaf or one cake, not only in
that they have at the same time one God, one Word, one baptism, one
sacrament, one hope and confidence; but also one body, as one member
lends a hand to the other, and helps, counsels. To bear compassion 2c.
The papists have even abolished this custom of the holy sacrament,
because they alone have arrogated the sacrament to themselves, and
thereby made a special group, which should be better than the common
Christianity. But so that the common man would also hold the one figure
in high esteem and not despise it, they held the feast of Corporis
Christi (the body of Christ) for eight days every year, when the one
figure was carried through the city with a magnificent display, with
cymbals and strings, so that people's eyes were opened, so that they
would think that although the priesthood was much more glorious and
greater in the sight of God, they still had something to flaunt.

5 Today's Gospel has the following to it

712 **2.2, 368.369. On the second Sunday after Trinity. 2.2, 369.370.**
713

must also serve them. It is as if this householder had prepared a meal
of mice, and had given only food, but nothing to drink. So they sing:
Venite, comedite panem meum, et bibite vinum meum: Come, eat my bread
and drink my wine. But it is the same with our Lord God in every way:
what he establishes and ordains must be perverted, blasphemed and
desecrated by the devil and his own. This is also the case with the most
reverend Sacrament, which is still being blasphemed today by the
papists. For, as I have said, they do not keep this feast in honor of
the holy Sacrament; otherwise they would carry the whole Sacrament
about, but in honor of themselves; and they make a great show of it, not
that we should have much of it, but only that we might know what
difference there is between a priest and a layman. In other things,
where God has created it, it is good to make a difference, so that a
woman remains a woman, a man a man, that secular authorities are
separated from the subjects, and so on with other secular classes. But
that one wants to make a difference here, since God has abolished all
difference, that pope, bishops, yes. St. Peter or St. Paul should have a
better baptism, a better gospel, than otherwise a common Christian, that
is not Christ's opinion. Therefore it is also wrong for them to want to
have a better sacrament than other common Christians, whom they have
called laymen; although our Savior, the Lord Christ, has not instituted
the sacrament, as has been said, for distinction among his Christians,
but for comparison (like baptism and the gospel), that one should have
as much of it as the other.

(6) Not to mention the abominable idolatry, which they have powerfully
driven into the people with such a transfer, that they have forgotten
that he who would have right use of the sacrament should eat and drink
as Christ commanded. They did not reproach the Christians with this
command, but told them that it was enough with this sacrament if they
saw it, fell down before it and worshipped, since it was not in his
custom.

For Christ has ordained it only to be eaten and drunk, and thus to
strengthen the faith; and not to be buried, taken up, looked at, carried
about, or worshipped. But if any man will abuse it in that which Christ
hath not commanded, let him see what he shall do with it, and what he
shall keep of such sacrament. For if the body and blood of Christ are by
command among the bread and wine, when they are eaten and drunk, it
follows that, if there is no such institution, and one wishes to use
this sacrament for something other than what Christ commanded, it is no
longer a sacrament, and that a vain idolatry is done with it.

(7) I have said this briefly for the sake of the youth and also for
our sake, so that everyone may beware of the abomination and get to know
the devil, whom the pope has introduced here, and thus divides
Christendom, since they want to have our Lord God united. For they
condemn and persecute us because we do not want to be made into mice and
rats, who eat drunk, or only want to take some form. Therefore they are
people to whom one is justly hostile, because they act against Christ
and his order in such a bold and defiant way. And for good, just causes
we have dropped and abandoned this feast of Corporis Christi in our
church, because it is an abomination before God, a disgrace to His holy
sacrament, and a noticeable harm to us. For we want to remain with the
unity of Christians, that here one is as good as the other, and all
difference in outward and worldly things remains. That is enough, for
the sake of the young and the simple. Now let us turn to the gospel.

(8) This gospel is above the miraculous work, when the Lord Christ
heals a dropsy in the Pharisee's house. But the evangelist says: They
were waiting for him, so that they might catch him.

(9) Therefore the Lord soon starts and gives a chapter to the guests,
so that they are full of pride and arrogance, and they struggle to sit
upstairs, until he finally comes to the host, to whom he also gives his
lesson on how to ask guests: not the rich, who ask him to sit upstairs.

714 **L. 2, 370.371. On the second Sunday after Trinity. L. 2,
371.372.** 715

but the poor, who will be able to ask and give thanks for him in that
life. One of them, who wants to be very pious, responds to such a speech
by saying: "Blessed is he who eats bread in the kingdom of God," as if
he had a great interest in God's kingdom and eternal life. But the Lord
notices the mischievousness and hypocrisy, and emphasizes to him how
holy he and his kind are, that they ask nothing at all, neither about
our Lord God, nor about the Kingdom of Heaven. You, he says, now let
yourself be heard as having a very great desire for God's kingdom. But,
shall I tell you the truth, you are one of the guests who are kindly
invited, but they have other things to do and do not want to come. The
blow is especially for the one who distinguishes himself from others
with this desire. As if the Lord wanted to say: You say a lot that it is
a blessed man who eats bread in heaven. Oh, you are very serious; how
you are such a good, holy man; namely, one of those who are invited and
yet do not want to come. These are hard, sharp, and dreadful words, if
you will move them; for he is speaking to the vain rascals who sat about
the table, not that they would learn anything of him, but that they were
waiting for him, where they might come and catch him. Then the likeness
began, as a man had been who made a great supper, and sent out his
servants, and bade guests. But what did they do? They all excused
themselves and stayed outside. One said he had bought a field, which he
must see; the other, he had bought five yoke of oxen; the third, he had
taken a wife: and they left the master with his supper, and despised him
in addition, so that at last the master became angry, took what he could
find, cripples, the lame and the blind, and drove them by force to the
inn. But of the rest he says, "They shall not taste my supper." This
is a hard gospel against both Jews and Gentiles. Now let us go over it
according to the text.

10. the man who made this supper is our Lord GOD himself, who is

a great and rich host; and has also made a supper, according to his
majesty and glorious honor, which is called great and glorious: not only
because of the host, which is God himself, that it would be a great
meal, if he had given only pea broth or dry bread; but the food is also
great, namely, the holy gospel, yes, Christ our Lord himself. He himself
is the food, and is presented to us in the gospel, that he has done
enough for our sin through his death, and has disposed of all the misery
of eternal death, hell, the wrath of God, sin and condemnation.

This sermon of Christ is the great, glorious supper, to which he asks
guests that he may sanctify them through his baptism, comfort and
strengthen them through the sacrament of his body and blood; that
nothing may be lacking, that there may be full sufficiency and that
everyone may be filled. So that this is called a great supper, also
because of the food and dishes, which are so seasoned and prepared that
no tongue can understand it and no heart can sufficiently comprehend it.
For it is an everlasting meat and drink, whereof we never thirst nor
hunger, but are filled and made drunk and merry for ever. And not one
man alone; but as far as the world is, if it were ten times wider, they
would all have enough of this meal. For the gospel thus saith, Whosoever
believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ, that he was born of Mary of virgins
for our sakes, and was martyred for our sins under Pontius Pilate, and
died, and descended into hell, and rose again, and sitteth on the right
hand of God, 2c., the same shall live for ever and ever, and be blessed.
On the other hand, he who has eaten enough today must eat again
tomorrow. But this is an eternal food, which endures forever. Therefore
give the hypocrites at the table to understand that it is another meal
than they gave him; and yet they are such husks and knaves, though they
can wash and chat much of it, yet they despise God and His mercy,
eternal life and blessedness, and let all other things be dearer to
themselves. Follow further in the text:

**[716 L. 2, 372-374. On the second Sunday after Trinity. L. 2, 374.378.
717]{.underline}**

**And invited many to do so.**

The "many" who are invited are the Jews and all the people of Israel,
who have been invited from Abraham onward, especially through the
prophets. For the arch-father Abraham was promised the seed through whom
the blessing was to come. And so this supper, as the father of this
people, was first proclaimed to him; then the prophets continued and
pointed out to the people that our Lord God's will was not lacking, and
that he had diligently invited them. That is why St. Paul in his
epistles prefixes the Jews everywhere: Judaeis primum et Graecis. (To
the Jews

primarily and also the Greeks).

013 And when the hour was come that they should come to meat, that is,
when it was about the time that our Lord Christ was born, and should
suffer, and rise again from the dead, and begin his everlasting kingdom,
then went forth the servants, John the Baptist and the apostles, and
said unto them that were bidden, unto the people of Israel, Good people,
ye are bidden hitherto: now is the time, come, now shall it be done.
Your Lord or Messiah has already been born, died and risen again;
therefore do not tarry long outside, come to the table, eat and be
merry, that is, receive with joy your promised treasure, which has
delivered you from curse and condemnation and made you blessed. And such
a message was especially preached to the highest among the people, who
were in the spiritual and temporal government. But what did they do
about it?

**They all started apologizing one after another.**

(14) This is a lesson for the guests who sit at table with Christ, and
especially for the useless washer who wants to master Christ over the
table and preach much about the bread in the kingdom of God: "Blessed
is he who eats the bread in the kingdom of heaven. Yes, says he, if you
want to know how blessed you are, I will tell you, it is already
prepared; John the Baptist is here; I and my apostles now call you to
sit at the table: but you do not remain alone outside, but still want to
excuse yourselves and be pure; sin therefore twofold: that you despise
the gospel, and the

nor want to have done right, nor be holy, pious and wise. That is a
grievous sin. For in this it would be much, much too much, that one
neither accepts nor believes the word of our Lord God; but that one
continues to add to it, and despises it, and wants to be righteous on
top of it, that is overpowering and quite unpleasant. As our nobles, the
papists, are doing now: they still want to be praised for giving the
sacrament under one form, forbidding marriage and causing other ungodly
things in the church; they even condemn us and put us to all tortures,
murder and chase away the people who do not want to accept their
abomination. Now let them pour out hot enough that they may sweat the
more.

(15) The Jews did the same, and excused themselves when they were
summoned, saying that they could not accept this teaching, because it
was against the priesthood and the law that God Himself had given
through Moses, and that it would lead to a disruption in the government
that God Himself had ordered. Therefore, the first one excuses himself
with the field, the second one with the oxen, and both think that it is
well done; the third one does not excuse himself at all, but says badly
that he cannot come. These are the excuses of these saints against the
gospel, that they first of all preach the law and their worship. For
because the apostles preached that neither law, temple, nor priest were
any longer necessary, because the right high priest was present, Jesus
Christ, of the tribe of Judah, by whose sacrifice alone one must be
saved; they did not want to suffer such preaching, but to keep their
law; so they left Christ and the gospel, and wait to this day for their
Messiah to come, and to restore the old priesthood and kingdom, as it
was in the time of David.

16 Christ touches on this with the purchase of the field, that the first
one says: "I want to look at my field"; that is, we priests must work
and reap, that is, we must govern the people (as Christ also calls the
preachers field people who sow the gospel), we must wait for our
priesthood. Because

718 **L. 2, 375. 376. on the second Sunday after Trinity. L. 2.
376.377.** 719

but the teaching of the apostles is against it and points to another
priest and another sacrifice, we condemn it as a false teaching and do
not want to come to this supper. So also the others, who were in the
secular regiment, excuse themselves with the oxen. For oxen are the name
of the rulers of the people (Ps. 22:13: "Great bulls have surrounded
me, fat oxen have surrounded me"). For they thought: We have a kingdom
and a regiment, established and appointed by God; we must stay with it
and see how we get it. But if we were to follow this new doctrine, we
would lose everything; therefore always away with this preaching! The
third say: "The gospel is a doctrine that does not want to be stingy,
but means to set everything in motion, life and limb, money and goods,
for Christ's sake; therefore we do not want to come, but keep our
houses full without a ride. 2c. For to take a wife here does not mean to
commit fornication or to intend something wicked and dishonest; but to
take care of everything that a householder deals with, to think how we
may keep house and prosper, how we may feed ourselves. For the Jews
looked to it, as Moses had promised them, if they were pious and kept
God's commandment, temporal blessing, that cattle, field, woman, child,
everything should be blessed and stand well. Therefore, they sought only
to fill their kitchen and cellar and become rich, thinking that they
were pious and that God had blessed them.

(17) So our papists also excuse themselves and say: The doctrine is
right, but one must nevertheless remain with the church and not cause a
separation, otherwise rebellion and division would follow. They are also
worried that if they accept the gospel, they will lose their church or
authority, since the gospel alone builds up the true Christian church
and prevents all unjust violence and rebellion. After that, avarice also
hinders them, so that they see nothing in the gospel but poverty and
persecution. But how will they fare? Just like the Jews, who held so
long and firmly over their law, priesthood, kingdom and goods, until
they finally came to nothing and were one with

They have lost one to the other, so that now and then they sit in
misery, among the strangers, as if on a hump, and have to take this
supper next to it, as the father of the house says: "I tell you that
none of the men who are invited will taste my supper. But he does not
want to have it prepared in vain; therefore he looks around for other
guests, as follows:

**Then the father of the house was angry, and said to his servant, Go
out soon into the streets and lanes of the city 2c.**

18 As if to say, "Well, then, since you are about to see your fields
and oxen and take wives and miss my supper, that is, you want to keep
your priesthood, kingdom and wealth, and let me and my gospel go, I will
advise the matter in such a way that you will lose everything you intend
to keep in this way, not even taste my supper, and make other guests for
me. Therefore go thou, servant, into the streets and lanes of the city,
and bring in the poor and the crippled, the lame and the blind. This is
what happened among the Jews. For since the great lords, princes and
priests, and what was best among the people, would not accept the
gospel, for cause as aforesaid, our Lord GOD accepted the lowly
fishermen, the poor, wretched and most despised multitude. As St. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 1, 26. ff.Consider, brethren, your calling: not many wise
men according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called;
but what is foolish in the sight of the world, that God hath chosen, to
put to shame the wise; and what is weak in the sight of the world, that
God hath chosen, to put to shame what is strong; and what is base in the
sight of the world, and what is despised, that God hath chosen, and that
which is nothing, to bring to nought what is something" 2c. According
to this saying, most of the wise, holy, rich and mighty things of this
people were rejected by God because they would not accept the gospel. On
the other hand, Christ accepted the foolish, simple, lowly people, such
as Peter, Andrew, Phi-

**720 L. 2, 377.378. On the second Sunday after Trinity. L. 2, 378-380.
721**

lippus, Bartholomew 2c.; which were poor fishermen and scanty beggars,
whom no man esteemed worthy to wipe the shoes of the priests and princes
of the people. For they were the basic soup, and as Isaiah says, the
yeast of the good, delicious wine; so that the best of the people,
priests, princes, rich men, and mighty men, were poured away because of
their unbelief, like a barrel of good wine, and only the yeast remained,
whom the Lord here calls poor, lame, crippled, and blind. They come to
the graces and honors that they are dear guests at this supper and have
all fullness.

19 Therefore the Pharisee says, "Blessed are those who eat the bread of
the kingdom of God"; yes, Christ answers, blessed are they; but you and
your kind are concerned about a field and oxen, that is what you are
talking about. Therefore you should know that a supper has been prepared
for the poor to eat, as Christ says in Matth. 11, 5: "The poor have the
gospel preached to them"; for the mighty, the holy, the wise do not
want it, nor should they have it. This means that the Jews are well
forbidden, *) and especially this one, who wants to be so wise and eat
bread in the kingdom of heaven, and yet wants to keep the priesthood and
kingdom, let Christ and his gospel remain where he wants. For his heart
is set on this, that he has no need of the Lord Christ in heaven; but
our Lord God will say to him and to all the Jews, "Come, you Jews, and
especially you priests, you saints, you princes, you fat citizens, the
Lord's Supper is appointed for you. Yes, he says, it is true, you are
invited; but you do not respect it and excuse yourselves, and still want
to have the right to it. Therefore I let you go, and accept rather the
least people, the crippled and the lame.

020 So far then is this gospel applied to the Jews only. For it speaks
of the lame and crippled who are in the streets and alleys of the city,
and calls the Jewish people a city, because they were a well-ordered
people, and had the law, worship, temple, priest, king, all from God
Himself.

*) gezwagen; zwagen - to wash the body or a bodyHeil. D. Red.

ordered and arranged by Moses. Now he sends his servant also into the
highways, and commands him to take guests where he finds them, even the
beggars at the fences, and everywhere.

**And the Lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and by
the fences, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.**

(21) These are we Gentiles, who have not dwelt in any city, that is,
have had no special worship like the Jews; but have been idolatrous,
because we have not known what we or God are. Therefore our thing is
called a free, open place, on the highway, in the field, where the devil
runs over and has his room as he wills. Go there, says the father of the
house, and force them in. For the world has this bad habit of always
opposing the gospel, and will not tolerate this teaching, but this
householder wants to have his house full of guests, because he has
prepared himself so that he must have people who eat and drink and are
happy, even if he makes them out of stones. And this is also the reason
that God leaves the world standing so long, when he would have reason
enough to push it into a heap every moment for the sake of our sin. But
he does not do this because he needs more guests, who also belong to the
Lord's Supper. Therefore, because his servants bring the dear gospel to
us, it is a sign that we who are baptized and believe also belong to
this supper. For we are the great lords who lie behind the fences, that
is, blind, poor, lost heathen. But how does he force us? Doesn't our
Lord God want to have a forced service?

22 So he compels us to preach, "He that believeth and is baptized shall
be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." There he shows
both hell and heaven, death and life, wrath and grace. For there our sin
and corrupt state is first revealed to us, so that we must be terrified
of it, because we hear that as soon as we are born we are under the
devil's kingdom and in God's wrath.

**722 2.2, 380. 381. on the second Sunday after Trinity. 2.2, 381.382.
723**

(23) This is called being rightly compelled when one is thus afraid of
God's wrath and desires help from Him. When this has happened through
the preaching, and the hearts have been shattered and frightened, then
one preaches further and says: "Dear man, do not therefore despair
whether you are already a sinner and have such a terrible judgment upon
you; do to him: go, you have been baptized, hear the gospel. There you
will learn that Jesus Christ died for your sake, and by his death on the
cross has made amends for your sin. If thou believest this, thou shalt
be safe from the wrath of God and eternal death, and shalt be a guest at
this glorious supper, and shalt eat that thou mayest be fat and strong
2c.

(24) That is, "to afflict," that is, to afflict with sin: not as the
pope afflicts with excommunication. He does not scare the conscience
rightly, for he does not teach what right sins are, but goes about his
foolish work: whoever does not keep his order and the statutes of men,
let him be under ban. But the gospel reveals the right sins and the
wrath of God from heaven, Rom. 1:18, that we all, none excluded, live in
sins and are ungodly. This is what our Lord God proclaims to us through
His gospel, when He says to the apostles, "Go and preach repentance."
Now repentance cannot be preached, unless it is said that God is angry
with all men because they are full of unbelief, contempt of God and
other sins. This anger should frighten them, make their consciences
timid and fearful, so that they will compel themselves and say, "O Lord
God, what shall I always do to be freed from this misery? Then they will
say to him: Sit down here and eat (for there are still many tables empty
and full of food), that is, you have been baptized, therefore believe in
Jesus Christ, that he died for your sin and has done enough. Otherwise
there is no other means by which you can be saved, except by being
baptized and believing. Then the wrath will cease, and from heaven will
shine forth grace and mercy, forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

(25) That is why "need" here is used as much as "need".

Preach repentance and forgiveness of sins, wrath on sinners and grace on
believers. So wrath and repentance presses in, that one must run and cry
for grace. This then is the right way to this supper. And so Jews and
Gentiles become one Christian church, and are all at the same time
called poor, miserable people, lame and crippled. For after the terror
they warmly accept the gospel and crawl to the cross. But those who do
not want to do this, being so wise and prudent as they always can be,
have here their judgment that they shall not taste this supper, that is,
that the wrath of God shall remain upon them, and shall be condemned
because of their unbelief. For then our Lord God does not inquire (as
was also reported before) whether they are rich, wise or holy. And even
if they are already sure and think that there should be no need, they
will still find out that this judgment will not lie, that the Lord
concludes here: Non gustabunt: they shall not taste it, my supper. But
we who accept it, and with frightened hearts, because of our sins, do
not reject the grace of God, which is proclaimed and offered to us in
the Gospel through Christ, receive grace for wrath, eternal
righteousness for sin, and eternal life for eternal death.

(26) Such a terrible judgment, as we see, is going on today among
Turks and Jews, that they have no smell of the Gospel; indeed, it is a
disgust to them that they cannot suffer it nor hear it. So are our
popes, together with cardinals and bishops, they do not smell this food,
let alone get their fill of it. But we, who have come to this teaching
by God's special grace, are getting fat, strong and happy from it, and
are in good spirits over this meal. May God grant that we may thus
remain steadfast until the end, amen.

27 Therefore in this parable the Lord will admonish us to esteem the
gospel precious and valuable, and not to keep company with the multitude
that think themselves wise, prudent, mighty, and holy. For here is the
sentence: They are to be rejected and not to take this supper.

**724** L.2, **382. S8S.** On the second Sunday after Trinity. L. 2,
**383.384. 725**

taste. So shall it be with us, if we prefer our fields, oxen, wives,
that is, spiritual, as it is now called, or worldly honor, along with
temporal goods, to the gospel.

028 He saith in simple, low words, They shall not taste my supper. As if
he should say: "Well, my supper is also something; and what is more, it
shall be far better, neither their oxen, fields and houses, nor their
wives, although they despise it now and consider their fields, oxen and
houses much more delicious. For the hour will come when they will have
to leave their oxen, fields and houses, so that they would like to taste
my supper. But then it shall also mean: Dear, I am not at home now, I
cannot wait for the guests; go to your fields, to your oxen, to your
houses, they will probably give you a better supper, because you have
despised my supper so surely and boldly. I had prepared myself for
guests, and had turned much upon it; which spurned you: now that ye have
cooked it better, eat, and be merry; only that ye taste not my supper.

29. These will be very hard words and a terrible judgment in that day,
when he will call his supper eternal life with clear words, and their
fields, oxen and houses the hellish fire, and remain stubbornly that
they shall not taste his supper forever, that is, there shall no longer
be any hope that they will be helped in eternity. For neither repentance
nor contrition will help. Therefore these are terrible, violent words,
which indicate the great, unending wrath of the master of the house. For
this is not the way of great lords and great men: when they are really
angry, they do not speak many words; but what they speak, a word weighs
a centner; for they have more fierce things in mind than they can speak.
How much more will these short words of the Almighty Lord indicate an
unspeakable anger that can never be appeased.

30. So we still go along as if such harsh, terrible words had been
spoken by a fool or a child, that we might laugh and mock; or as if it
were our Lord God's jest and reproach: and neither hear nor see that
the text clearly says that he is angry and has spoken such things out of
great anger, and that he is not a fool nor a child, but the LORD and GOD
above all things, before whom the mountains tremble and are terrified
(as the Scripture says) with ground and earth, and both sea and water
flee before him. Only man is still so hard and iron that he does not
fear anything, but still despises it and makes a mockery of it.

(31) But we preachers are excused here; for we ever admonish you
faithfully enough that you should take this supper more than all the
money and good things on earth. Therefore, on that day, the whole world
will have to bear witness to us and confess that we were not lacking.
For we do it so diligently and faithfully that even our opponents know
about it and call our teachings heresy. We are grateful to them for
accepting this. For thus they confess that they have certainly heard,
read and seen it, and that we have not kept silent. But if we have not
kept silent, but have faithfully and diligently taught and preached such
things, so that our enemies themselves say, "We have done too much: ah!
let the man be judged whom we believe to have told us; and let the man
defend them, or condemn us, who drives them to condemn. Let it be known
in the name of God which part of God is the right God, and which Christ
is the right Christian, which church is the right church; it will be
found when the snow melts. However, let us ask God to graciously keep us
in such doctrine and faith through His Holy Spirit, so that we will
certainly be welcome and dear guests at this meal. May our dear Father
in heaven grant us this for the sake of His Son, Christ Jesus, through
His Holy Spirit, Amen.

**726 L. 2, 397-399. on the third Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1616-1614. 727**

**On the third Sunday after Trinity.**

**Luc. 15, 1-10.**

And all the publicans and sinners came near to hear him. And the
Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying: This man accepts sinners and
eats with them. And he said unto them this like thing, saying, What man
is there among you, that hath an hundred sheep, and if he lose one, and
leave not the nine and ninety in the wilderness, and go after him that
is lost, until he find him? And when he hath found, he layeth it upon
his shoulder with joy. And when he cometh home, he calleth unto his
friends and neighbors, and saith unto them: Rejoice with me, for I have
found my sheep that was lost. I say to you: So also shall there be joy
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, before nine and ninety
righteous, which need not repentance. Or what woman, having ten pennies,
if she lose one, doth not kindle a light, and turn the house, and search
diligently, until she find him? And when she has found it, she calls to
her friends and neighbors, saying, "Rejoice with me, for I have found
my penny which I had lost. So also, I say to you, there will be joy
before the angels of God over one sinner who repents.

This is one of the most comforting gospels preached throughout the year,
in which the Lord Jesus teaches us that his ministry is a shepherding
ministry, that he should go after sinners, seek them out, and bring them
to judgment, so that they will not be given to the devil and eternally
condemned. Such a sermon, however, stands out above the rest, because
all kinds of tax collectors and sinners ran after the Lord Christ to
listen to his sermon. The Pharisees and scribes saw this, grumbled about
it, and reproached him very badly, as if it were a sign of a special
recklessness. For it is right for a godly man to associate with godly
people. But the Lord answers very well and says, "He does just what
people usually do in matters where so much is not involved. So he wants
to be unpunished by the Pharisees and be right in his cause.

For this is the question and the business at hand: how to deal with
sinners and what to do with them. Just as two unequal parts, who have
both studied God's word, come together, so the answer to such a
question is also unequal. The Pharisees and scribes know nothing more of
God's word than what Moses and the Law teach. Because the law preaches
everywhere: God will be merciful to those who find pious and

Therefore, the Pharisees and scribes conclude that it is not fitting for
people to deal with sinners in any other way than the way God deals with
them. Because God is angry with them and does not take care of them,
they should not accept them either, but let them go.

3 Our reason also judges in the same way. As soon as a man becomes aware
of his sins, he thinks that God is angry, that there is no mercy, that
he must wait for all misfortune. As we can see from Adam and Eve: as
soon as they ate from the forbidden tree, and had to bear the conscience
that they had done against God, they hid themselves away and were not
allowed to be seen anywhere. We also see it in the young children: when
they know that they have done wrong, they hide themselves. For this is
the way of sin, that it makes a fearful heart, fearful of disgrace and
punishment. Again, when the conscience knows itself to be innocent, man
takes courage and does not ask whether someone is ungracious, because
there is always confidence in the heart: You know yourself to be
innocent; someone else will be found who is guilty, so that you will go
out unpunished.

4 Like a heart that knows itself guilty, naturally cannot but fear, and
for this reason gives itself all grace.

**728 D- 2, 399-401. on the third Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1614-i6ie. 729**

and awaits disgrace: so do the Pharisees here judge of sinners also.
They see that tax collectors and sinners have lived in a sinful state
until now; therefore they quickly conclude that no one should deal with
bad boys, nor show them any mercy; for God Himself is ungracious to
them, does not want them, wants only pious, God-fearing hearts that do
not burden themselves with such gross sins.

5 But think about it, if such a judgment is true, that God will have no
patience with sinners and will always strike with a club, how will we
all fare? Where will he have people and a church? For even if we do not
all lie in outward gross vices: there is, praise God, many a husband who
has not broken his marriage; many a man who has not murdered with his
hand, not stolen, nor done other things that are dishonest and ungodly:
nevertheless, we must all confess ourselves sinners before God. For we
see and experience that there is nothing good in our hearts, although
the hands, the mouth and other members are more blameless and pure in
one than in the other. But now God will judge according to the heart. If
then God should be ungracious to all sinners, throwing them away and not
taking care of them; as the Pharisees here pass judgment according to
the law, it would follow that no man could be saved. But the Pharisees
themselves must confess that such an opinion is wrong and unjust.

Therefore, our dear Lord Jesus Christ makes a different judgment and
does not want to accept such an answer of the Pharisees at all, and
concludes the contradiction, namely, that God is not hostile to sinners,
and does not desire their death; therefore, he, the Lord Christ, cannot
be hostile to them, and came into this world to seek them out as
erroneous sheep and to bring them back to rights. And all men,
especially the preachers, should follow this example, that they, as one
does in a house where something is lost, should make every effort to
find it again.

(7) This is a different doctrine and preaching from the doctrine of
Moses and the preaching of the law that

did not grow in our hearts, but was brought to us from heaven by the Son
of God. As John the Baptist says: "No one has ever seen God; the only
begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared Him to
us. For no man knows that God wills not to be angry with sinners, not to
condemn them for their sins, but rather to accept them with grace and
make them blessed. We know and feel the contradiction. Therefore, where
there is sin, it follows, as previously reported, that one is afraid of
God. But our dear Lord Christ teaches us through His Gospel that He has
a different opinion of sinners before God's judgment, that He will not
be angry with them, but will accept them in mercy, and that the angels
in heaven above take great delight and pleasure in it, where sinners
come to repentance and are converted.

(8) Such teaching should be remembered all the more diligently,
because our reason includes the contradiction that we learn to comfort
and endure ourselves with it against the evil conscience and sin. For
whoever wants to follow his own heart, reason and understanding in such
a challenge of the conscience, he goes and can neither be advised nor
helped; he must despair. Therefore, all power is up to us, against our
own heart and conscience, to join with Christ and say: I am a poor
sinner, I cannot, indeed, will not deny it; but I will by no means
despair because of it, as if God did not want me. My Lord Jesus Christ
says that a sinner is like a little sheep that has lost its shepherd and
gone astray. He will not leave such a sheep astray, but will seek it out
and carry it to the other sheep. This is an indication that he will not
cast us away because of our sins, but will use all his diligence to
bring us out of sin and back into grace.

Now the Gospel elsewhere shows sufficient reason why God does not want
to cast away sinners. Namely, as John says in chapter 3, that he is such
a God who is not hostile to the world, but loves it, and so loves it,

730 **8.2.40I-4W. On the third Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, 16I6-1619.**
731

that he gave his only Son to her and made atonement for her, so that the
world might be comforted by this sacrifice and not despair on account of
its sins. For although God could have helped us humans in other ways,
this help is so well done by Him, because His only begotten Son Himself
takes our sin upon Himself and pays for it, that we have no reason to
doubt such payment. For it must follow that God is more pleased with his
Son's death and dying than he can be displeased with us and our sins.

(10) Besides such causes, in today's Gospel the Lord Jesus shows a
special thought which he had in this matter, that he could not refrain
from being about sinners, seeking them out, and doing everything that is
conducive to their salvation, saying, "It is just as it is with us men.
A rich man who has ten thousand guilders, if a thousand are stolen or
lost, he is no different than if he had lost everything. For he is not
so much pleased and comforted by what he has left as he is by what he
has lost. This is our way, and where it concerns only the temporal, it
is called a bad way. For there one sees that God always leaves more than
the devil takes. Therefore, we should not let the temporal accident
grieve us so much, but take comfort in the fact that we still have
something and most of it, and that God can give us more every day and
increase ours.

(11) This way then, says our dear Lord Christ, I also have. The
sinners are my purchased, dear purchased goods and property; for I have
purchased them for myself through my suffering and death. That it should
not hurt me now, and that I should not worry about it and assume that
they will go out of the way and out of my hands again, is impossible;
because they cost me too much, and have become too sour for me, and it
takes me that they should still be of the devil. For this reason, I
cannot leave it alone; as soon as one of my sheep leaves me, I must act
as if the others had nothing to do with me, and go after the lost one
and look for it,

so that the wolves do not get it. Just like a mother who has many
children, they are all dear to her, and she would not like to have one
among them. But when one of them falls ill, the illness makes a
difference between the other children, so that the sickest is the
dearest, and the mother no longer takes care of any of them, nor does
she wait diligently for any of them. Whoever would then judge love by
the waiting would have to say: The mother loves only the sick child, not
the healthy ones. Thus, says the Lord here, I am also with the sinners.

(12) This is the heart of our Lord Christ most kindly and sweetly
portrayed, that it is impossible to make it more sweet and kindly,
because he has such care, concern, trouble, and labor about how to
restore poor sinners; and he himself leads us into our own heart to
think how we should feel when we lose something that is dear to us.
Thus, he says, my heart stands, thus it waltzes and is troubled, when I
see that the devil has brought a poor man into sin and error.

(13) For this purpose also he takes the likeness of the little sheep
and the shepherd before him. It is not a miserable thing for a sheep to
go astray from its pasture and from its shepherd, for it has no way of
advising itself and is in danger at all times of being caught and eaten
by the wolf that is stalking it. In such a journey, it has no help at
all, and can neither protect itself nor endure with the least. For there
is no animal among all that nature has created so completely bare and
defenseless. It is the same with a sinner whom the devil has led away
from God and his word and brought into sin. For there he is not safe for
a moment, since our enemy, the devil, as Peter says, prowls around like
a lion, seeing if he may devour us. In such a time, this is the only
consolation, that we have a shepherd, our dear Lord Christ, who takes
care of us and seeks us out: not because he wants to punish us for our
sins and cast us into hell; no, this is the devil's

[732 **L. 2, 403-406. on the third Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1618-1621.** 733]{.underline}

But when he finds us, that he will gladly lay us on his shoulders and
carry us home, where we may be safe from the wolf and have our shelter
and pasture in the best way.

14 But you know how such a search is made, namely, that he lets his word
go and sound publicly everywhere. In the same, we hear how sin is a
terrible misery and burden that throws us into eternal damnation. But
since God was moved out of fatherly love toward us disobedient children,
and has provided counsel and help for us from such misery through His
Son, He desires nothing in return, except that we should accept it with
thanksgiving, believe in the Lord Christ, and keep to God's word, and
be willing and obedient to Him.

(15) When the sheep, the poor sinners, hear this and have confidence
in God from such a sermon, they strike themselves and think: "What have
you done to yourself, you wretched man, because you have such a gracious
God, that you have not kept to His will and let the devil lead you into
disobedience? What does the shameful money help you, since you are so
stingy? Wouldn't it be better to make a fair profit with God and honor
that is pleasing to everyone, than to be accused of being an
unreasonable usurer before God and the people, and therefore have
neither happiness nor salvation with such shameful profit? What good is
the dishonest, lewd life? Would it not be better to be married and have
a good conscience, than to lie in sins and shame outside of marriage,
and wait every moment for the terrible judgment of God? What is the use
of indulging, eating and drinking, since at last bodily sickness and
sudden death and destruction may follow? Soon, soon the other way
around, and you will be gone before God's wrath befalls you, who would
gladly be merciful to you, if only you wanted it yourself and did not
put yourself deeper into disgrace through such wanton sin. Where such
things happen, namely, that the hearts beat within themselves and
through

*) Ei, was hast du denn gewollt, du 2c. D. Red.

When the shepherd finds comfort in Christ, he finds his erring sheep who
turn to the shepherd's voice and run to him in all confidence, and he
takes them on his shoulder, that is, he forgives their sin and takes
them into his protection and protection, so that they may be safe from
the wolf and other wild animals.

(16) Now here we see what difference there is between sinners. In this
all sinners are equal, that they give themselves to the devil for
service against God's obedience. But after that they become unequal.
For some and most of them, if you preach and tell them what you want,
they still remain in sin, and do nothing better, comfort themselves, and
think: "Well, there is no need, God is merciful, he will be happy with
you always, you come and desire mercy when you want; I will first better
myself in the world, I will first be a little bit pissed off; then I
will also go to church, hear the sermon and become godly. These sheep
hear the voice of the shepherd, but they do not want to be found. What
happens then? Nothing else happens, except that day by day, the longer
they go astray, the more they fall into the devil's trap, so that they
can no longer work their way out. As you can see, things are going on in
the world, and people are drowning in avarice, fornication, indulgence
and other sins, so that it becomes a nature that they think they cannot
live, so they do. We should beware of this, and when we hear the voice
of the Shepherd, we should soon find our way to Him, that is, we should
repent, not persist or continue in sins, but repent, amend, and believe
that our Shepherd Jesus Christ will not leave us astray, but will accept
us again in all graces and reconcile us to His Father.

17 For repentance does not mean becoming more devout for the sake of an
outward life alone, but trusting in God's goodness through Christ and
believing in the forgiveness of sins. Christ wants to accept such
sinners. The others he would gladly accept, but they do not want to be,
so he must let them go. For because they do not want to be found, they
may remain astray as long as they do not believe in God.

**[734 L. 2, 406-408. on the third Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1621-I62S. 735]{.underline}**

they want, and see how they will finally succeed.

(18) Not only does this gospel comfort poor sinners that their
shepherd, Christ, will seek and accept them as erring sheep, but it also
teaches us how to approach this shepherd, namely, to hear his voice and
to follow him. As the history of the Gospel also tells us, that these
people were tax collectors and sinners, but nevertheless ran after the
Lord Christ, because they heard him. But what do we hear from Christ?
Nothing else, except that God wants to be merciful to sinners through
Christ and make them blessed; only that they let themselves be enticed
and do not continue to run astray, but when they hear the Shepherd's
voice, turn back and let themselves be carried by the Lord Christ, who
has already paid for their sin and done enough, and reconciled them to
God. For we do not want to suffer, because God has done so much for us
and has shown His grace so abundantly to us, that we despise His command
and do not want to keep His word and do anything to please Him.

19 Therefore, let us be mindful of such teaching, so that we may resist
the devil and our own hearts, and endure against despair, as if God were
such a God who would have no patience with sinners and would condemn
them. For such a thought is in the hearts of all people. Against this,
one must be prepared with God's word and press this image, which the
Lord Christ himself presents to us, into the heart, that he is a
shepherd, and therefore let his word resound in the world, so that the
erring sheep may hear it and find their way to him.

020 Therefore, if thou knowest thyself to be also an erring sheep, which
the devil hath driven far from the way, and led away, receive this
preaching of Christ. For for your sake it is preached that you may come
to repentance, that is, that you may take comfort in the Lord Christ and
his grace, and come out of the devil's snares and become more godly.
And beware of this, as of the devil himself, that you do not let such a
voice pass, but soon turn back and go after the shepherd.

You have recovered and have brought great joy to the angels in heaven,
who will gladly be around you and protect you from all the devil's
journey with their presence and protection. On the other hand,
unrepentant sinners cause the dear angels all sorrow, worry and
displeasure, and therefore fall from their protection, and must stand
and walk in eternal peril every moment.

21) But that the Lord is not satisfied with the one likeness of the
shepherd and the little sheep, but adds another, of a woman who has lost
a penny; this is because he wants others to follow his example, and not
to reject sinners, but to seek them out and bring them to repentance.
For the first likeness is of our dear Lord and Savior Christ Jesus
alone; he is the only and right shepherd, who is not hostile to the
sheep, but lays down his life for them, so that they may be protected
and pacified from the devil. The other similitude of the woman applies
to the Christian church, which therefore has the office of preaching, so
that poor sinners may be lured to repentance, saved from eternal death
and damnation, and saved to salvation. She also rejoices, like the
shepherd, when she finds the penny, lights a light, the word of God, and
turns the house around, that is, she teaches how to be pious and to take
comfort in the grace of God through Christ before God and His judgment.
With this sermon she finds the lost penny.

(22) This is to praise and glorify God's word as the only treasure
that takes away sin and all the misery that follows from sin, such as
death, damnation, the devil and hell, so that we are no longer sinners
and enemies of God, but a special joy to the angels in heaven and all
the saints on earth. For this reason we should hold it in all honor and
dignity, hear it gladly and with heart, love and value those who preach
it; so that we may also come to such blessed fruit, out of error and
free and free from all the ride of the sorrowful devil, and become
eternally blessed. May the dear and faithful shepherd of our souls, our
dear Lord Christ, grant this to us all through the Holy Spirit, amen.

**736** L. 2, 408-410. on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
1W6-1640. **737**

**On the fourth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 6:36-42.**

Therefore, be merciful, just as your Father is merciful. Judge not, and
ye shall not be judged. Do not condemn, and you will not be condemned.
Forgive, and you will be forgiven. Give, and it will be given to you. A
full, pressed, shaken, and superfluous measure shall be put into your
bosom: for even with the measure that ye measure with shall ye be
measured again. And he said to them the same thing: May a blind man
guide a blind man? will they not both fall into the pit? The disciple is
not above his master; if the disciple is like his master, he is perfect.
But why do you see a mote in your brother's eye, and do not see the
beam in your own eye? Or how can you say to your brother, "Be still,
brother, I will take the mote out of your eye, and you yourself do not
see the beam in your eye? You hypocrite, first take the beam out of your
eye, and then see to it that you take the mote out of your brother's
eye.

In today's Gospel, our dear Lord Christ teaches his disciples and all
of us how we should relate to one another and live a Christian life. For
when we have believed, and are called Christians, saved by the Lord
Christ from sin, death, and all unhappiness, a new life shall follow,
that we may do what he would have us do. Such a new life the Lord puts
into one word: "Be merciful, as your Father is merciful.

Now everyone knows what merciful means, namely, such a person who bears
a kind, friendly heart toward his neighbor, has compassion on him, and
takes his need and misfortune, whether it concerns his soul, body, honor
or goods, with seriousness, and lets himself go to the heart in such a
way that he thinks how he can help him; he also proves it by deed and
does it with pleasure and gladly. Such a heart, says the Lord, you
should have toward everyone, so that it is not a mercy like that of
sinners and tax collectors: they also (as Christ says shortly before
this Gospel) practice mercy among themselves, love one another, show
kindness and friendship to one another, lend to one another; but they do
this so that they may receive the same again. This is a ruthlessness
that does good in order to receive good or better again.

*) Held in the house, 1533.

But we, if we want to be Christians, should be merciful, as our Father
in heaven is: not only to those who are our friends, but to everyone,
even to those who are enemies to us and persecute us, because we let
ourselves think that they are not worthy that we should speak a kind
word to them. As we then learn, that it goes out very hard. Let us say,
what is the knave to me, he has done this and that to me, I know his
useless mouth well; should I help him? I would rather that the lice eat
him 2c. So our nature always wants to draw us to the ruthlessness that
only goes to our comrades who play tricks on us; it does not want to go
with the others.

(4) This is not the opinion, saith Christ; but if your neighbors have
offended you, if ye will be Christians, remember that ye be merciful,
and as merciful as your Father is; otherwise ye cannot be his children,
nor my brethren, who with my blood have redeemed you from sins and
death. For this you must all confess, that you have done your God and
Father in heaven all harm and offence, and have kept none of his
commandments at all, yea, have transgressed all of them, who would have
cause enough to say, Should I give my son for such desperate husks? To
the devil with them, into the abyss of hell; for they do not fear, love
and trust me, yes, they despise, blaspheme and hate me, swear and curse
by my

**738 2.2, 410-412. on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xiii,
i64o-1642. 739**

names, persecute and condemn my word, disobey parents and authorities,
are murderers, adulterers, thieves, covetous, usurers, perjurers, and in
sum, they do all evil; therefore let them always go where they belong.
So God, says Christ, could also say to you: but he does not; but over
all your wickedness he goes and is kind and gracious, giving not only
life and limb, food and drink, wife and child, food and all necessities
for this life, but also his Son and eternal life.

(5) You shall also learn such mercy. For if someone has offended you
and done something that is not pleasing to you, what is that compared to
what you have done so often and so grievously against God? Now if God
has such great mercy that He gives His only begotten Son to His enemies,
that through Him they may be redeemed from sin and death; and gives us
for this purpose soul, body, goods, and all that we need, since He
should justly send punishment, even hail, thunder, lightning, and
hellish fire, and all calamities: learn thou also by this example, that
thou mayest say, Though this man or that man hath offended me so
greatly, that I should make him eat maggots, yet will I not do it. For
such would be only a pagan, and not a Christian mercy. If he has done me
evil and wrong, who knows where I have deserved it. Therefore, now that
he is in need of my help, I will not repay him, for I see that he is in
need of help and that I can help him. So does my Father in heaven with
me 2c.

(6) One can see what the peasants are up to; if they could give their
goods, which they bring to market, for a lot of money, they would rather
do it than not. It is the same in the cities. Everyone collects money,
feasts and brags, and lies and cheats others wherever he can. This
should at least be a displeasure, if it would again cause a need, so
that one would think: "Oh, right, let the boys only be worn down. But a
Christian should not do this, but say: What do I care, even if they are
bad? This shall not move me, that I also would be wicked.

I will do like a good tree. If you break off the fruit that it has borne
for a year, it brings forth others, and is not angry about it; so I will
do likewise. If I have done thee good before, and thou hast been
unthankful, and hast done me evil in return, thou shalt not move me to
be angry with thee. If thou be a briar, that canst not but prick, let it
remain; I will not therefore become one, but will remain a fine and
fruitful vine, and bring forth good grapes. For so does my Father in
heaven: He gives wicked men and wicked women as well as the pious and
the righteous, cattle, oxen, calves, eggs, butter, cheese, house, farm,
wife, child, money, goods, body and soul, peace, good weather, and
whatever is needed. He lets the dear sun shine, since we well deserved
that he let hellish fire rain down. But he does not: he does not want to
become a thorn bush because of our ingratitude, but says: "If you will
be nothing but evil, I will remain good, let my sun and my rain go over
the evil and the good.

(7) This is the example which our dear Lord Christ sets before us,
that we should continue in such godliness, and not allow other people's
wickedness to cause us to become wicked also; as the world is wont to
do, it avenges itself, and soon pays for itself. This shall not be among
Christians, but shall say, Thou art a briar, thou hast pricked me evil:
but for thy sins I will not become a briar also, but will do thee all
good in thy trouble; beseeching God for thee, that he will forgive thee
these things, and turn thee out of the briar into a goodly fruitful
vine. That is, "Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful," who
does the very best to his worst enemies.

Now, one must understand this so that one does not think that God wants
to have all punishment forbidden and removed. For Christ preaches here
to his disciples, who had no regiment. The children in the house, the
peasants in the village, the citizens in the city, the princes in the
empire have no right against each other; for in the house rules father
and mother, in the village the judge, in the city the burgher, in the
city the governor.

[740 **L. 2, 4i2-4i5. On the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1642-i64ö.** 741]{.underline}

In the empire, it is the emperor. The children in the house, the
peasants in the village, the citizens in the city, the princes in the
empire are all equal among themselves; therefore they should keep this
rule among themselves, which the Lord gives here, that no one should do
evil to another, but be merciful to one another. But where persons are
unequal, as the emperor in the empire against the princes, the nobleman
or judge in the village against the peasants: there one should not use
mercy against the wicked, but punish the wicked. So parents should not
be merciful to their children when they are wicked, but should strike
quickly. Husband and wife are not to be merciful against the servants
either, but punish what is to be punished and do not overlook anything.
This is what God demands of them; and if they do not do it, they must
give God a hard account for it.

(9) Therefore this command of Christ of mercy is for those only who
are equal. But where there are unequal persons, let each wait for his
special command, and let not mercy hinder such a command. But where
there are equal persons, citizen against citizen, peasant against
peasant, child against child, servant against servant, a Christian
should speak: You have done me harm and evil, that God may forgive you;
but I do not have to punish you for it. This is called mercy.

(10) If any further harm comes to thee, tell thy father, judge, mayor,
or prince, and say, This and that he doeth to me; that thou judge not,
neither pass sentence. So no child shall strike another, no peasant, no
burgher shall strike another, no nobleman shall overreach another; but
to the authorities announce and say: This and that has happened to me,
which is not mine to punish, for I do not have the office. This is
called mercy, where this proper means is sought from those who have it
in their power, so that the wicked may be controlled and their will to
anger increased. So Joseph did. He saw much wickedness in his brothers,
but he did not punish them himself, for he was not commanded to do so;
instead, he told his father: Father, so do Simeon, so do Levi.

may watch and defend. This was right and well done, and a special work
of mercy. But he earned disfavor, hatred and envy with it. For his
brothers could not believe that he meant so well for them and did such a
great work of mercy for them. For with such an announcement Joseph
helped the soul from the devil and the body from the executioner.

(11) So shall it be among the children and the servants, that no man
revenge himself, but with a gentle and not bitter heart declare to the
rulers, parents, lords, and wives, what is wrong. In this way, one helps
the other in body, money and goods, and even in soul, so that you will
no longer be so lazy, careless, careless, forward, unfaithful, but will
be better. Therefore the young servants should learn such mercy, if
something happens to you, or you see something naughty, that you do not
strike, but say: I am sorry, I wish you had not done it. This is called
praying for your neighbor. Then go and tell him who has the power to
punish, who can correct and change it, and who has the command to do it.
For God has appointed enough people to do this, namely princes, lords,
officials, fathers, mothers, priests, chaplains, and finally also the
executioner, who are to punish sin. The others, who are not in such
offices, should leave it unpunished and show mercy, that is, advise and
help with what they can.

(12) Now then, we are to understand that this command is for equal
persons, since no one has authority or command over the other. But where
there are unequal persons, one is a father, the other a judge, the third
a prince, they shall also show mercy to their equals; but not to the
subjects. For there is a special command that they should punish the
evil of the children, servants and subjects. But where there are like
persons, they shall bear toward one another a kind, friendly,
compassionate heart, help, admonish, announce; this is called living a
Christian life. But if they scold you about it, as the children and the
servants do, and call you a traitor, it does no harm. Think that you are
a fig tree.

742 **L. 2, 415-417. on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
164S-I6S7.** 743

or good vine, and let no thorn bush make you. So does the dear sun: it
now looks at many a rogue who has stolen the previous night or broken
the marriage, and yet it remains a beautiful sun, even though you are a
black devil, and because of your sins you are not worthy to look at it.
For she thinks thus: Even if I must now watch your mischievousness, I
also want to see one day that you are hanged on the light gallows. Now
you laugh at me, and I must shine upon you for your mischievousness; but
what matters if you do not improve, I will also shine upon you one day
for your punishment?

Experience shows that God does not let any evil go unpunished. For he
who escapes from his father and mother does not escape from the
executioner. You must either atone and mend your ways, or certainly
await punishment; for God will not leave anything unpunished where
correction does not follow. Many a murderer and thief passes through,
becomes a fugitive, leaves all the country, and thus escapes punishment
for a time; but where no correction follows, it ultimately happens
miraculously that they run into the hands of the authorities and receive
their reward. For the common saying is not lacking: Bad boys can escape
from their parents, but they cannot escape from the executioner.
Therefore, what the father cannot force with the rod, the executioner's
rope and sword shall force. If you do not want to turn to the life
sentence, then suffer the death penalty, that is your deserved reward.

14. *) So the Lord Christ would have us lead a good life, and do good
works among ourselves, which are righteous, and not a bad show. For this
reason he commands us to be merciful, not like the Gentiles, who are
merciful to those from whom they expect help, so that one hand washes
the other. Not so; but as the Father which is in heaven, which poureth
down with heaps what we have need of, that the whole world may have
enough to raise up: not to the pious only, whom he would have paid all
in one day; but also to the wicked.

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1533.

Therefore do not let his goodness fail, although most of the part is
evil and ungrateful; indeed, the evil ones always overtake the best and
most part.

(15) This, saith Christ, I set as an example unto you that are my
Christians, that ye should not only help your friends; for such
godliness will I have among the heathen: but also unto enemies, as ye
see that your Father maketh the sun to shine upon every man, even upon
murderers, thieves, adulterers, wicked scoundrels, citizens, and
peasants, who should be worthy that their eyes should never look upon
the dear sun. But he does not do so; he will not let his mercy fail for
the sake of people's wickedness.

(16) So, saith he, do ye also, be not offended, withdraw not your
hand, as the world doeth, saying, All is lost that is done to the
wicked. That is not saying anything. Serving friends is nothing special;
for the heathen themselves are friendly and helpful as long as they hope
for and feel help. But if the help is not forthcoming, the good deeds
dry up. There one sees publicly that it is not a spring or a living
fountain of love, but only water carried in sand and a heathen help. You
Christians must rise higher, and be undaunted to help even your enemies,
since you deserve vain ingratitude, and think: If they want to be
ungrateful, well, there is God, who still has so many devils, so many
bad boys on earth, so much water, fire, pestilence and other plagues, so
that he can punish them; he will find them well. Knowing then that it
cannot go unpunished, I will keep a sweet, compassionate heart, ready to
counsel and help. This means a Christian heart and Christian love, which
the heathen do not have, who do not help further, so they deserve thanks
and help. But the Christians should have such a heart and love, which,
like a living spring, is not to be exhausted, nor does it dry up,
although the benefit, like the water in the sand, is lost and is in
vain. Now the Lord goes on, and divides such mercy into several pieces,
and says:

**744 L. 2, 417-420. on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin, iM-iesu
745**

**Judge not, and ye shall not be judged. Do not condemn, and you will
not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven.**

The Lord would have us be righteous Christians, who do not boast of the
faith and the gospel with words, as people do now who want to be
evangelical and know much to say about Christ; but if you really look at
it, there is nothing behind it. So most of them, even those who have and
hear the gospel, deceive themselves and go to the devil with their false
faith. Christ would gladly prevent such evil; for this reason he does
not present us with a strange, unknown example, but with his Father's
and our own example, which we ourselves have experienced, that he has
acted in this way with us, and says: We should do the same with other
people.

For we have all been in the judgment of God and in condemnation because
of our sins. What then has our Father in heaven done? Is it not true
that he has neither judged you nor condemned you, but has forgiven your
sins, has removed hell and condemnation, and has accepted you into
grace? You have such an example in yourself and in your person; follow
it and do the same to others: then you are a true Christian who believes
in Christ and does not judge or condemn your neighbor, but gladly
forgives him for what he has done against you.

(19) But if thou wilt not do it, but wilt receive mercy with the
servant of the devil, Matt. 18, and wilt not prove the same to others
here, know that thou art not a Christian, and that God will again cast
thee out of mercy into judgment and damnation, and will deprive thee of
all the goods which he hath given thee, and will again lay upon thy neck
all the iniquity which he hath left thee: this thou shalt have for a
certainty, for it is written: "Judge not, that ye be not judged," that
is, if ye will not refrain from judging, God also will judge you.

20 But now we see how it is difficult to leave it so excessive; as soon
as someone offends us in the slightest, then the judgment comes quickly:
What shall I do to the rogue?

do more? I have done this and that to him; that is the thanks, so he
pays me. That is an unmerciful mercy and an annoying help, that one
wants to judge as soon as the thanks does not follow. And it is fine, as
Gregorius says: Vera justitia habet compassionem, falsa autem est duplex
iniquitas: The right piety is compassionate, but the hypocritical piety
is a twofold unmercifulness. This is what one learns when someone gives
me a florin, he would like to buy me with it and make it his own.
Therefore, as soon as I say or do something that he does not like, or
that is not useful in a certain case, he soon says to me: "See, I have
given you this and this; will you not also do this friendship for me?
That is to serve, to serve thee again, as the heathen do, and to judge.

(21) But it shall be thus: If thou doest good to any man, and he
knoweth it not, or doest evil against thee, thou mayest warn him not to
do it, lest he sin against God. But if you want to become an enemy to
him, and deliver him or judge him, and not help him again in his need,
beware. Commit him to his judge, for you do not know what God will do
with him, whether he will convert or not. If he does not convert, God
has, as said before, so many devils, executioners and other bad guys
that he can punish him in his own time. As you can see, now here, now
there a misfortune can happen unawares. Therefore beware that you do not
judge, but think: If God had wanted to deal with me according to the
severity that I have long deserved, I would have had to die in my sins
ten, twenty, thirty years ago, since I lived in all shameful idolatry
and hypocrisy.

(22) So also beware of condemnation, for it does not belong to you.
You may punish, instruct, admonish and announce it to those who are to
judge and condemn. But nothing else belongs to you, except to be
merciful, not to judge, not to condemn, but to forgive. And though thy
neighbor would not cease from sinning against thee, yet let thine heart
be with him.

**746 L. 2, 420-422.** on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. **W. xm,
1661-1672. 747**

be inclined to forgive, neither hinder him nor desire to avenge you; but
where you can, promote and create his best.

23 But such things are painful and very difficult. But remember that you
are a Christian, and if you want to remain a Christian, you must attack
yourself more seriously than the unbelievers. As the example of our
Father in heaven shows us. For if you do good to your neighbor, and he
does not thank you, or even wants to harm you, you must not doubt that
God will find him well; let him take revenge, and do what you are
commanded.

(24) One reads a story of how a misbehaving son took his father by the
hair and dragged him to the threshold, where the father began to cry
out: Stop it, stop it, my son, for I also dragged my father to this
place; as I did to him, so now do you to me again. This is the judgment
of our Lord God, who knows how to punish iniquity and especially
ingratitude. Therefore command thou him, and do as thou art commanded
here, that thou be not punitive, but merciful. God will not remain
outside with the punishment, as the Lord further reports here:

**Prayer, and it will be given to you again. A full, pressed, shaken,
and superfluous measure will be given into your bosom. For with the same
measure that you measure with, you will be measured again.**

(25) The Lord has ever summed it up well, and would like us to become
fine, pious Christians, and to be righteous in all things. Therefore,
just as he commanded that we should deal graciously with poor sinners,
as God deals with us, not judging them nor condemning them, but
commanding judgment and sentence from God and pleading for them: so he
further commands here that in other needs we should also be helpful to
them with giving and counsel; and then we should certainly hope that we
cannot give so much and so abundantly, but that God will always give
more and more abundantly. So that the heart may always spring up in
love, and not let the thorns prick it, that it may dry up. As the
heathen do, they cannot refrain from judging and condemning;

As soon as you do something they don't like, they won't forgive it
until you fall at their feet and worship them. So, where they do not
know how to enjoy again, they give nothing. Therefore, the heavy
judgment remains upon them, that God will judge them again, condemn
them, and neither forgive nor give them.

(26) We should beware of such naughtiness, and do to our neighbor as
our dear God in heaven has done to us. He cancels the judgment and wants
to forgive; he will neither avenge nor condemn, regardless of the fact
that we are so ungrateful and throw our hands and laps at him for his
good deeds. We should also learn this. If not, then we may wait for the
judgment that he says: "With what measure you measure, it will be
measured to you again.

27 But now we must confess that our God has measured us very richly. For
if God had wanted to measure us according to our merit, we would have
deserved wrath, strife and all misfortune, so that the earth would have
swallowed us up as soon as we were born on it; not to mention that we
have kept ourselves so badly throughout our lives. So that the right
measure for us would have been death and hell. But what does God do? He
pours away all that we have deserved, wrath, disgrace, judgment, death,
hell, and gives us heaven, grace and freedom from the accusations of the
law and our evil conscience. He pours out all lack and guilt, and gives
all good. That is ever graciously measured. But afterwards, if you do
not want to measure others again, do not wait for anything else, because
as you measure, God will measure you again. Thou didst tarry before, for
God had pardoned thee with all grace: but now, as thou doest and
misteakest with thine ingratitude, so shall it be measured unto thee.

(28) This is a wonderful sermon, in which one sees that God is more
concerned with the service of his neighbor than with his own service.
For in his cause and as far as he is concerned, he forgives all sin and
will not avenge what we have done against him. But again, if we do evil
to our neighbor, he will be merciful to us.

748 . **l. 2, 422-424. on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1672-1675.** 749

also be at odds and forgive nothing at all. Therefore, the measurement
here must be understood after faith and not before faith. For before you
came to faith, God did not deal with you according to your merit, but
according to grace. He made you come to his word and promised you
forgiveness of your sin. This is the first measure of us, since we began
to believe.

29. Because we have received such a measure from God, he says,
"Remember and measure other people in the same way. But if thou doest
not, it shall be unto thee even as thou doest unto others. Thou art
ungracious unto them: I will be ungracious unto thee also. Thou judgest
and condemnest them: I will judge and condemn thee also. You take from
them and give nothing: I will also take from you and give nothing. The
measure is according to faith, that our dear Lord God takes such care of
works toward our neighbor, that he will call back what he has done for
good, if we will not also do good to our neighbor.

30 Therefore, whoever thinks of serving God faithfully, let him do to
his neighbor as God has done to him, that is, let him not judge, let him
not condemn, let him forgive and give gladly, let him be kind and
helpful where he can. For otherwise we will be like the servant in
Matthew 18, who was given a great deal of grace, because the Lord
released him and freely gave him all his debt: but since he would not
give his neighbor the hundred pennies, nor be patient until he paid
them, the ten thousand pounds came back to him, and he was handed over
to the tormentors until he paid everything.

(31) Now it is true that it is not possible for us to keep to this
rule at all times. We very often forget mercy: where we should be kind,
we chasten; where we should speak good words, we curse. If therefore
these things come to pass, that in this case we do contrary to the
commandment of Christ, let us take heed that we beware of the sin of the
Pharisees, and not go and continue in sin without conscience; but that
we soon repent, remember this image, and do as our Father hath done unto
us, that we also forget, and

Forgive, and let no iniquity nor ingratitude make us bitter.

(32) But if one is to forgive, it is also necessary that the one who
is to be forgiven recognize his sin and be sorry for it. For that I
should forgive the pope and other enemies of the word their sin, that is
not possible for me. Cause, they think it right that they persecute our
doctrine. But if they confess that they have done as fools, they will
henceforth cease: then should forgiveness of sins follow. For if sin is
to be forgiven, there must ever be sin. Whoever wants to be right and
does not confess sin, as Saul did with Samuel, cannot be forgiven sin.

This is the doctrine of Christian faith, which the Lord holds up to us
from the example of our Father in heaven. He elaborates on this doctrine
in the simile of the splinter, or pike, **) in the eye, and the beam.
As if to say, "I see that you are grieved, for you are grieved by your
harm, and you cannot soon forget it: as soon as you see your adversary,
or think of him, you are filled with bile, and think, "He has done this
and that to me; I would that he had all the misfortune. Dear children,
says Christ, not thus: if he has harmed you here and there, or touched
you with a word, in truth it is only a splinter and a small penny, a
small stick in the eye; whereas you have a great beam in it, if you want
to see what you have done against God. Therefore, it takes a lot to
judge and condemn another.

34 In other matters, the schoolmaster must be more learned than his
pupil, or the pupil will not learn much from him. What manner of
schoolmaster art thou then, that wilt teach and judge others, and yet
art just as wicked, and canst teach no more than he whom thou dost
presume to teach? In the sight of men, the Lord will say, such things
are not fit for a drop; how then will it be

*) Life [*a b c*]. D. Red.

**) Bechtlein - Splitter. D. Red.

750 **L. 2, 424-426. on the fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1675-1677.** 751

in my kingdom and in the sight of God, since you are all criminal at the
same time?

35 Therefore, learn this parable finely in the work: when you hear, see,
or suffer something that you do not like to hear, see, or suffer, that
you say: Patientia (patience), it is a small sin compared to my sins;
God sees much more fault in me than I can see in other people: therefore
I will gladly keep silent and forgive; only that God also forgive me and
keep silent. But there is no end to it; in the world one brother always
punishes another for the sake of the splinter, and yet he himself has a
large beam in his eye. For where you have one thing for your neighbor,
God has a thousand and a thousand for you, that you have never kept His
commandments all your life, and have sinned against them manifoldly. You
do not see this, and you go on, wanting to eat your neighbor for the
sake of a few bad words. Fie on you, are you so sharp-eyed and yet
cannot see such a large beam?

For this reason a Christian should be accustomed differently: when he
sees the splinter in his neighbor's eye, he should first, before he
judges, stand before the mirror and look at himself in it; there he
would find such large beams that one would like to make troughs out of
them, and he would have to say: What is this? My neighbor offends me
once in a quarter, half, whole year; but I have become so old, and have
never kept my. God's commandments, yes, transgress them every hour and
moment; how then can I be such a desperate rogue? My sins are vain
four-clawed great oak trees; and the poor little splinter, the little
stick in my brother's eye, do I let myself err more than my great
beams? But it shall not be; I must first see how I shall be rid of my
sin, then I shall have so much to do with it that I shall forget the
little splinter. For I am disobedient to God, to my authorities, to my
father and mother, to my dominion, and I continue to do so, and I do not
cease to sin.

Be so ungracious to my neighbor and not credit him with a few words? Oh
no, Christians should not do this.

(37) Thus the Lord will always point us to the example of our Father
in heaven, who will not see our great beams, that we may have patience
even with the little splinter, and not judge nor condemn.

38. Whoever will not be moved to mercy by such a glorious, beautiful
promise, that God will abolish all judgment and condemnation and gladly
forgive us if we forgive and do not judge one another, that there will
be neither hell nor death, but only mercy and kindness; again, whoever
will not be frightened by this and will not be turned away from judgment
and condemnation, that where he finds a mote in his neighbor's eye, God
will find a beam in his eye: I cannot know what will move, comfort or
frighten him.

(39) Are we not wicked men and great fools, that we will not give a
word of credit to one, when God will give credit to us for all our sins?
and where we slacken our judgment for a moment, that he will slacken his
judgment for eternity? But what good will it do us if we do not do this,
and want to follow the example of the world rather than that of our
Father in heaven? Nothing else, but that we throw ourselves out of grace
into the highest disgrace, and where we could otherwise have a gracious,
merciful, mild God, we ourselves make God unfriendly to us, and move him
to anger and punishment against us.

40 We should well consider such misery and thus learn to live our lives
in a Christian manner, so that everyone, friends and enemies alike, may
see in us that we are true disciples of Christ and have such a heart,
where there is an inexhaustible fountain of love within that never seals
up. May our dear Father in heaven, through his Holy Spirit, graciously
grant this to all of us for Christ's sake, amen.

752 **L. 2, 426-428.** on the fifth Sunday after Trinity. **W. XIII,
I678-I681.** 75A

**On the youngest Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 5, 1-11.**

And it came to pass, when the people pressed upon him to hear the word
of God, that he stood by the sea of Galilee, and saw two ships standing
by the sea; and the fishermen were gone out, and were washing their
nets: and he entered into one of the ships, which was Simonis, and
besought him that he would lead them a little from the land. And he sat
down, and taught the people out of the ship. And when he had ceased
speaking, he said unto Simon, Go up to the high place, and let down your
nets, that ye may make a draught. And Simon answered and said unto him,
Master, we have labored all night, and have caught nothing: but at thy
word I will let down the net. And when they had done so, they caught a
great number of fish, and their net was broken. And they beckoned to
their companions that were in the other ship, that they should come and
help them draw. And they came and filled both ships, so that they sank.
When Simon Peter saw this, he fell to Jesus' knees and said, "Lord, go
out from me; I am a sinful man. For he was sore afraid, and all that
were with him, because of this fishing which they had done one with
another; even Jacob and John, the sons of Zebedee, Simoni's companions.
And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not: for from henceforth thou shalt see
men. And they led the ships to land, and left all, and followed him.

In this Historia Lucas shows how Peter and others were called and came
to the apostleship. And the Historia is very fine. For the Lord wanted
to show them how the gospel would go into the world by force, and how he
would catch people from the devil's kingdom and bring them into God's
kingdom. For the Lord Himself indicates at the last that Peter, Andrew,
James and John are to catch men from now on.

2 This is a special comfort against the temptation that all pious
preachers commonly have, that they worry that the world is too evil,
that their preaching will be in vain and for nothing, and that no one
will improve. Christ says that this may be the case with the sermon to
Moses, but where my word goes and I am called to preach, it should be
done as it was done here with the fish haul, which Peter did at my
command.

Before the evangelist begins the story, he says how many devout people
followed the Lord Christ with multitudes, so that they loved to hear him
preach. With such an example he wants to provoke us that we should also
gladly hear God's word and diligently adhere to it. For whoever hears
God's

*) Held in the house, 1534.

If you listen diligently to the Word, you have two great advantages,
which you can never attain without the Word.

The first is to learn to know God's will, how He is disposed toward us
and what He wants to do with us after this life. It is impossible for a
human being to know this apart from God's word. The contradiction is
thought to be that God is angry with us and wants to punish us. But the
Word teaches, as we will hear later, that God is not angry with us, even
though we are sinners, but wants to be merciful to us and help us from
sins and death to eternal life. This is a fruit that we have through the
Word, and for this reason we should hear it gladly and diligently.

The other is that we learn from the word how our outward life, status
and nature, put into the word and sanctified by the word, is a right
service to God, since God is pleased with it; that it is not necessary
for anyone who wants to serve God to do something special for the sake
of his outward life, as the monks have done. He should stick to his
profession, do what his authority, his office and status require and
want him to do. This is called serving God rightly, and if he is
particularly pleased with it, it will also bring happiness and
salvation.

754 **L.2, 428-430.** On the fifth Sunday after Trinity. **W. XIII,
1681-1683.** 755

(6) This is a necessary teaching, since it is very important for us to
put our calling in God's word, and for everyone to be sure that
everything he does and leaves is done and left in God's name and by
God's command. Then the heart can defy the devil, be in good spirits,
and say: I have done this and that today, and have done it because I
know that God has commanded me and commanded me in His word; therefore I
know that it is a good work and pleasing to God 2c. But he who cannot
say these things, let him only cease in time, intending what he will;
for it is sin, and God is displeased and displeased with it; as St. Paul
says, "That which is not of faith is sin."

(7) But here we must know that whoever does not live in the air, as
the Gentiles do, but wants to put his actions into the Word and do
everything in faith, must first of all have and know the Word of God.
For faith cannot be where there is no word. Then you may think to
yourself what such a word is that encompasses all states and the entire
outward life. But it can be told you very soon. For first of all there
is the fourth commandment: You shall honor your father and your mother.
This commandment covers all classes. For the marriage state is the
source from which all states grow. And God has especially bound it
together in this way: just as the married state must serve all other
states (for where there should not be married couples, there could be no
government nor civil life); so again all states should serve the united
married state.

(8) Secondly, in addition to this word, which covers all states, we
have another word which covers all works, namely, the word which is
called and commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves. Let these two
commands shine before our eyes forever, so live our lives according to
God's word and command.*)

(9) Now if you count it by the work, it is a very small thing for a
maid to cook, wash, sweep, carry children, wipe, and bathe in the house.
For this is what the heathen do

*) See the appendix at the end of this sermon.

> D. Red.

and unbelievers also; but they do it without God's word, that is, they
do not believe that God requires service and obedience in such works,
and do not know His command. But a maiden who is a Christian knows from
the fourth commandment that God commands such works and wants us to do
them, and sees that love for one's neighbor also requires them.
Therefore, make a holy work of it, and do not need any Chresam for it.
For the word is the true Chresam, which the Lord saith by St. Paul: "Ye
servants, be obedient to your physical masters with fear and trembling,
in singleness of heart"; item: "Ye children, be obedient to your
parents in the Lord", Eph. 6, 5. 1. Such a word and faith make the bad
works (which the pagans do as well) holy and pleasing to God, since they
cannot please God where the word and faith are not. For on earth nothing
is holy except the name and word of God. What is to be sanctified must
be sanctified by such a name and word of God.

(10) The command of the fourth commandment passes through and over all
ranks and works, blessing them so that they are holy and pleasing to
God, provided you believe in Christ and obey in God's name. Die
therefore in such a state, if God wills, and you die blessed and well;
for you die in the right faith and obedience, and are a child of eternal
life: not because of such works, but because of faith, from which such
obedience and works follow.

(11) For a monk to put on a cap, to be given a present, to get up at
night for matins, to say mass, to have his special rule with food, 2c.:
such works have a great appearance, for they make people angry: but all
the fault is in the fact that such works are not done according to the
word of our Lord God; therefore they are not holy works. But this is a
holy work, and maketh holy, that thou believest on Jesus Christ, and
afterward takest the fourth commandment before thee, and there doest
thine obedience; because thou hearest that thy estate, wherein thou art,
is adorned with the word of God, and therefore is a holy estate.

756 **L. 2, 430-432. on the fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1683-1686.** 757

(12) Therefore, one must look first and foremost at the word. For he
who looks only to the work itself sees no difference between Christians
and unbelievers. For they do in both parts what father and mother,
servants and maids, master and wife do in the home. But there you can
see the difference. The heathen and unbelievers do it in sins and
unbelief, for they know nothing of the word. But a Christian does it in
faith, and considers such works according to the word of God to be
obedient and pleasing to God. Therefore, this is a holy work, but that
is an unholy work.

(13) Therefore, if we were to listen diligently and gladly to this
example according to God's word, we could come to it this very day,
together with Peter, that we would have a certain command for our
actions, and after that there would be all the more happiness in
everything we do; otherwise, where God's word is not, there must be no
real blessing, but rather a curse and disgrace, and an evil conscience.
That is enough of the example that the evangelist reports in the
beginning, how this people diligently kept to the word, and Peter
himself held the word in such high esteem, and did what Christ called
him.

14.*) Now let us take the history before us. There are two parts in it:
first, a bodily comfort and teaching that God will not let us die of
hunger; then a spiritual one, that He will not let us be condemned for
sin, but will accept us with grace. These are two doctrines that are
very necessary and useful; therefore, we should remember them diligently
and apply ourselves to them.

15 The comfort of the flesh is that Christ calls Peter to make a move,
and Peter follows and catches an abundance of fish. This may be a fine
householder: who only could have him in his profession and in his work,
he would certainly have all things enough, and suffer no want. But the
evangelist gives so much to understand that our dear Lord Christ does
not want to do this to everyone; but only to those who labored in vain a
whole night before, and afterwards

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1533.

Have heard God's word. That is, he wants to help the pious and poor,
who have suffered hardship before, with his blessing. For Christians
must suffer and be tempted here on earth. But if they are tempted, and
yet remain faithful to the word in their profession or work, then Christ
will be there and help them with rich blessings.

(16) This is the one consolation which is held out to us, that we
should believe; and though we sometimes lack, and have not all things,
that we should not despair, nor be impatient, but hope that the blessing
may yet come. For so it is with Petro and his companions: they labor all
night in vain, and can catch nothing; but Christ our dear Lord comes,
and first gives them his word, and makes Christians of them; after that
he bids them go into the sea, and try themselves once more. Then Peter
follows, and is very well pleased with him. It should be the same with
us. God does not want to give us all fullness immediately at the
beginning. For if he gave it as soon as we were baptized and became
Christians, we would think we had it from ourselves. That is why he lets
us lack for a while beforehand, so that a man has to despair and say to
himself: "Who knows how I will fare in the end? Who knows how I will
fare, how I will be provided for? If we then hold fast to hope and to
the word, the dear Lord and good steward will be with us and say: Be
content, make a move, do not be driven by work and wait for my blessing.

(17) For this is not to be the case with Christians, whether they are
already in want or not, that they should be anxious, deny Christ, and
become impatient about it; but they should hope that in time the Lord
will still give them what they need, and for this reason they should
continue and persevere in their work forever. For Christ does not give
the fish to Petro in such a way that they jump into the boat by
themselves: he must go up to the heights, prepare his net, and, like
other fishermen, send himself to the trade, even though he has now
become a Christian; and must let the Lord see to it that he catches
something.

**758 D. 2, 432-434. on the fifth Sunday after Trinity: W. XIII.
1686-1089. 75A**

(18) So shall it be with us, in what estate God has placed each one.
If you are a servant, a maid, a lord, a lady, a mayor, a prince, do what
is your duty, for it does not hinder your faith, and in such a state you
can serve God rightly and well; then let God take care of how he will
feed you and provide for your needs; and do not be frightened by it,
even if you have to suffer hardship and lack for a while. For a time may
come, which thou knowest not, when happiness and blessing shall be
found, as it is found here. But persevere faithfully, and do not be
weary or impatient. But whoever does not do this, but wants to throw
away the net as soon as he is tired of it, and in impatience abandon his
profession and trade and start another, would have to remain a humbler
all his life, and would neither get behind nor ahead of himself.

19 This is the first lesson, that we should be undaunted, even though we
feel lack and God does not give us the blessing as soon as we need and
would like it. For it would ever be unreasonable for God to give us a
boost as soon as we want it. Work for a while in vain, as Peter did, and
suffer yourself; say: I also have to have my night and get up, I also
have to work in vain; in time my Father in heaven will probably do it
differently. As it is said: Dat Deus omne bonum, sed non per cornua
taurum. One must work, suffer something and dare; then God will also
come with his blessing: but provided that one does not forget the first
part, and with Petro lend the little ship to the Lord Christ, that he
may sit in it and preach, and that we may diligently listen to the word
and learn it well.

20) And here we see a special great virtue in Petro; he must have been
a pious heart, that he can break himself so finely and hold to the word
so stiffly. For here it is as usual that our Lord leads and pretends his
commandments and works (as reason sees it) very foolishly. Otherwise it
has such an opinion with the fishing that one does not catch much at
noon, the night is much better.

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1532.

to this. The fishermen also do not go into the middle of the sea, but
stay on land, where there are plenty of fish. But the Lord turns this
around and tells Peter to go up to the heights, that is, to go into the
sea; and since they had caught nothing all night, he now tells them to
cast their nets at noon. Peter senses that this is not a matter of
skill, so he answers very politely, "Lord," he says, "we have worked
all night and have caught nothing, and if it is to be according to our
skill, there is little hope that we will catch anything now. But still,
on your word I will dare; if it does not produce something special, it
is lost.

(21) This is a very fine, courteous answer, for otherwise he would
have gone out and said, "Dear, do not teach me; I certainly know better
how to catch fish than you can teach me. Preaching and fishing are two
different things. You can do that; I can do that. I will not teach thee
to preach; neither teach thou me to catch fish; it will not do. So we
might have answered the Lord. For this is our way and nature, that we
always want to be wiser than our Lord God. But Peter is more pious, he
drops all such thoughts and thinks: I can and know what I want about
catching fish, but I will not despise this word, but follow it. So he
clings to the word with all his heart and lets go of reason, experience
and everything.

(22) This is a fine piece of faith, if only one could follow the
example of our beloved Peter, and leave all that comes to mind, and keep
his word alone. For this is what we learn: one man likes another to
believe and follow him; and even if it should be a mistake, one is not
angry about it. Again, it is very annoying when the master in the house
commands something that the servant does not want to follow, saying,
"Lord, it won't do; I tried it before and it didn't work out;
therefore I won't do it. No one would like to have such a servant in
the house. But indeed, we are always doing so against God in heaven,
letting ourselves

**[760 2, 434-437. on the fifth Sunday after Trinity. W.XIII. 1689-1691.
761]{.underline}**

reason errs, that we do not follow the word as we should. As is seen in
the sacramental devotees. Christ says: "Take and eat, this is my body;
drink, all of you, this is my blood." No, no, they say, it is not his
body and blood, but only a sign of his body and blood; for Christ sits
at the right hand of GOD. So they want to judge the word according to
their reason. Fie on you! That is to teach the chickens to lay eggs and
the cows to calve, if one wants to teach our Lord God to preach. How
would we like it if our servant and maidservant behaved against us in
such a way that what we said they wanted to do everything differently?

(23) Therefore God considers it a great honor when we act against Him
and His word, as Peter does here: although reason wants to lead us
elsewhere, that we nevertheless stick to ourselves and say: Reason this
way, reason that way; there stands God's word and command, and I will
keep it that way. So whoever can keep to the word, our Lord God and the
whole heavenly host laughs. People also like such obedience. If a prince
commands his servant to do something, and he quickly goes and does it,
do not argue long about how it should be done, but think: My lord has
commanded it this way, I will do it in the name of God; if it is right,
it is right for him and for me; if it is not right, it is wrong for him;
if it is foolishly commanded, it is foolishly done. What is it to me? I
am there to follow 2c. Whoever could do this against God and His word,
as we are obliged to do, there would be greater peace on earth. Neither
herds nor heretics would arise, but all churches would remain finely
united and healthy in doctrine. But because they do not do so, and the
wise part is puzzling and disputing, and does not merely want to follow
the word, that is where all error and disunity comes from.

(24) It is true that it is important to be free from temptation. When
it happens to us, as it does to Petro, that we work in vain even for one
night, we do not fail to grieve and soon grumble about it, become
impatient, and think that we want to leave it all behind and walk away.
But such temptation shall

One must not give room, but remain in the profession, one way like the
other, and let God take care of it. For we often see that there are
fine, pious, obedient children, for whom nothing goes right, nor will go
right; while other bad and disobedient boys are fine, and go out as they
wish. But it does not last long, and in the end it is found that the
evil in the beginning turns, and the good in the beginning finally goes
out badly. Therefore, even if it happens to you that it does not always
go well with you, only hold fast and do not let yourself be weary; for
the evil is better where you remain in obedience than the good there.
Cause, God finally pushes the disobedience to the ground with happiness,
be it ever so great. But he finally helps out obedience and gives
happiness to it.

(25) Therefore, we should take note of this and follow the beautiful
example that Peter alone looks at the word and follows it; other
thoughts that would have occurred to me and to you, and which
undoubtedly also occurred to him, neither err nor hinder such obedience.
For there is God's word and command, both over us and over St. Peter,
that God commands us to work and do what our profession requires.
Whoever now looks to such a profession, and diligently perseveres, even
though fortune blocks and blessings fail to come for a time, will
finally have to do well. For God cannot leave it alone, He takes
pleasure in obedience and also gives happiness to it, even if He
postpones it for a while, and tries us whether we also want to hold fast
to His command. Therefore, let no one be displeased or unwilling, even
if he fishes with Peter one night in vain. For if Peter had fished this
rich haul by night, he would have thought it was due to his art and
labor, not needing anyone else to do it. But because he fishes all night
and catches nothing, and the Lord gives him the word first and tells him
to try again, Peter must conclude that he did not fish alone; the word
and the blessing of God did it, not his work at all. That is enough of
the first comfort and teaching,

762 L. **2, 437-439.** On the fifth Sunday -after Trinity. **W. XIII,
1691-1694.** 763

which is bodily and goes to food: that Christ will not always leave his
Christians to labor in vain; he will be with his blessing at their work,
and will not let them die of hunger.

26) The other comfort and teaching is spiritual. For there your love
hears how Peter is frightened by the fish, and learns to know the Lord
JEsum, that he is more than a common man. But because he knows himself
to be a poor sinner, he falls at the feet of the Lord JEsu and says,
"Lord, go out from me; I am a sinful man." This is a spiritual piece,
which few people quite understand. For it has such an appearance, as if
Peter were so devout and humble, that he would gladly flee from the Lord
Christ. But it has a different opinion.

When God comes with His grace, promising forgiveness of sins and eternal
life through Christ for nothing, the grace becomes so great that one
thinks it is too much and cannot accept it. One can well believe that
God is gracious and merciful, but that He wants to be so exceedingly
gracious to us is hard to believe. Everyone thinks: If I were as pure
and pious as the Virgin Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul, I would also want to
comfort and accept such grace; but I am a sinner, I am not worthy of
grace, but of disgrace and wrath. Then the devil also strikes, he blows
up the sin in the heart in such a way that you can see nothing but your
unworthiness, and so you must be frightened before the great,
overflowing grace. This is a spiritual challenge, since raw people, as
we all commonly are, know nothing about it, which one learns only in
experience, and nowhere else. For most people live in such a way that
they think neither of their sin nor of God's grace. But the true
Christians are afraid of this, and they always think that it is too much
that God should do this for their sake. What am I? they think; I am not
worthy that God should be so gracious to me.

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1531; after *a b*, from 1533.
D. Red.

028 Now this comfort and teaching goes with Petro, that the Lord lets
himself be heard here so kindly against him: Oh, Peter, I am not here to
choke you or punish you for your sins; do not be afraid. If thou art a
sinner, be thou content: I can and will save thee from it, and make thee
a great man: therefore be thou content for my sake; there shall be no
need.

29 So that this consolation may serve to teach us that where such
thoughts try to frighten our hearts and make us fainthearted, we should
reject them and not give them room. For it is not the opinion of Christ
that he cannot suffer poor sinners. He came to earth for their sake.
Therefore he comforts Peter here against such thoughts, and Luc. 12, 32.
he says: "Fear not, little host; for it is your Father's good pleasure
to give you the kingdom." Then the Lord also speaks to such fearful
hearts as Peter is here, who think, Who? Should you go to heaven ? live
with the dear angels in eternal joy and delight in heaven above? Yes, if
you were pious and holy! But as you are now, nothing will come of it.
Nay, saith Christ, ye fear me; but ye shall not. My Father will give you
the kingdom; and will give it to you out of gracious good pleasure. For
since you, poor sinners, are not worthy of it, it is his gracious will
to give it to you freely and by grace. Therefore do not be afraid of it;
accept it with love and thanksgiving. For if God should not give us
something sooner, if we had earned it and were worthy of it, then he
should hardly give us the dear bread and mere water. But he does not
want to look at our merit and worthiness, but at our need and his grace
and mercy, and above the bodily blessing also give eternal life.

(30) Peter is in such a challenge here. He realizes that it is the
Lord's gift and blessing that he and his companions catch such a large
number of fish in one go, but he considers himself unworthy of such a
feat and wants to despair because of it. What," he says, "shall I, O
Lord, do with you?

764 **2.2, 439-442. on the fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1694-1697.** 765

Keep to pious people, I am unfortunately a wicked, sinful man. But
Christ comforts him, and holds himself far differently against him than
he thinks; saying, Let him be without fear, and be content. As if he
should say: It is a small thing about the fish; I will still make you a
fisher of men. Now thou hast the office of a fisherman; but I will
command thee another, that thou shalt go into other waters, and catch
men, and make heaven full of fish, and fill my kingdom, as these fish
fill thy little ship. For such fishing I will give thee another net, the
gospel; by it thou shalt catch the elect, that they may be baptized,
believe, and live for ever. And not in one place only, but in the whole
world; and thou shalt catch and convert here a city, and there a whole
country.

This is the spiritual comfort which the Lord gives to his disciples, not
only that he will not let them die of hunger, but that he will put them
in spiritual government, and send them out into the world, to rumble
among kings and rulers through the gospel. Whether the devil is angry at
this and opposes it with all his might, it does no harm; nevertheless
the word, whether the devil is angry or laughing, shall break through
and bring forth fruit, so that many may believe in the Son of God and
thus receive forgiveness of sins, become righteous, blessed and heirs of
eternal life. As a certain sign of this, God has given us His word,
baptism, the Lord's Supper, and absolution, which are His nets, so that
He may gather His own from the world, where the devil is prince and God,
and thereby protect them from the devil's cunning and the world's
tyranny, and keep and strengthen them in faith, so that they will not be
condemned with the world. And though sin still stirs in them, and faith
is weak, so that they think they are not worthy of the great and
glorious treasure, yet Christ comforts them, as I said in Luke 12,
saying, Fear not, neither consider whether ye be worthy or unworthy: but
hear what I say unto you, that your Father's good pleasure is good.

is to give you the kingdom. If so, your Father will not let you go to
hell, even though you deserve it. Therefore, only hold on to me, crawl
into baptism, go to the holy sacrament, let yourselves be drawn and
caught by my gospel, and there will be no need.

(32) So your love, besides the example that God's word should be
gladly heard, has these two things: the first, that although God lets us
suffer a time of lack and labor in vain, He will nevertheless be with us
in due time with His blessing and help us; the second, that He will also
help us against sin and not condemn us. For this reason he also gives us
his word and comforts us with it, so that we may certainly believe that
we are his children.

Such people also do righteous good works afterwards, if they know
beforehand through the Word and faith that through Christ they have a
gracious God and Father in heaven, of whom they are little fishes, who
in his Word, as in his net, are well protected from all misfortune. They
can be cheerful and of good cheer even in lack, hunger and sorrow, and
say, "Though I suffer poverty here, it does me no harm; yet I know that
my dear God will not let me suffer need. For he hath given me Christ,
and all blessedness in him: he will also give me so much, that the body
shall have its need during the short time of my life.

34 Therefore, it is most important for the Lord to comfort our hearts
and make us certain that we firmly believe and do not doubt that we have
a gracious God in heaven. Whoever believes this will not only not allow
any temporal lack to be disputed, but will also not ask whether the
devil and the world are angry: if only God is merciful to us, heaven and
all the dear angels smile upon us. That we may firmly believe these
things, and in all temptations, bodily and spiritual, comfort ourselves
in this way, may our dear Father in heaven grant us this, through Jesus
Christ, His Son and our dear Lord, amen.

**[766 L. 2, 442. On the fifth Sunday after Trinity. L. 2, 442.443.
767]{.underline}**

**Appendix to the sermon on the fifth Sunday after Trinity.*)**

But now God has made his word available to us in abundance, so that we
can easily and without any effort put all our works, doings and
non-doings into it. For he who believes, that is, who puts his heart and
trust in God's grace, which He has shown us through Christ, sings or
prays, eats or sleeps, is said to have done well, for he does it as a
Christian man who believes in the Lord Christ, and says, "I will pray,
read, work and thus serve in my Lord Christ's name. This would be just
enough from God that He has given us the word of faith, so that every
Christian can be joyful in such faith and serve God. For whatever is
done in faith, no matter how small, is called well done and is the best
of works.

But God is not satisfied with such things, but adds that he sanctifies
all ranks in his word, when he says and commands: "One should honor
one's father and mother. Then a child can say: I will now go to school,
study, cook, spin, sew, and know, if I do it faithfully and diligently,
that it is pleasing to God. For my father and mother told me to do it,
and I have God's word that I should follow them. So a child could spend
a whole day in his parents' obedience, and know that it is pleasing to
our Lord GOD. So servants and maids, master and mistress of the house,
each in his position, have God's word for himself, so that he can say:
God has commanded me this; in his name I will get up, go to work, lie
down, sit at table 2c.

Whatever one does, even if it is no more than sweeping a room, it is all
well done and means living in obedience to God. For the word, Thou shalt
honor thy father and mother, embraces all ranks, offices and works that
belong to the marriage state and come from the marriage state.

*) Instead of the two §§ 7 and 8, the edition *a* has the above. D.
Red.

Whoever does not have or know the word of God, cannot have such
confidence and must be deprived of this excellent consolation.
Therefore, we should gladly hear God's word, so that we can learn from
it how to make our lives pleasing to Him. For then we could be all the
more joyful and have a good conscience. No pagan, no Turk, no Jew knows
this; only Christians know it, and they can say: What I am doing now, I
will do in the name of Jesus, and in the obedience to which I have been
placed by God, and I will do it with joy. If something happens to me and
the devil comes upon me, what is the harm? Nevertheless, I am in the
position where God's word comforts me, whatever I do or suffer is well
done, and God is pleased with it and will be with me with grace.

So let every Christian be accustomed from his youth to be sure that he
is in a blessed state. Whoever can do this, even if he falls down the
stairs and breaks his neck, can still say: My father, my mother, my
lord, my wife has commanded me; therefore I die in a blessed state and
right obedience. Thus, whoever goes to war by the command of his ruler
and authority, and goes there in the name of God who has placed him
under such authority, whether he is shot or stabbed, he dies well. For
he lives in the obedience of God, and knows what he does according to
such a calling, that he has orders from God.

In this way, all men could live blessedly and well, and have nothing
more to live for than the Ten Commandments and faith in Christ. But
there the devil warns day and night, that one does not think of God's
word; badly risen, laid down, eaten, drunk, like swine, and not asked
whether one also serves God: that is the custom and manner of the
godless world. But Christians should beware of this, and learn how to
live their lives according to God's word day and night, for this makes
everything holy.

[**768 L. 2, 443-445.** on the sixth Sunday after Trinity. **W. XIII,
1736-1739. 769**]{.underline}

**On the sixth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 3, 20-26.**

For I say unto you, Except your righteousness be better than that of the
scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Ye
have heard that it was said unto the ancients, Thou shalt not kill: but
whosoever killeth shall be liable to judgment. But I say unto you: He
that is angry with his brother is guilty of judgment; but he that saith
unto his brother, Racha, is guilty of counsel; but he that saith, Thou
fool, is guilty of hell fire. Therefore, when thou offerest thy gift
upon the altar, if thou thinkest there that thy brother hath aught
against thee, leave thy gift there before the altar, and go first, and
be reconciled to thy brother; and then come and offer thy gift. Be ready
to meet thine adversary soon, while thou art yet with him in the way,
lest the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee
to the servant, and thou be cast into prison. I say unto thee, Verily
thou shalt not come forth thence, till thou hast paid the last farthing.

001 In this gospel we see that our dear Lord Christ will teach his
Christians, if they believe and are baptized, and have the name and
glory of being called Christians, and have received all spiritual goods
and gifts, that they may think to live righteous lives among themselves,
which are neither false nor hypocritical. For he hath not bestowed upon
us a false grace, which is only in appearance; but as our sins are real,
great, damnable, and not painted sins: so also is his grace in earnest,
and a righteous truthfulness. Therefore we should think that we do not
act falsely against our neighbor, but faithfully and truly; as God has
acted with us because of our sins.

2 For this cause the Lord takes the fifth commandment before him in
today's gospel, and sets before us an example to beware of, saying, "I
say unto you, Except your righteousness be better than that of the
Pharisee, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." This is a
short sentence: whoever wants to go to heaven must have better piety
than the Pharisees. Now what is the piety of the Pharisees? That it was
not unjust, that they hieled themselves in a fine, chaste, unruly life
and walk.

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1534.

ten. For this is what God wants from us in all our ways, as His word
says: Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt
not steal, thou shalt not lie 2c. He who keeps himself in such obedience
does right. But this was wrong of the Pharisees, that they boasted about
such outward works, discipline and respectability, wanting to be pious
and righteous before God through them, and went along safely, as if the
law had no further accusation against them, they had now fulfilled it
completely; when God wants not only the works, but a new, pure heart.

The Lord wants to warn us against such certainty. Even though we offend
no one with our works and are blameless before everyone, we should not
let ourselves think that we have fully obeyed God. For Christ says here:
Even if someone does not kill with his hand, he can still be a murderer
and transgressor of this commandment before God. Cause, God has not only
forbidden the killing with the hand, but also the anger in the heart, an
angry word, an angry sight in this commandment.

4 Now this is the Pharisaic righteousness, to be outwardly pious, not to
kill, not to commit adultery, not to steal, and to think that because of
such works one is pious and holy and needs nothing more; the law has no
more claim on us, we have completely fulfilled it, God is well pleased
and not angry;

770 **L. 2. 445-447. on the sixth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1739-1742.** 771

although the heart inside is full of sin and evil lusts. This
righteousness, says Christ, does not belong to heaven but to hell. For
God's commandments cannot be fulfilled by mere works; the heart must be
pure from all anger, hatred and envy, fornication and all kinds of evil
lusts. Whoever can bring it to that point may say that he is pious. But
because sin and evil desires are not yet all dead in the heart, but are
still stirring, even though they do not always come into the work; so
beware that you think you are pious, or that you intend to go to heaven.
A higher and better righteousness is needed, says Christ; with the
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees you will not enter heaven.

What then is the better righteousness? This, that works and heart at the
same time are pious and directed according to the word of God: that not
only the hand be not deadly, but also the heart be wholly without all
wrath; that not only thou be not an adulterer by works, but that thy
heart be wholly pure, without all evil desire and lust. So henceforth in
other commandments all; for such the law requires. It does not want the
work alone, but a pure heart, which compares perfectly with the word of
God and the law.

Yes, you say, where can such a heart be found? I do not find it in me,
neither do you find it in yourself. For it is exceedingly soon that the
gall runs over you, that you are moved to anger. So the evil desire in
the heart can also be aroused very soon, even against our thoughts and
will, because we would like to do it and become hostile to it. How then
shall we do to him? We do not have such high righteousness (that is, a
pure heart), and yet here we hear the judgment: If our righteousness is
not better than that of the scribes and Pharisees, then we will not
enter the kingdom of heaven. So let us do to him: let us not be like the
scribes and Pharisees in thinking ourselves righteous because of our
works; but, besides all the good we do and can do, let us humble
ourselves before God and say: Dear Lord, I am a poor sinner; have mercy
on me, and do not judge me according to my own works.

works, but according to thy grace and mercy, which thou hast promised
and rendered unto us in Christ.

(7) So this teaching is primarily to warn us against spiritual hope
and to bring us to the knowledge of our unclean, evil heart and sinful
nature, and thus to lead us to the hope of his grace. This then is the
true righteousness that belongs in heaven. It is not found in our works,
whether they be holy and unrighteous or not, but in the forgiveness of
sins and in the grace of God. For even though we have gone so far as not
to offend anyone outwardly, and diligently practice God's word and
will, the greatest defect is that the heart is still full of evil desire
and sins.

(8) Whosoever therefore hath the record of the word of Christ, and
believeth that such sins are forgiven him, is justified; not because of
himself, for he hath sin; but because of grace, that such sins are
forgiven through faith in Christ. Therefore Peter says in the Acts of
the Apostles Cap. 15, 9: God purifies the hearts through faith. But this
cleansing does not take place in such a way that we no longer feel evil
thoughts or desire in our hearts; this will not happen until we are
buried and resurrected to another and eternal life; then the heart will
indeed be truly cleansed. But here it is in word and faith that God will
not impute or punish sin for Christ's sake, but forgive and remit it.
Nevertheless, the fruit of faith follows, that by the help of the Holy
Spirit we begin to be pious and to render obedience to God; but, as
reported, it is still an imperfect obedience, therefore forgiveness of
sin must be included.

(9) Now the words of the Lord, "Unless your righteousness is better
than that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will not enter the kingdom
of heaven," are not to be interpreted as if the Pharisee's works are
evil in themselves. For the Pharisee boasts that he is not unrighteous,
not a robber, not an adulterer, that he fasts twice a week, and that he
gives tithes of

772 **L. 2, 447-450. on the sixth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1742-1744.** 773

He said that he had not lived unjustly, and that it would be desirable
if all people behaved in this way in their outward conduct, so that
worldly authorities, the executioner, father and mother, master and wife
in the house would not have much to do with bad boys and naughty people.
But the same Pharisee thought himself righteous for the sake of such a
life, and thought that he did not need God to be merciful to him and
forgive his sins and evil desires in his heart. The Lord warns us that
we should not stay with such righteousness, but strive for a better one,
if we want to enter the kingdom of heaven otherwise. He therefore sets
before us an example of the fifth commandment, that we may learn by it
what Pharisaic righteousness is, and beware of it.

(10) The fifth commandment, as you know, is, Thou shalt not kill. The
Pharisees thought that if they could only break off so much that they
would not kill with their hands, they would have done enough with this
commandment, there would be no need for it, no one could push them
higher. But Christ stretches it higher for them and says: No,
journeyman, it has another opinion. If the fifth commandment were
therefore, Thine hand shall not kill, then he that killeth not with his
hand hath done enough for the commandment. But it reads thus: Thou shalt
not kill, that is: Your heart, your mouth, your five senses and
everything that you have and is in you, that shall not be harmful to
your neighbor. You shall not only not kill the corpse, but also leave
everything that serves for death.

(11) From this it is clear that the Lord does not take the word "to
kill" so narrowly that it means only to take life and make a carrion;
but it understands all the doing, because of which death must follow. As
if you were an enemy to someone and did not give him a morsel of bread,
as the rich man did to poor Lazaro, such a man would have to die and
perish because of you. You do not strangle him with your fist, and yet
you are a murderer, according to the saying of Ambrosii: Si non pavisti,
occidisti: If you do not give food to your brother, you have strangled
him. And 1 John 3:15: "He who hates his brother is a murderer,

And ye know that a man that is slain hath not eternal life abiding with
him." Cause, where there is hatred, there is but lack of season, and it
may easily come to pass that the death blow shall follow. Therefore,
whoever wants to keep this commandment must not only keep his hand on
himself, but his heart must also be without all anger: so that one does
not see a sour look, does not let a harsh word pass, even against those,
when all the world must say, they have deserved all misfortune for us.

Accordingly the Lord clearly indicates that this commandment is
transgressed in four ways: first, with the heart, when it is moved to
anger and dislike against the neighbor; second, when the heart breaks
out, and the man sets himself up with gestures to be angry. As when you
pass by your neighbor, not wanting to look at him, not wanting to talk
to him, not wanting to thank him when he greets you 2c. For the little
word "rachah," which the Lord uses here, refers primarily to a sour,
unkind gesture, when anger is seen in one's eyes or face, or heard in
one's speech. The third is when anger comes from the heart into the
mouth, that one curses, evil-does people, or otherwise says nothing
good. The fourth is the grossest and most fearful, when it all comes
together, an angry heart, an unkind attitude, an angry tongue and an
angry hand, so that one strikes and strangles, or desires to strangle.
Although one degree is always more severe than the other (for the Lord
himself divides them and makes a distinction between the punishments),
they are all, the least as well as the highest, sins against this
commandment: So that whoever bears in his heart an aversion, anger or
disfavor against another is called and is before God also a mortal
slayer.

(13) Now consider whether you have kept this commandment so purely all
your life, or whether you can still keep it as Christ commands. But you
will have to confess, if you are not a hypocrite, that you have not only
not kept it, but that it is completely impossible for you. How then
shall you do it? For how God will punish the transgression of His word,
Moses indicates with clear, plain words when he says,

774 **2.2, 450-182. on the sixth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1744-1747.** 775

Deut. 27:26: "Cursed be he that fulfilleth not all the words of the
law, to do them." So you shall do as Christ teaches you here: that you
take heed, and do not become a Christian scholar or a Pharisee, so that
you think yourself righteous, even though you have not struck death with
your fist; but take heed to your heart, to your mouth, and to your
words; and where you find that wrath has seized you, turn quickly to
God, and say: Lord, I, a poor sinner, have broken the fifth commandment,
I have been enraged, I have been unkind to my neighbor in word and deed;
forgive me this great sin of mine, and grant me thy mercy, that I may
amend myself, and henceforth do no more. This is a thing that thou shalt
do, which the Pharisees do not do, who walk in all security, regarding
such anger as a small sin, and ask not forgiveness for such sin.

14. After this, you should also attack yourself with seriousness, not
letting the bridle of anger be too long: But even if you cannot leave it
out of your heart, first confess and complain of such sin to God with
all your heart and ask for forgiveness; and then defend yourself so far
that such anger, which has not yet been forgotten in your heart, does
not grow again and in time break out again, showing itself with unkind
gestures, angry words and a belligerent hand, but at least get rid of
the anger and speak kindly to your neighbor. Then a good word will find
a good place; and you will certainly experience that where you keep
yourself in this way, anger will leave your heart from day to day and
will vanish like smoke.

15 The Pharisees did not do this. They did not consider anger in the
heart, unkindness, or even evil words to be sins, so they let them go
freely and without fear. For this vice, anger, has a special bad habit
of adorning itself. For we think, "He has done this to me and that to
me; if I should not be angry or angry about it, I would be doing wrong,
for otherwise I would be wronging him in his evil ways.

strengthen. I have to let the boy become a little bit mellow, otherwise
he would become too wild and insolent 2c. If the heart is inclined to
anger beforehand, and the delusion arises that one is doing right and
well to be angry with one's neighbor for his own sin, then the fire
really starts and the devil has won his game, so that the resentment
grows from day to day, and the hearts become more and more embittered
against one another. The Lord warns us not to let ourselves be seduced
by such pharisaical thoughts, but to be righteous Christians who either
do right or confess the wrong and ask God for mercy so that he will
forgive and give us pure hearts.

(16) Therefore, if anyone practices the Ten Commandments, do you not
think that he would have reason to confess his sin every hour, to pray,
and to practice faith and the Word? For confession must be, when anger
or other lusts overtake us, that we neither deny nor excuse it, but
confess to God and confess to Him with all our heart that we have done
wrong. This must be followed by prayer that God will not reproach us for
such things, but will forgive us and, for Christ's sake, make us more
godly through His Holy Spirit. Such prayer should be followed by faith,
so that we do not doubt that through Christ we are forgiven for this and
other sins.

(17) That is, to practice the law or the Ten Commandments rightly, and
there is no need to look around for other good works or worship; as the
pope and his crowd do, they are up to their ears in Pharisaic
righteousness. As then the saying, so that they, just like the
Pharisees, interpreted the fifth commandment to mean only outward works,
testifies: Rancorem ponere necesse est, sed signa rancoris non: The
grudge, they say, thou shalt let fall; but the sign of the grudge is
unnecessary to let fall. That is, if a man grieves thee, beware that
thou shouldest be at enmity with him, or that thou shouldest smite him:
but not to speak to him, not to have fellowship with him, is not sin.
Therefore they considered the Ten Commandments to be a bad thing.

**[776 8.2, 452-485, On the sixth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1747-1749. 777]{.underline}**

The people of the world are supposed to deal with them. But they have
invented their own and higher services and works. But whoever wants to
deal with the Ten Commandments, as I have now said about the fifth
alone, I think he should have enough to do that he should not look for
other practices or services.

(18) But now the Lord is exceedingly severe, and, if we would be
Christians otherwise, he would have us always enter into this practice
of the Ten Commandments. For it is a hard saying when he first says,
"Unless your righteousness be better than that of the Pharisees and
scribes, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." So he
concludes at the end, making two parties. For where there is anger and
dissension, there are always two parties: the one that does wrong and
offends the other part; the other that is offended. Now to the one who
has given cause for anger and has offended others, the Lord says here
that he should remember briefly and remain unconjured to God and to the
service of God until he has first been reconciled to his opposite,
saying thus:

**If thou wilt offer thy gift, and there remember before the altar that
thy brother hath a matter against thee, leave thy gift, and first be
reconciled to thy brother.**

19. If this is not done, your sacrifice and worship is in vain, and God
has no pleasure in it.

(20) With these words, the Lord of the Pharisees is very subtle in
their thoughts, who thought that they wanted to make a smoke before
God's eyes, so that He would not see their envy and hatred in their
hearts against their neighbor, and other people would also consider them
pious. No, you are not; you are deceiving yourself. God looks first of
all at your heart, how it stands against your neighbor. If he finds it
in hatred and envy, do not think that he has any pleasure in your
sacrifice or worship. For since he commanded, "Love thy neighbor as
thyself," he wants the same obedience from thee above all things, or
does not want thine at all. For what would this be, that thou shouldest
offer unto our Lord GOD an ox, which hath ten

How can you give your brother a gift worth a hundred thousand guilders
and then kill him? That would be giving a penny there and stealing a
hundred thousand guilders somewhere else. That should not and cannot be.
If you want to serve God, serve him with a heart that is not hostile to
your neighbor, or know that your service is an abomination before God.

(21) Hence many, when they are at odds with their neighbor, abstain
from the Sacrament and do not want to pray the Lord's Prayer. For the
word strikes them in the forehead when they pray: Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us. Because they do
not forgive, they pronounce the judgment against themselves, that God
should not forgive them either. This is true, and no one should think
otherwise: if you do not forgive, God will not forgive you, and it will
never be otherwise. Therefore, think carefully about what you are doing
to yourself if you keep your anger and do not let it go. For you will
not make your cause better by it, if you do not want to pray or go to
the sacrament, but only worse. For as God finds you, so He judges you.

22. Therefore, follow the counsel of Christ: humble yourself before God
and confess your sin; then also be reconciled to your neighbor and let
go of anger. Then offer your gift 2c. Otherwise, you hear here that you
are to be on your word with God, as He will not put up with your
sacrifice, prayers 2c. This is what Christ means when he says, "Leave
your offering before the altar." As if he should say: You are not doing
anything with God with it. This is the one who gives cause for anger and
offends his neighbor: he should not only humble himself before God and
confess that he has done wrong, but also before his neighbor; and then
also wait for forgiveness from God.

(23) Now the other part, which is offended, and thinketh that it hath
good cause to be wroth, the Lord also warns that it should gladly
forgive, and not be long celebrated. For there, says the Lord, is a
great trial. For if thou shouldest plead long, and not be found gracious
in atonement, thine antitype would bring the matter to the attention of
the Lord.

778 **L. 2, 4ss-4s7. On the sixth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1749-1753.** 779

Judge, God in heaven, and say: Lord, I have done what I should: I find
grace with you, but not with the people; well, I will command you. If
then God hastens you, what do you think the judgment will be? He will
take you, who will not forgive nor forget, and hand you over to the
servant and throw you into the dungeon. Thou shalt not come out, for
thou hast paid to the last farthing. That is, there will be no mercy, as
he says in Luc. 6, v. 38: "With the measure that you measure, they will
measure you again.

24 Thus the Lord wills for both parts that one be merciful, let go of
anger, and be kind to everyone. Otherwise, the fifth commandment is
there, accusing us of being death-slayers before God; therefore, the
punishment will not remain outside. Such teaching and life should remain
among Christians and be diligently practiced. Otherwise God will be
displeased, and we will harm ourselves, not only in body and goods, but
also in soul, as the Lord threatens.

(25) But apart from the Christian state or the kingdom of Christ, in
worldly offices and states, the fifth commandment no longer has its
course or power. There God has given a special command to be followed
and obeyed. For he who is in the secular government has orders to be
angry, to punish and to choke, where something unjust is committed by
the subjects. Item, father and mother in the house have a special
command from God over children and servants, that they are not to laugh
when children or servants have done wrong; but they are to rebuke and
punish confidently. That is what they tell God; and if they do not, they
are disobedient to God and do contrary to their office and command.

26 Therefore it is not for a thief to say to a judge: Do not kill me;
for in the fifth commandment it is written: Thou shalt not kill. He may
say this to his

of his equal, who is not in office. But the authorities have the command
to use the sword to prevent the evil. So it would not rhyme that a maid
in the house, if she had neglected, neglected and rotten something,
would want to say to the woman: Dear woman, you are a Christian,
remember the fifth commandment, that you be not angry with me; for it is
forbidden. "He that is angry with his neighbor," says Christ, "is
guilty of judgment." No, handmaid, GOD has made a different order here.
You are a maidservant, and you shall diligently wait upon your office
and what you are commanded. If you do not, you shall not be rewarded
with good words, but you shall be punished for it.

(27) God has not only imposed this on masters and wives in the
household, but also on the temporal government of the rulers; such anger
does not make them unbelievers any more than the office and profession
they have. But this would make them unchristians if they abandoned their
profession, and wanted to drop house and town discipline through
industrious attention, and act as they please with their children and
servants, and do not ward off trouble at times. So that the difference
remains: In the kingdom of Christ there shall be no wrath, but only
kindness and love; that the heart be not bitter against any man, neither
that the mouth nor the hand deceive any man. But in the kingdom of the
world, and in the government of the house, let every man's mouth and
hand, according to his station and office, do evil, and hurt all them
that do evil, and do not the things which are commanded them. For there
it is not a matter of sparing or being merciful, but of punishing. But
whoever leaves the punishment pending causes the highest judge, God
Himself, to come and punish the evil. There is little advantage in this.
For when God comes, he comes and stops.

This is the teaching of today's Gospel. May our dear Lord God help us
with His Holy Spirit, so that we as Christians may keep one another, and
each be diligent in his office and profession, amen.

[780 2.4S7-4SS. On the seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, 1774-1779.
781]{.underline}

**On the seventh Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Marc. 8, 1-9.**

At that time, when there was a great crowd and they had nothing to eat,
Jesus called his disciples to him and said to them: For they have
tarried with me three days, and have nothing to eat: and if I should
send them home without eating, they would die of hunger by the way. For
some had come from afar. And his disciples said unto him, Whence shall
we have bread here in the wilderness to fill them? And he asked them:
How much do you have of bread? They said, "Seven. And he commanded the
people to lie down on the ground. And he took the seven loaves, and gave
thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples to set before them:
and they set before the people. And had a little fish; and he gave
thanks, and commanded the same also to be presented. And they did eat,
and were filled: and they took up the rest of the fragments, seven
baskets. And there were about four thousand of them that had eaten; and
he sent them away.

This miraculous work was done twice by our dear Lord Jesus. For at
midfast your beloved hears that with five loaves and two fishes he fed
five thousand men, without wife and child, and twelve baskets of
fragments remained. But in today's Gospel you hear how with seven
loaves and a few fishes four thousand were fed, and seven baskets full
were left over.

2. But it seems as if such a miraculous work was ordained to be
preached at this time, so that the people would learn, because the
harvest is now beginning at the time of the year, that the fruits of the
field are beginning to be brought in, that everyone would be reminded by
this gospel that it is God's blessing, and that God is still doing the
miracle with us today that he did in the wilderness, that he can reach
far with a little through his blessing, and feed and nourish many; so
that, even though there may be a small supply or the grain may have
turned out badly, we may still hold on to this comfort, that it does not
depend on that alone whether one has much, but on the blessing of our
dear Lord Christ.

(3) For this is the proper way of the shameful, unbelieving world: if
it does not see and have an abundance of all things, it soon wants to
despair, as if it had to die of hunger. And indeed God has supplied us
abundantly for many years now; it does not help yet, it will

*) Held in Dause 1533; after *a* and *b* and after Röhrer, 1532. D.
Red.

Nevertheless, everyone will starve. In addition, the misers and usurers,
who keep grain and wine behind, do not want to let it happen to the
people for an equal penny, but wait until it becomes more expensive and
may be worth more. These are unbelievers who neither know nor believe in
such blessings and miracles; otherwise they would primarily look at
God's word and keep to it, and entrust all their worries to the rich
God in heaven, who can bless what is small and make much out of it.

(4) Now we see here two consolations, namely, that our dear Lord
Christ will supply both the soul with the word, and the body with bread;
so that, though he may cause his own to suffer want for a time, to be
poor and despised (for all the world is hostile to them, and grudges
them not a morsel of bread), yet they shall not doubt that he will
provide for them, that they shall not die of hunger, and that he will
provide them with a fair livelihood, that they may be able to support
themselves with means.

Now the Lord deals with such blessings according to the rule he gives in
Matthew 6:33: "Seek first the kingdom of God, and all the rest will be
added to you. The evangelist reports that the people stayed with the
Lord for three days. But what do you think they did or sought with him?
No doubt nothing else, but that they followed the word and desired to
hear it. This is after

782 **L.2. 459-461. on the seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1779-1782.** - 783

The reason that he cares for them so warmly, and makes himself believe
that he must see to it that they get something to eat so that they do
not die of hunger.

(6) That therefore this should be the chief doctrine, that we should
seek first the kingdom of God and the word, and pursue the same. When
this is done, we should then let the Lord Christ take care of the belly.
For he has already determined, if we are disciples of his word, that we
shall not die of hunger. Therefore he saith, "I mourn for the people."
And it is certain that before there is a lack of bread, the stones must
become bread.

(7) In the same way, in chapter 6, when Christ feeds the five thousand
men in the wilderness, Marcus says that he crossed over and went into a
wilderness. When the people became aware of him, they ran after him from
all the cities and towns. But when he saw the great multitude, saith
Marcus, he was grieved of them, because they were as sheep having no
shepherd; and he began a long preaching.

(8) This is the first lamentation, which the Lord, as the right
shepherd and bishop of souls, considers, that they were like a scattered
flock. Just as we were under the papacy: the one called St. Barbara, the
other St. Catherine; there was no right preacher anywhere to lead us to
the right pasture (that is, to hold out the pure doctrine); everything
floated and lived in idolatry and error. Marcus says that it was the
same with the poor people of the Jews: priests and Levites were
appointed to preach about the future Christ and his kingdom of grace.
But what did they do? They turned the shepherds into harmful wolves,
preaching their own dreams so that the poor sheep pined away. Just like
us in the papacy, since no one knew how he was with God: that God for
Christ's sake wanted to be merciful to us and forgive sin. Everyone
thought that if he wanted to be saved, he would have to help with his
works and life. This is the first sorrow and harm that the Lord sees in
the poor people.

He said, "What are the wicked priests and Levites doing? There are so
many people who would like to hear and learn from our Lord God, but
there is no one to teach and guide them; those who should do it are busy
with their splendor, avarice, and pride.

(9) Therefore Marcus says: "They were like sheep that have no
shepherd. Ah, Lord God, if a sheep has no shepherd, it is a poor,
abandoned little animal. It is in need, even if it has a shepherd, a dog
and a pen; what will it be, then, if there is no shepherd, no dog, no
pen? It is the same with us poor people. Shouldn't the devil reign
there, where there is no word of God nor right preaching; because those
have enough to do to stay safe from the wolf, who like to hear the
gospel, pray diligently, and also have pious pastors and faithful
pastors? Therefore, where God's word is not pure, and no one knows how
he should pray and command God, it very soon happens that people are
persuaded to accept this saint and that one another saint as savior, and
thus all go astray and come under these wolves.

(10) The Lord's first remedy for such afflictions and great distress
is to preach, and to draw and gather together the erring sheep by the
word. Therefore we have great cause to consider this good deed, and to
praise such kind and loving eyes of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, that he
sees into the hearts of the people in this way, and takes care of them
so warmly that they go without a shepherd. Therefore, even though he had
gone into the wilderness for the sake of his rest, as Marcus says, he
still comes forth and laments to the people that they are spiritually
hungry and famished, and preaches a long sermon to them, feeding and
comforting them first of all in their souls.

(11) So it is in today's Gospel, when the evangelist says: "The
people stayed with the Lord Christ for three whole days, no doubt
hearing his sermons. And it would be good that such sermons were
written; but the evangelists only wanted to report the work.

12 This is now the first piece that our

[784 **L. 2, 461-464. on the seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1782-178S.** 785]{.underline}

The Lord Christ is careful and has a sorrowful heart for the abandoned
souls. For this reason, he stops his prayer, which he has to do against
his Father, takes care of the poor people and preaches to them.

(13) Because he has such a heart, how do you think he will receive on
the last day the industrious pastors who do not faithfully maintain
their office and still seduce their parishioners? item, princes and
lords who force the people to idolatry and do not want to let them keep
the word pure? Especially, however, what do our bishops want to say here
and how do they want to answer for themselves, who bear the name and
boast of the office that God has made them bishops and pastors, and yet
do nothing, except that they knowingly keep the people in idolatry, and
do not want to let them come to the right knowledge of the Word and
right worship; punish their subjects for this, both in property and in
body, where they do not want to allow such idolatry and do not want to
handle it.

Item 14: What will father and mother say, who do not keep their children
and servants diligently to the church and the word? Then he will
undoubtedly say, "You lords and wives, you kings and princes, you had
so many souls under your jurisdiction that you should have raised them
to godliness and kept them diligently to the word; but you did not do
so, you let them become reprobate and grow up without any godliness.
From whom shall I demand an account for such unspeakable harm? From no
one, but from you parents, lords and wives, kings and princes, whom I
have commanded to see that your children, servants and subjects learn
something. For this is not the reason why fathers and mothers, rulers
and sovereigns are here, that they alone make peace for their children
and subjects and fill their bellies; but they should also do everything
possible to lead children, servants and subjects to the truth and
knowledge of the Word, and thus, above all, to feed the soul, so that
people may become God-fearing, pious and blessed.

(15) Therefore, the highest and greatest work and the noblest service
that we can do on earth is to help others.

Bring people, especially those who are commanded to us, to the knowledge
of God and the holy gospel. The devil is very hostile to such good work
and opposes it fiercely with mobs and persecution. Besides this, it is a
very difficult thing in itself and takes a lot of effort and work before
the children and the young people are brought a little on their feet, so
that they accept the teachings and become God-fearing.

(16) This service and the greatest almsgiving is the first thing the
Lord does here, helping the poor people's souls. This means that the
Sabbath is properly sanctified, so that God is served more and the
people are better helped than if the Lord had given a thousand guilders
to each of them who heard his sermon. For spiritual food far surpasses
bodily food, by which a man lives forever.

(17) Let fathers, mothers, lords, wives and rulers follow this
example, so that they may earn heaven for their children, servants and
subjects, that is, do the highest and most pleasing work for God, if
they first help souls that they do not lead to the devil.

(18) After this spiritual almsgiving (after the sermon, which is
called rich almsgiving), the other, lesser almsgiving also comes, that
the Lord may also help the body. For Christ did not come to destroy soul
or body; he wants to help everywhere. Therefore, there is no reason to
think that a Carthusian would want to fast and pray himself to death.
The body is indeed given the task of not walking idly, but of exercising
itself. But the exercise should be such that the body remains healthy.
But whoever harms the body (as has happened in the monasteries of the
papacy to many who have corrupted themselves with too much praying,
fasting, singing, watching, casteism, reading, lying so badly that they
have had to die before their time) is his own murderer; beware of this,
as of a great mortal sin.

19 Sirach speaks on the 33rd chapter v. 25.: "To the donkey belongs his
food, scourge and burden; so to the servant his bread, punishment and
work." "But," he speaks soon after,

786 **L- 2.464-467. on the seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
17W-I78S.** 787

V. 30, "lay not too much upon any man, and keep moderation in all
things." The body is mortal, therefore it must have its food, that it
may remain healthy. Then it must not walk idly, but have something in
mind and work; otherwise it will become horny and restless. Thirdly, the
scourge or punishment must also be there, so that he always stops and
continues, not becoming lazy or careless. But it should have a measure.
For man cannot always work, he must also have his rest, without which no
one can last long. Therefore, God has not only ordained the day for
work, but also the night for sleep and rest; and we keep the noon hour
for eating. For God is not a murderer, as is the devil, who wants the
saints of works to fast to death, to pray, to watch. But God has no
pleasure in this; so it is said: Keep moderation in all things, as the
wise man admonishes.

20 This is the other consolation, that we learn the matter well and seek
first the word of God. Whether we seek the same in the wilderness and
suffer lack of it is not the issue. We have a rich Lord who takes care
of our needs and provides for us in a far better way than we can provide
for ourselves. For we can do nothing with our worry. But where Christ
cares, all abundance must be found, even if there were nothing at all,
as can be seen here.

21 The apostles also care, but much in a different way than Christ; they
say, "Whence shall we have bread in the wilderness, that we may satisfy
them?" This is called worrying, but such worrying does not help the
cause. On the other hand, when Christ takes care of the people and
thinks how to provide food for them, although there are only seven
loaves of bread and a few small fish, it is enough to feed four thousand
men, and there are still seven baskets full of loaves left over; not
counting the women and children, there will undoubtedly have been many
of them.

22) Now tell me, is it not true that anyone who could know for certain
that with a few guilders he could reach as far and live as long as a
rich man of ten thousand, would certainly not dispute it?

If he had only one florin, he would not consider himself richer than the
other man with ten thousand florins. But if he wanted to insist and defy
his large pile, the latter would still mock him and say: You have a vain
joy, for though you have much, you have no advantage over me, unless you
count more than I do; otherwise your ten thousand florins must melt away
as soon as my one florin.

(23) How is it, then, that we, who are all Christians, or at least we
all want to be, do not do the same, neither taking comfort in abundance
nor in plenty, and not being afraid of lack, nor being careful about it?
For if we faithfully and diligently adhere to God's word, there shall
be no lack; Christ provides for us, and must follow that we may have
food. For it is not a question of whether we have a little or a little;
it is a question of his blessing. If he adds it to the small supply you
have, not only will you not run out, but the blessing must also
overflow, and more must remain than was there in the beginning.

(24) If we learn this, we will not only have nothing to worry about,
even if there is a shortage, but we will also be able to avoid the
miserliness that otherwise always afflicts us. For we all have the bad
habit of thinking that he who has much may do all the less, and may go
all the further. That's why everyone wants to have a lot, and people
finally get to the point where they ask neither for God nor for people,
if only they can satisfy their avarice and scrape together a lot of good
things.

(25) He that diligently meditated on this miracle would have other
thoughts, and would not be comforted by abundance, nor be dismayed by
want. For he would set his heart and conclude: He who has Christ has
such a steward, who can make much out of little, even everything out of
nothing. But where Christ is not with his blessing, great heaps are
broken down *) and decrease from day to day.

*) to break up, that is, to come apart in fibers.

D. Red.

**[788 2.467-469. seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII, I789-I791.
789]{.underline}**

(26) These seven loaves here and the small fishes may have belonged to
a meal for the Lord himself and his disciples. For since the Lord was in
the habit of spending time with the people for prayer and other things,
the disciples had to take food on such journeys. But since so many
people come to the Lord, and this need arises that they do not have
enough to eat, this supply must serve to feed the whole crowd. As soon
as the Lord takes the seven loaves, breaks them and gives them to the
disciples to present to the people, they visibly grow under his hands,
so that he always gives to the disciples what he has broken, and yet
more remains in his hands than he gives out. He knows this art and
demonstrates it too well to his disciples, who follow his word, but not
sooner, unless there is need and lack. Therefore, whoever desires such a
blessing, do not complain about the lack, that for a time it is bad.
Hold fast to the word and to your profession, according to Christ's
command; then let him take care how he feeds you.

27 For no man hath seen or heard that a Christian died of hunger. They
may be persecuted, imprisoned, and many killed; but if they have first
received the first and rich alms, and have believed the word, they have
all found food, and have been fed. For a Christian shall not be put to
shame, though he have not so good, glorious, and plenty, as the rich men
have. For here things are also bad. The Lord Christ gives his guests a
piece of bread and fish, and a drink of water, and does not set before
them ten dishes, delicious malmsey and various wines, as the rich use to
have in abundance.

28 The Lord also wants his Christians here not to strive for great
things during the short time of their pilgrimage, but to be satisfied
with the little that he has given them. For what more do you want, but
to be able to avoid hunger and keep a healthy body? Be content with
that. If other people have better, let them thank God for it, and be
careful not to get carried away with the abundance.

sin and abuse to their own detriment.

(29) For it is evident that rich men's cakes do not serve everyone,
and that people do not remain healthy for long; that some would rather
have a piece of bread and a fresh drink of water to keep them healthy
than such abundance, since sickness and an unhealthy body must follow.
As is commonly seen in the rich, who seek pleasure more than what is
healthy for the body and serves their needs. That is why they prosper so
much that many of them die of various diseases before their time. On the
other hand, poor people, who must eat and drink what they have for their
necessities, stay fresh and healthy and live many years. And it hardly
serves such bankers right. They could eat and live moderately, make less
of excess, make do with two, or at most three, fairly good meals, so
that they would be full, cheerful, in good spirits and remain merry.
They do not do this, but make too much of the desire, thus harming their
body and life, so that they still become sick and ill in their youth,
and must die before time.

(30) But where are the poor, who cannot have dry bread, and who should
not suffer the rich if they could escape the great expenses and excesses
which they spend on clothing and banqueting, since not only is
everything superfluous, but also many useless things must perish and
perish? For the rich, who are the disciples and followers of the rich
man, Luke 16, have this unkindness about them, that they do not take
what belongs to and serves for splendor, abundance and lust. But if they
should give a poor man a coat, or otherwise help him, they complain, or
do it unwillingly; and if they should give and help the poor abundantly,
they do it unwillingly, and act as if their ruin were upon them.

31 Therefore our Lord God does exceedingly well, either to let it
finally melt away, where they have bathed before in wine, so that
afterwards they have scarcely the good water; or, if they have no lack
of the good, to let them have it.

**790** L. 2, 469-471. on the eighth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1791-1794. **791**

If the rich have their own sicknesses and diseases, they have to suffer
in their bodies, which is more distressing and painful. As you can see,
the rich have their own special afflictions and diseases, ailments,
stones, gout, paralysis and the like. This is because they know how to
care for their bodies so well, and leave the poor, meager people to
suffer hardship; for whom God repays the lack they suffer, even though
they have only dry bread and a drink of water, so that they are still
healthy, cheerful and in good spirits. This is what I wanted to report
here as a reminder, since we hear how the Lord feeds his guests so
briefly, with a piece of bread and a piece of fish.

32 So today's gospel serves this purpose,

That we may learn to know our dear Lord Jesus Christ as a gracious Lord
and Father, who is pleased to help body and soul, and who comes first
with the help we need by sharing his word with us, and thereby teaching
us how to know God and be saved by grace. By grace we shall be saved.
After that, whoever is in need of the He will not leave us alone, but
will add His blessing to our small supply, so that it may prosper and
increase against all the world's reason and thoughts. For such teaching
we should give thanks to God today, and ask that he may provide us with
his spiritual and temporal blessings through Christ, amen.

**On the eighth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 7, 15-23.**

Beware of the false prophets who come to you in sheep's clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. By their fruits ye shall know them.
Can you also gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles? So every
good tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil
fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, and a corrupt tree
cannot bring forth good fruit. Every tree that does not bear good fruit
is cut down and thrown into the fire. Therefore you shall know them by
their fruits. Not all who say to me, "Lord, Lord," will enter the
kingdom of heaven, but those who do the will of my Father in heaven.
Many will say to me in that day, "Lord, Lord, have we not taught in
your name? have we not cast out devils in your name? have we not done
many deeds in your name? Then I will confess to them: I have never known
you; depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.

The Lord preached this sermon at the end of the long sermon on the
mountain, which St. Matthew describes in the 5th, 6th, 7th chapters. And
this is because he knows that where our Lord God builds a church, the
devil builds a shrine or inn with it; or, as it is said to the young
children, when our Lord God took a hole in the ground and made a
beautiful man out of it, the devil wanted to imitate this work and made
toads and snakes.

1533 After *a* and *b and* after Röhrer: held in the house, 1533. D.
Red.

For it has always been so, when right preaching has had its course, that
the devil has mixed false doctrine and heresy in with it. As you can see
in a garden, when you sow something good in it, the weeds grow with it,
and it is difficult to keep the good seed from the weeds and to bring it
up.

2 Because it cannot be otherwise, we must be here on earth under the
devil, who has the world under him and always sows his tares among them:
so the Lord admonishes and warns us in today's gospel, as our faithful
teacher and arch shepherd of our

792 **L. 2.471-473. on the eighth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1794-1797.** 793

Souls, that we should beware and beware of false prophets. As if to say,
"I have given you my word and have faithfully taught you what to do and
how to understand the Ten Commandments correctly, how to pray correctly,
how to fast correctly, how to trust in God, and other things. Now it is
up to you to take care that you are not led away from such teaching. I
warn you, you will not be able to excuse yourselves; for I do not send
you among angels, but among wolves; and I do not sow you among the
wheat, but among the tares. Therefore take heed that ye be not deceived.

(3) Therefore the Lord wills that we hold fast to the word, and not be
led away from it. But what is contrary to the word we are to hate and
flee, as the devil himself. Therefore let no one be safe, nor sleep. For
it will not fail (as said before), where the word is right and pure, the
wolves will not stay outside, but will surely come. As can be seen,
first in the church, then also in secular government and households.
Everywhere the wolf is creeping in, whether he could snatch us from the
word and do us harm. The Christian church has the true, pure Word of
God; the devil cannot leave it at that, and brings in all kinds of
fanatics who bring something new and special about baptism, about the
Lord's Supper, about Christ Himself, and thereby mislead and seduce the
people. And where such enthusiasts are to be found, we, as unruly, rash
people, have the bad habit, as soon as we hear something new, of
bursting at the mouth, falling away from the word, and gawping after
such mobs and enthusiasts.

4 This is where this warning belongs in the first place. As if Christ
should say: The false prophets will not remain outside, but will
certainly come to you, and in addition with a beautiful, glittering
shine, and make you monkey-mouths, so that you will think, you have
never heard a better sermon in your life; will therefore fall, like the
untimely, wormy fruit, when the wind comes in. Then what will be the
fault? Not mine, for I warn you against it; but yourselves, who hear the
word and have it, but do not abide in it.

For if a Christian were diligent, and had no more than the Catechism,
the Ten Commandments, the Faith, the Lord's Prayer, and the words of
the Lord concerning Baptism and the Sacrament of the Altar, he would be
able to defend himself finely against all heresies.

(6) But because we hear the word so diligently, and because we keep
empty hearts that do not keep the word, the devil finds his way into
such empty hearts and leads them into gross and palpable error. The Lord
would like to warn us against this, so that we do not keep such careless
hearts, but consider how we can grasp God's word well and firmly. For
he does not send us among the angels, but among wolves; there it needs
well attention. Whoever then wants to be sure of the matter and not to
err, let him keep my word, says Christ. This is the right light which I
have lighted for you, and the armor, that ye may be able to withstand
the stings of the devil, and to resist him, though he come unto you in
sheep's clothing.

Now this is terrible, and we are in for a great ride, that the devil,
when he comes to us (in his spirits), does not come as a devil, but he
adorns himself as if he were God Himself; as he came to our dear Lord
Christ, saying, "Worship me, and I will give you all the kingdoms of
the world. These were not words for the devil to speak, but belong to
the high majesty, the eternal GOD. For it is he alone whom one should
worship, and he alone is powerful of all the kingdoms of the world, and
gives them according to his pleasure to whom he pleases. Therefore
Christ punishes him, saying, "Arise, Satan." As if to say, Thou
wouldst gladly give thyself up for GOD; but I know thee: thou art the
devil. Therefore we must not look upon the sheep's clothing; otherwise
we would be deceived, and would have to accept and listen to the devil
in God's stead. For, as I have said, he comes to us in his mobs, in his
flocks, and in his heretics: not in a wolf's skin, which is knowable
and loathsome, but in sheep's clothing. For first of all, they lead
God's Word and the Scriptures, boast much of Christ, of God's Spirit,
know all things better than others, even give it with such a

794 **2, 47:^76. on the eighth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
I797-I8M.** 795

They appear to attract many people and do great harm. Moreover, they
lead a strict, seemingly glittering life, so that one would like to
swear that they are holy, that they mean well, and yet they are the
wretched devil. As we see in the case of the Anabaptists, devotees of
the sacraments and others. Wherever the hearts are careless and
unconcerned and do not look carefully at the Word, the devil creeps in
through such spirits' false teachings, like a snake into a man sleeping
in the grass.

Therefore we should diligently accept our Lord Christ's faithful
warning, and not be such muzzlers who can do nothing but keep their
mouths open, always looking for something new. We should hear the word
diligently, hold fast to it, and judge and judge all doctrine according
to the word; then the devil would not be able to do harm so easily.

(9) This is also the case in the secular government, which is also an
example and an illustration of the Christian church. If the rulers are
sure and industrious, if they do not wait for their own office and
command, then the country becomes full of hypocrites. For they trust
here, they trust there, they rely on their officials; they keep such a
house that is probably better. Nevertheless the poor man is neglected
and weighed down; God finally gives an evil blessing to 2c. For it is
not good that lords should command their great matters and affairs to
others and trust everyone, and not take care of the affairs themselves.
They should look into the game themselves, take account themselves, and
believe no further than they see, so they would be the less deceived.

So it is also in housekeeping. If master and wife snore, and leave
everything in the hands of the servants, and put good trust in them,
then it goes according to the common saying: Trauwohl ritt das Pferd
weg. It is true that one should and must trust; for it is a shameful
thing about unfaithful (mistrustful) people, who do nothing good to
anyone: but there should nevertheless also be a measure, so that one
does not trust too much; but watches himself, and by trusting too much,
as commonly happens, does not give the servants cause to sin.

Now the servants should not be safe, but should diligently obey the
command of their rulers, and not let evil company lead them away. For
how can it be when father and mother speak to the child, master and wife
to the servants? Do this; that they let their journeymen and their
companions persuade them to leave that which they have been commanded to
do, and do something else? meanwhile they should go for a walk, play,
carouse, while they are working in the house, doing this and that. But
such loose company does not act as if they meant it badly, they say very
good words; but because they give cause for disobedience, it is the
wicked devil; you should not follow him.

12. many a servant or maid has a good service with honest pious people
who did not like to see or suffer fornication or levity in theirs. But
what has the devil to do through wicked mouths? Here comes one, there
one, and says: What do you show yourself,*) that you let yourself be
locked up and kept hard like this? You could well improve your cause, be
in a place where you would have more pleasure, not have to work so hard
and have better days. With such words a simple-minded man is soon
persuaded, does not think that anyone means him ill, even considers such
honey-sweet mouths good friends, when they are the worst of enemies. For
nothing is more harmful to a young person than to let him have his own
way and not to always encourage and drive him to discipline and work.

(13) So it goes everywhere in all classes that the wolf finds himself
and tears the hearts away from the word. For the devil can neither
tolerate the word in the church, nor a serious disturbance in the
worldly government, nor obedience in the household; but everything that
God has ordered, he must worm out, in the household and worldly
government as well as in the church. For this is God's order and will,
that His word be kept in the church, good order and laws in the
government, and the strictest discipline and obedience in the household.

*) What do you want? That is: What do you want?

D. Red.

796 **L. 2. 476-478. on the eighth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1801-1805. .** 797

The devil gets in the way everywhere, so that he can destroy such a
godly, useful and necessary order. Therefore, we should be careful and
not be sure, for we do not live among the most pious Christians; most of
them are wicked and false, yet they can adorn themselves with the
sheep's clothing, so that the wolf cannot be known.

This is what happens most often and is most dangerous in the church:
there come all the mobs, fanatics and heretics with the pretense that
they care a lot about the salvation of the people, and that they would
like to see God's word pure and the truth promoted. When the poor sheep
see such sheep's clothing, they make themselves believe that it is pure
gold, soon burst out of it and put up with it. For who would not like to
hear God's word and know the truth? But then the Christians should
learn that the devil can name the truth and praise God's word just as
well as the pious Christians. Therefore, they should say: I also want to
hear God's word and the truth with pleasure; but do not trust too much,
but see if it rhymes with my catechism and with the sermon I have heard
so far. Whoever is careful and not only believes, but also sees the
word, is healed and undeceived. But whoever does not, it is impossible
that he should not be deceived.

(15) So it was with Eve in Paradise: the devil came with good, smooth
words, and made our Lord God as pious as if he could not be angered. He
said, "He gave you the whole garden to enjoy; how could he not give you
this one tree, which does not harm you, but can serve to make you wise
like him? These were smooth, sweet words that came to Eve, so that she
fell and forgot the commandment of God. Or if she did not forget it, she
put it into doubt. Then it was also over with her. At the first, when
the devil set upon her, she acted very wisely, and struck the devil away
with the command that God had given her. But when he stopped again and
said, "If God had forbidden them the tree, then he must be an envious,
unfaithful God who would have given them the tree.

not begrudging them to be as wise as he; so she abandoned the word,
broke off the apple, and ate it; by which she and all of us fell into
all unhappiness and eternal death.

(16) For the sake of such a journey, that we also be not deceived by
the devil through his apostles, the Lord warns us here, saying, "Take
heed. As if to say, "If you are deceived, the fault is not mine but
yours. Cause, I have given you my word pure and clear, which shall be
your guard and light to shine before you. Only you look at it, and do
not let this light out of your sight, but hold fast to it. If you hear
someone talking against it, which does not rhyme with it, say: I do not
hear; here is my light, which shines differently for me.

17. *) So God has sufficiently protected us in that he has given us
his word, and warned us to beware of false prophets, and is therefore
well excused. But we are not excused if we do not keep the word and
listen to the cry of the wolf, when we have great need that we should
not do so. For he is a liar and a murderer, who desires nothing to do
but to seduce and strangle.

18. as he soon proved in the beginning in paradise with Adam and Eve,
and threw them with all their descendants into sin, death and wrath of
God. Our merciful God and Father in heaven helped us out of such misery
through His Son, so that we were saved from sin and death. That is why
the enemy is creeping up on us again, to see if he can move us out of
such grace and bring us into the old accident. We must be careful and
faithfully keep our word, otherwise we will be lost.

19 Let this be said in general of this gospel for bad, simple teaching,
because the Lord tells us to beware of false prophets and to be careful
to stay with the word and not be led away from it, but to flee
everything contrary to the word as the devil himself. This would be
enough. For, as we have heard, he who

*) From a sermon preached in the house in 1532.

[798 ' **L. 2.478-481. on the eighth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1805-1808.** 799]{.underline}

follows this light and does not let it out of his sight, he is
recovered.

(20) But the Lord does not leave it at such common teaching, but gives
his Christians two rules to follow, so that they will not be in trouble.
The first is that they should not let the sheep's clothing deceive
them, nor should they place their judgments after it. For as the wolves,
when they are hungry, bark and howl like dogs, if they can deceive
cattle or men with it: so do the false prophets, coming with a delicious
appearance, pretending great holiness 2c. Let no one turn to them. This
is the one rule that is very important.

(21) First of all, this is the sheep's clothing in which the false
spirits clothe themselves and adorn themselves, so that no one comes who
confesses that he wants to deceive the people and preach
unrighteousness. They come with good, smooth, gentle words, pretending
that they are driven by God's zeal and that they no longer want to see
the misery of the poor people, that they have been kept from their
virtue for so long. The common man is not accustomed to such words from
bad boys, and for this reason he soon bursts, and considers it pure
sanctity what such sneaks say and do. But a Christian should learn (as
reported above) that the devil does not come as a devil, but as if he
were God. So these wolves do not come like wolves, but put on sheepskin,
so that whoever does not know them thinks they are silly pious sheep.

(22) After this also the sheep's clothing is called the office or
profession and the great, glorious titles. As we have learned, then,
that pope and bishops have done the most harm with it, and still that
they have vaunted their office, and for that reason have kept their
statutes. For even though their life is so annoying that they can
neither deceive nor catch anyone with it, it still has a very great
appearance that they sit in public church office. Just as the Lord says
of the Pharisees and the scribes that they sit in Moses' chair. And we
ourselves cannot take away such glory from them; we must confess that
they have the office, and the

Office be right in themselves, if they only needed it right.

(23) Therefore, when the pope and bishops boast of their ministry and
want to be heard as those who cannot err, a Christian should be warned
and say: I know the office well, it is a true sheep's clothing. But
Christ warns me not to be satisfied with it when I see the sheep's
clothing, but to look around to see if there is not a wolf hiding under
the sheep's clothing, that is, if there is not an ungodly, wicked
wretch in charge of the ministry, who wants to introduce false doctrine
through the appearance of his ministry.

24 So it is also a sheep's clothing, that the false prophets outwardly
lead a beautiful appearance and glittering life. As can be seen in the
Anabaptists, there is not a trace of them, their clothes, food and drink
are poor and bad, they deal much with God's word, pray much, are
patient in suffering, not vengeful. Such things are not wrong in
themselves, and it would be desirable that all people were like them.
But that one should therefore consider their teaching right and follow
them, Christ says: Beware of them. For under the sheep's clothing you
will find a wolf, viz: that the Anabaptists, like the monks, put their
comfort in their own righteousness and works; that they prove God false
in his promise, because they allow themselves to be baptized again, and
thus nullify the first and right baptism; teach unjustly about the
Lord's Supper, as if one received nothing there but bread and wine, and
impose unnecessary burdens on Christians; tear up the household, say it
is wrong to have something of one's own, despise worldly authority as
an unchristian state; thus turn back and destroy all three of God's
institutions, namely, the church, worldly government and household
government. Such a harmful and shameful wolf is under the fine, smooth
fur, that the Anabaptists lead such a beautiful appearance in the
outward life.

(25) The life of monks and nuns has also had such an appearance that
the whole world has been fooled and deceived with it. But God's word
exposes such deceit publicly, so that one sees the wolf under the
sheep's clothing.

[800 **L. 2, 481-483. on the eighth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1808-1811.** 801]{.underline}

26 So also the great gifts are a sheep's clothing, since the Lord says
here that some will prophesy in his name, cast out devils and do great
miracles. For a Christian should also beware lest he for this reason
plump himself, cling to such people, and without diligent attention
accept and believe everything they say; but he should especially watch
the word, whether there is not a wolf under the sheep's clothing.

27 This is the first rule, that we should not let the sheep's wool
deceive us. For though the words be good, the ministry right, the
outward life without offense, and beside them great, peculiar, and not
common gifts; yet one may be deceived and defrauded: that under the good
word there is a harmful poison, under the right ministry a dangerous
abuse, under the glittering life a deceit, and under the great gifts a
false heart. Therefore, as soon as you see the sheep's clothing, think:
It is not good to be safe here; for Christ himself warns that even
wolves put on sheep's clothing and hide under it. Therefore I must
uncover the sheep's clothing and look down. Now how does this happen?
So:

028 Now this is the other rule which the Lord giveth, that one should
leave off outward appearances, and look after the fruits. "By their
fruits," saith he, "ye shall know them." Gives it a likeness. No one
is so foolish among you, when he sees a thorn or thistle bush in the
field, as to go and see if he can find grapes or figs on it. No, one
looks for such fruits at another tree, which is not so prickly and
prickly. It is the same in the garden. When a tree hangs full of apples
and pears, everyone who sees it says: Oh, what a good tree that is!
Again, if there is nothing on a tree, or if it is all wormy, broken, and
naughty, everyone says, "The tree is worthless, only cut down and
thrown into the oven, and a better one put in its place. This art, saith
the LORD, which ye also use against false prophets, ye shall not lack
it, be the appearance what it may; if twenty sheepskins lay upon the
wolf, ye

yet know him, that he deceive you not.

29 What then is the fruit of a true prophet or preacher, that he may be
known to be not a wolf, but a godly little sheep? The outward life, the
title and the office, special gifts and graces are not. For the Lord
himself testifies, as experience also teaches, that people are often
deceived and seduced by these things. But the true fruit, as the Lord
says at the end, is to do the will of the Father who is in heaven.

(30) Notice here that the Lord does not say of all Christians in
general, but of the prophets. It is true that all Christians should do
the will of the Father, so that they may be saved. But "the will of the
Father" does not only mean that one does the Ten Commandments and obeys
God in this way; for since we cannot fully do this in this life, it is
impossible for us to boast that we have done the will of the Father and
therefore will never enter heaven: but the will of the Father means, as
Christ says, Joh. 6:40: "This is the will of him that sent me, that
whosoever seeth the Son, and believeth on him, should have everlasting
life; and I will raise him up at the last day. This is the only way that
all of us, preachers and listeners, should go at the same time, if we
want to be saved in any other way. Now the Lord speaks here especially
of the preachers or prophets, whose right and proper fruit is nothing
else than that they should diligently recite this will to the people,
and teach them how God is gracious and merciful, who has no pleasure in
the sinner's death, but desires that he should live; and that God
Himself has shown such mercy in that He allowed His only begotten Son to
become man.

Whoever therefore accepts him and believes in him, that is, whoever
comforts himself that God will be gracious to him for the sake of His
Son, forgive sin and make him eternally blessed, 2c.: whoever preaches
this sermon purely, and thus points people to Christ as the one mediator
between God and us, he, as a preacher, does the will of God. And this

**802** D- 2.483-485. on the ninth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1811-1813.1824. **803**

is the right fruit, by which no one can be deceived or seduced. For if
it were possible, if the devil himself preached thus, such preaching
could not be false nor lying; whoever believed it would have that which
it promised him.

(32) After this fruit, which is the noblest and most certain, which
cannot be deceived, others also follow, namely, that life also rhymes
well with such doctrine and is not contrary to it. But such fruit is to
be considered true fruit when the first fruit, namely, the doctrine of
Christ, is present first. For sometimes doctrine cannot be unjust,
though life be vexatious and evil. For this reason we must look
primarily not at the life, but at the doctrine; so we will be able to
know finely whether he is a wolf or a sheep who comes to us in sheep's
clothing.

(33) If anyone wishes to judge the pope and his church, let him begin
with the first fruit, and he will find that the doctrine of beatitude
and forgiveness of sins is based not only on Christ but also on all
kinds of works, monastic vows, the observance of mass, indulgences, and
the merit of the saints. This is a shameful, poisonous, stinging thorn
that cannot be found on any fig tree or vine. On the other hand, look at
life: there you will find that the pope and his whole crowd have
withdrawn from all proper obedience. They are bitter enemies of the Word
and of Christians, persecute, torture and strangle them wherever they
can, live in abominable fornication, work in the fields of

They eat nothing and eat the church's goods for nothing. In sum, there
is not one good drop in all their lives.

34 Where therefore the evil fruits both beat together, that doctrine and
life are useless, think that it is a thorn and a pricking thistle,
whereon thou shouldest not seek grapes nor figs; and if thou shouldest
support thyself to do so, that thou shouldest not only not find them,
but thou shouldest also prick and rend thyself upon them. It is not
because the vine has such a rough, rough bark, and the fig tree such a
weak, unfit wood, but the thorn has such a beautiful smooth bark and
such a lovely, tasting,*) beautiful blossom and rose. It is the fruit
that matters, not the external appearance. Learn to do your calculations
according to that, and nowhere else.

(35) But what punishment shall befall such false teachers the Lord
shows by the similitude of the rotten tree, that it should be cut down
and cast into the fire. Just as it is with false teachers, so shall it
be with their disciples if they do not hear the right teaching or bear
fruit.

Therefore let us keep the word of God before our eyes, let us hear it
diligently and remember it well, and let us live our lives according to
it, so that we may bear good fruit and learn to know and flee all false
teaching. May our dear Lord Christ, through his Holy Spirit, grant this
to us all, amen.

*) smelling [*b*]. D. Red.

**On the ninth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 16, 1-9.**

And he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man, which
had a steward, which was reproached before him, as if he had destroyed
his goods. And he challenged him, and said unto him, How hear I of thee?
Give account of your stewardship, for you cannot be a steward
henceforth. The steward said to himself: What shall I do? My lord takes
the office from me; I do not like to dig, so I am ashamed to beg. I know
well what I will do, when

*) Held in the house, 1533.

804 L 2, 485-487. on the ninth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII, 1824-1828.
805

I am now set apart from the ministry, that they may take me into their
houses. And he called all the debtors of his lord unto him, and said
unto the first, How much owest thou unto my lord? And he said, An
hundred tons of oleum. And he said unto him, Take thy letter, and sit
down, and write fifty. Then he said to the other: How much do you owe?
And he said, An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take
thy letter, and write eighty. And the Lord praised the unjust steward,
because he had done wisely. For the children of this world are wiser
than the children of light in their generation. And I say also unto you,
Make friends with the unrighteous Mammon, that, when ye now offer, they
may receive you into the everlasting tabernacles.

Today's gospel is a sermon about good works, and especially against
avarice, that one should not misuse money and goods, but help poor,
needy people with them. As the Lord says at the end in clear words:
"Make friends of unrighteous mammon", that is, help poor people with
your money and goods. For the word "mammon" in German means as much as
wealth.

(2) The Lord puts this teaching into a simile, as he likes to do
(because it is easier to remember), and says, "We should send ourselves
three ways, like this unjust steward. He saw, because he was deposed
from office, that he would need the help of other people; therefore he
needed his office, because it was still in his hands, so that he left
half to one debtor and the fourth part to another, so that they might
remember such friendship and also help him when he needed it.

3 Now it is not the Lord's opinion that we should do wrong to one
another, and cheat one another out of what is his, and give alms out of
it. No, but his opinion is that we should follow this steward in
prudence, diligence and prudence, turning money and goods to enjoy them
in a different and better life; that we should make friends with our
mammon, as the steward made friends with the unjust mammon.

4 Here we are to learn first of all why the Lord gives the name to
mammon, that he calls it an unjust mammon. For unjust goods should be
given back, and no good should be done to others with them, nor should
alms be given. As Isaiah says in chapter 61, v. 8: "I," says the Lord,
"am he that loveth righteousness, and hateth robbery or stolen
offerings." This is said so much: Who sacrifices, gives alms and wants
to do a service to God with the money,

Let him do it from his own, which he has acquired with God and a good
conscience, or be satisfied. For one should not do anything else with
someone else's property, except to give it back to the one from whom it
was unreasonably taken. Now how is it fitting that the Lord should say
here: from unrighteous mammon one should make friends, that is, give
alms from it and help the poor? Answer: The Lord does not call mammon or
goods unjust because they are unjustly gained (for, as I said, unjustly
gained goods are to be restored), but because no man has a right need of
mammon, except the right, pious Christians who keep the fear of God and
the commandments of God. The others need mammon for this purpose,
according to the common saying: "Good makes you brave," they flaunt,
bank, live in luxury, and let the poor pass by unharmed, whom they could
well help. That is why wealth and riches must have and bear the shameful
name that they are called unjust.

(5) What pleasure God has in such abuse can be seen in the saying of
Ezekiel, where he says Cap. 16:49: "Behold, this was the iniquity of
thy sister Sodoma: High-mindedness and all fullness, and good peace,
which she and her daughters had. But to the poor and needy they would
not willingly have given their hand; but were proud, and did abominable
things in my sight." There it is, peace and having all sufficiency,
that one does not know what to do with it because of great courage, and
yet one does not help poor people. That is the pity, and yet the common
custom in the world, since the disgraceful name comes from the estate,
that it is gained as honestly as it always can, that it is called an
unrighteous mammon, a damned money, a stolen good: not because of its
kind and nature (for what can the poor penny, florin, jochimsthaler,
bread, meat, etc.), but because of its value?

806 **L. 2, 487-489. on the ninth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1828-1831.** 807

Fish, wine, and other things in addition?), but of the man half, which
does not need it quite.

(6) Therefore, the teaching of today's Gospel is primarily that we
should not be stingy, but that we should make good use of what God has
given us and make friends with it, so that when we die and are in want,
that is, when we have to leave everything behind, we will find friends
there who will take us into the eternal dwellings. For whatever good we
do to poor people here, whatever friendship and charity we show, these
works will not only be witnesses on the last day that we have kept
ourselves brotherly and Christian, but will also be rewarded or paid
for. Then one will come and boast: Lord, he has given me a coat, a
florin, a loaf of bread, a drink of water in time of need. Yes, as
Christ says in Matthew 25, he himself, the Lord, will come forward and
say before his heavenly Father, all the angels and saints, what good we
have done him, and how we have thereby proved our faith. These friends
will do it and help us to heaven, if we have to live in want and leave
everything we have on earth.

(7) Whoever follows this teaching and gives money and goods, which God
has given him, to the poor, who cannot gain their own bread, for
taxation and help, would make a right mammon out of the wrong one,
because he would turn it from abuse to the right use. For this is by no
means the case with Christians, that they want to use money and goods
only for themselves, for their splendor, honor, pleasure and pride. As
can be seen in the case of citizens and peasants, and the common saying
that such felons carry in their mouths: I have grain and bread for
myself; if you also want to have it, get it for yourself. This means an
unjust grain and bread, an unjust mammon, which they use for sins and
their eternal ruin, when they could well use it and serve and please
God, if they served their neighbor with it.

8 But if some have unrighteous mammon and do not help others with it:
Dear, what will be the unrighteousness of those who steal and take in
addition? As there are almost all hands

merchants and traders, servants and maids, since one always translates,
misrepresents, deceives and lies to the other. They will not only not
make friends, but many enemies, all of whom will accuse them on the last
day before God's court and judgment, because they suffer injustice
here, keep quiet about it and call such enemies grace-junkies.

9 But in that day it will be different; they will open their mouths and
say, "Lord, there was a great time, and this man had many boxes of
grain and cellars full of wine; but he would not have given out a grain
or a drop, because he would have been paid in cash as he wished. He has
been my landlord, has increased me from year to year with the interest.
From him I have taken my bread, beer, meat, fish; but there has seldom
happened to me and my kind the right weight and measure, nor otherwise
the same. Yes, in that day not only the saints, who have suffered
hardship and lack here, and the Lord Christ Himself, but also all
creatures that have ever had and enjoyed them, will lament and cry out
for eternity over their necks, that they have misused them so badly to
their eternal harm and damnation. How do you think, you wretched servant
of idols and mammon, that when this judgment comes upon you, you will
stand? For if those who do not come through without punishment, who do
not harm others with increases, but do not give to the poor, how do you
think it will be for those who not only do not give, but who, as real
thieves and robbers of stools, make a fuss with their avarice, usury,
stealing and robbery, and weigh down the dear poor, just so that they
scrape together a lot of money and become rich, and yet have no
conscience about it?

(10) This is the sermon against stinginess, that he who wants to be a
Christian should not always open his hand to take, and to give so hard
that not a penny drips from it; but he should gladly, willingly and
charitably help the needy and give where he can. This means serving God,
who will finally reward you. Whereas the

[808 **2.2, 489-492. ninth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII, 1831-1839.**
809]{.underline}

Misers and usurers, who can do nothing but scrape up everything for
themselves, give nothing or even meagerly to no one, serve the wretched
devil, who will also reward them.

11. but especially all the saints will cry out over them in that day
and say: This farmer, citizen, merchant, nobleman 2c. could do nothing
but scratch, scrape and scrape; I would have needed his help often, but
he would not have helped me with a word, let alone that he should have
helped me with money and goods 2c. The Lord makes such a prosopopeiam
here, that he makes it so before the eyes, how the poor saints will
stand before the Lord Christ on that day, and complain about the rich,
meager felts.

(12) On the other hand, the rich, who have been mild with their goods
and have gladly helped others, will be greatly honored, will find many
friends (and above all the Lord Christ), who will praise their good
deeds. From this we are to learn to begin with right earnestness, to be
pious, mild, kind, charitable, 2c., thus proving our faith, and [those,
if we have done good,*] may have its witnesses before Christ at the
last day, that we have abstained from shameful vice, which does no more
than scratch at itself, let others besides have it as they will.

13. **) Now it says here: The Lord has praised the unjust steward.
This must not be interpreted as if he should put up with us doing wrong
to other people, but only praises speed and prudence, and wants us to
use the same earnestness and diligence in a good matter that this
steward used in an evil matter, for his own benefit and to the detriment
of his Lord.

14 As when thou seest a lewd woman adorning herself most beautifully for
the purpose of fornication, poor gold, silk, and silk cannot help but be
used for fornication. But nevertheless I can praise it and say to you:
Do you also see how this woman knows how to use her fornication?

*) [*c*] D. Red.

**) Held publicly 1533; after *a b c*: 1532.

D. Red.

send? Why do you not also need such diligence to please your bridegroom,
our dear Lord Christ? With these words I do not praise fornication, but
diligence, care and prudence, that we should use it in good, honorable,
honest things.

(15) We must also pay attention to the fact that Christ speaks a very
terrible word here, when he says: "The children of this world are wiser
than the children of light in their generation. This does not need much
interpretation; we see it before our eyes every day, unfortunately more
than is good, how the world searches so exceedingly precisely when it
sees its advantage, and does not let any effort or work be put off. How
much trouble, worry and danger have the shrub thieves who make do in
hedges? They have neither day nor night to rest, if they are in danger
of being killed by a blade or a rope; nor do they love their devilish
life, so that they cannot tire of it. So a thief, a fencher, an
adulterer, all of them lead a hard life and a hard order, need all kinds
of cunning and trickery, intrigue and advantage, so that they can carry
out their mischievousness and fornication; and they get mad beyond
measure, until they give the devil his joyful service.

(16) On the other hand, we see how the children of light, that is, the
true Christians, are lazy, discontented, careless and industrious in the
things of God, knowing that God is well pleased with them and that they
may enjoy them for eternity. So the good comes to them sourly. Thus,
according to the common saying, it is twice as sour for the wicked to
deserve hell, since they serve the devil so diligently, and do and
suffer everything for his sake, as the godly do for heaven; and this is
well said, if one understands it correctly. God must pull his Christians
by the hair and force them to do what they are supposed to do.

(17) Therefore this is a very fine similitude which the Lord here
holds up to us. If we are Christians and want to do what we are supposed
to do, we must not look into the books; every man must look into his own
house, like evil children, evil servants, maidservants, 2c. on evil,
mischievousness and everything that is dear to the devil,

810 **L. 2, 492-494. on the ninth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1839-1842.** 811

are so sweaty, trained and ready. There you will feel such great
diligence, that people are so cursed with mischievousness that they do
not know how to be sufficiently nasty and wanton. Then learn that you do
such things against God and His Word, and to the good of your salvation,
and take a useful lesson and example from such wickedness. Remember, can
the peasant, the burgher, the merchant, the sheriff, this woman, maid,
2c. serve the devil with such diligence, and let no effort be spared:
why would I not also serve my Lord, whom I am to enjoy for eternity, in
this way? They run, as if they were senseless, after their eternal harm
and destruction: how am I then so sleepy and lazy, since it concerns my
soul's bliss, that God must still drag me to it with my hair? I should
spit at myself, so that I do not crawl to heaven, since those run and
run to hell!

18. But especially the children of the world set a fine example to the
children of light in the case the Lord says here. For behold one whom
covetousness hath rightly possessed, thou shalt find that he hath no
rest day nor night from his own thoughts; all his care and mind is for
money. If he finds an empty corner in the house, he makes a little room
or a little shop out of it, so that he can take an interest from it; now
he makes this trade, soon another, and tries which one will bring the
most profit. In sum, he leaves not a penny behind, and takes no trouble
nor work where he sees money.

(19) Then we should learn that as a miser takes care of money, so we
also take care of eternity with seriousness. But where will you find a
Christian who does so? who rejoices when he finds a poor person whom he
can help with ten florins, more or less, according to his fortune and
that need; as a rich usurer rejoices when he knows how to make a great
profit with his money? Here everyone runs to, and would like to bring
the hundred to ten, twenty or more guilders.

20. but what is that against the usury, which our money shall certainly
bear, if

we help the poor with it? For thus saith Solomon: "He that hath mercy
on the poor lendeth to God by usury." O how a certain debtor, o how a
faithful payer we would have, if only we ourselves wanted! But the devil
will not let us believe such things and earnestly seek such rich usury,
which brings more than the main sum. That is why it is right for us,
because we prefer usury with men than with God, that not only great,
horrible sin, but also great accident and misfortune is involved, and we
lose body and soul with the shameful mammon.

Therefore Christ decides rightly and says that the children of the world
are much more diligent and clever than his children. For thus it is
found in the work, that the devil hath a hundred ministries with his
own, whereas Christ hath scarcely one. What shall we do about it? We
cannot change it, for the world will not let us tell it. We may preach,
and always persist with punishments, threats, and admonitions, if we
could free some of the world's children from the devil's snares; We
may also confidently promise the lazy, careless Christians, yes, all of
us, that we may take an example of such diligence, which the world needs
in the service of the devil, that we also practice good, as the children
of Adam practice evil, if we may obtain a little of such an example;
especially because we have the advantage (no matter how difficult it may
be) that we are children of light.

(22) If we keep this name, that we belong to the light, though we are
not so industrious, not so clever, as the children of the world, there
is no need but that we do something, and are thus found to have begun to
be among the least of the company that is called "children of light.

(23) But let no man suppose that we shall bring it where the children
of the world bring it in their generation. It would be well if we were
far ahead of them, because we have the promise that we will receive the
eternal crown; but there are too many obstacles in our way. Nevertheless

[812 **L. 2, 494-497. on the ninth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1842-1845.** 813]{.underline}

We are to be diligent to continue from day to day in discipline,
patience, meekness, gentleness, mercy, and other Christian virtues. For
if we are and remain only in lifting up and on the right way, the step,
however slow and narrow it may be, will be fine for us to follow. But we
must not let ourselves think that we have even taken the wrong path.

24 Our consolation, then, is that where we thus begin, God will not
judge us like the children of the world, who surely run to hell and get
angry; but He will say to us in all grace: You should have served me
more faithfully and been more diligent, because you are a child of
light; but it did not happen. Therefore I must cover it with the mantle
called grace and forgiveness of sins. This must be thrown into our
lives, yes, drawn up above, so that we walk under it, as under the free,
wide sky. So we will still find a friend or two there, but especially
the right friend who can give heaven and make us blessed, our dear Lord
Jesus Christ.

(25) This is the lesson of today's gospel, that we should learn to
deal rightly with unrighteous mammon and make friends with it, that is,
serve people with it; just as this steward made friends with other
people's money.

(26) Here it is asked how such a doctrine rhymes with the doctrine of
faith. And especially the papists make much ado about it, pointing out
that one can earn heaven by works, but faith alone does not do it; for
the Lord says here, "The friends will take you into the eternal
tabernacles. Although they are not worthy to be told of these or other
questions (for they do not accept them, but blaspheme and persecute more
and more), we will nevertheless, for the sake of the pious, briefly
answer such a question.

First, the papists themselves must confess that the friends the Lord
speaks of here are people who live with and around us. For how else
could we give them?

On the other hand, they must also confess this: Because these friends
are human beings like us, they cannot give heaven. For God alone, as the
right householder, is mighty in heaven. Why then does the Lord say,
"Make friends of the unrighteous mammon, so that when you offer, they
may take you into the eternal mansions"? How can this be? We are to
take the interpretation from the words of Christ, Matth. 25, where he
says that he will boast at the last day what we have done good to our
brothers here on earth, that it has happened to him, and that he will
give us eternal life 2c. These words show you who is the right friend
who wants to give heaven, namely, Christ. The poor beggars, whom we help
with a florin or a penny here on earth, will not do so; whether they can
serve and benefit us again with their intercession, prayer and other
things.

(28) Therefore, the answer to this question is whether we can buy
heaven and eternal life by almsgiving. This is to be answered soon. Paul
says: "Whatever does not come from faith is sin", Rom. 14, 23.
Therefore it must follow that God has no pleasure in the alms of
unbelievers, much less will he give them heaven and eternal life. But
those who believe in Christ and prove their faith with works, their
works are pleasing to God for the sake of faith. God also wants to pay
or reward such works in that life. But it does not follow from this that
eternal life is given for the sake of works, which alone is promised to
him who believes in Christ; as Christ very often testifies: "He who
believes in me shall never see death." "I am the way, the truth, and
the life." "GOD gave his Son, that whosoever believeth in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life. "2c.

This report is certain and thorough. For there is the judgment of St.
Paul: "What does not come from faith is sin. Therefore, if almsgiving
is to be a work pleasing to God, faith in Christ must first be present.
The same faith brings with it eternal life and receives forgiveness.

814 L. 2, 497,498. 3, 1. on the tenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
184S-1850. 815

and makes all our doings pleasing to God, even though they are frail and
imperfect in themselves; and God will reward them in the life to come.
As Christ says in Matthew 25, and as Paul says: "That the sufferings
and afflictions of Christians may be paid for in the life to come, and
that they may be refreshed in return.

(30) Now that Christ says, "Make friends of unrighteous mammon, so
that when you give, they may take you into the eternal tabernacles,"
the words can do no more than this, because if we are disciples of
Christ and do good works, God will pay for those good works in that
life. But what does Paul say? If they are to be good works, they must
come from faith. And Christ says that it is through faith that we come
to forgiveness of sins and eternal life. You must believe such sayings
as well as this one, that they are true and not lies.

(31) But how is it to be put together? Nothing else, but that through
faith in Christ we have forgiveness of sins and eternal life; and that
God, for the sake of such faith, will be pleased with our almsgiving and
other good works, and will pay and repay us abundantly in that life; so
that, although it is a sore matter for us to serve God and do good
works, we may be all the more willing and glad to do so, for the sake of
the hope that is set before us in heaven; as Paul says to the
Colossians, Cap. 1:5. 1, 5. This is the right and proper understanding
of this saying, and correct, thorough answer to the question of good
works. May God impart His grace to us for the sake of His Son Christ
Jesus, and through the Holy Spirit awaken our hearts in such a way that
such faithful, beautiful promises and admonitions may also bear fruit in
us, and we may live our lives according to them, and finally be saved,
amen.

**On the tenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 19:41-48.**

And when he was come nigh, he looked upon the city, and wept over it,
and said, If thou knewest, thou wouldest consider in this thy time what
is for thy peace. But now it is hid from thine eyes. For the time will
come upon thee, that thine enemies shall make a siege against thee, and
against thy children with thee, and shall besiege thee, and be afraid in
every place, and shall drag thee, and shall not leave one stone upon
another, because thou hast not known the time wherein thou art
afflicted. And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that
sold and bought therein, and said unto them: It is written: My house is
a house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves. And he taught
daily in the temple. But the chief priests, and the scribes, and the
chief of the people, sought after him to destroy him, and found not what
to do for him: for all the people adhered unto him, and heard him.

1. Christians should diligently remember this gospel, so that they may
learn to fear God from it. For it is one of the most terrible gospels in
Luke; for this reason it should go to our hearts, so that we never
forget it. For here we hear what a great wrath is

*) Held in the house, 1532 and 1534.

and earnestness has fallen upon Jerusalem. From this we certainly
conclude: He who wants to be secure in his wickedness and continue in
sins should not take it into his head that he will escape punishment.
For if God has not spared the excellent, highly gifted city, because it
has had God's word, and yet has not reformed, then only think of every-

**[816 L.3.1-4. on the tenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII, 1850-1853.
817]{.underline}**

man, and at times desist from sins and improve himself; otherwise the
punishment and wrath will certainly not remain outside.

(2) Now the wrath and woe that has come upon this city and people is
so great that the Lord Christ himself is moved to the heart and weeps
bitterly over it, that the beautiful city should perish and be torn
apart so miserably that not one stone should be left upon another, and
wishes, "Oh Jerusalem! If you knew, and believed such future misery to
come upon you, you would certainly not be so sure, but would also weep,
and consider what serves your peace, and pray that God would be merciful
to you.

Although the Lord speaks of Jerusalem alone, he wants to warn and
threaten all those who have the word of God and yet hear it in vain and
despise it, that they should not be sure or rely on it as if God were
giving it to them. No, the punishment will be found, as God lives.
Therefore, one should beware of all sins, but especially of the one that
is called despising God's word or the time of the visitation, that is,
hearing the sermon, and yet not reforming, but continuing in sin
forever, preaching and saying whatever one wants. The punishment for
such sin certainly does not remain outside, although it is stopped for a
while.

4 In this gospel we are given a special example of God's terrible
judgment of His most beloved and holy city Jerusalem and His own people,
which city was our dear Lord's own house and hearth, and the people His
own household. For Jerusalem was like half a heaven, where God Himself
dwelt with His angels, where all divine services were held, where almost
all the patriarchs lived and had their burial, and finally where Christ,
the Son of God, Himself walked, died, was buried, rose again and gave
the Holy Spirit. So that this city is so heaped with holiness that it
has not been like it in the whole world, nor will be like it until the
last day. Nevertheless, all this is unseen, since they do not accept
God's word.

When the Jews did not want to follow it, our Lord God kept his word so
firmly that his dearest city had to be devastated in the most horrible
way. How much less will he give to other cities that cannot hold a
candle to Jerusalem, and to other peoples who do not belong to him as
closely as the Jews, who were his blood friends.

(5) Therefore, in this example, notice God's anger, and beware of
despising the word, lest we say, as we commonly do, "God will not be so
angry, he will not punish so severely. For if he has caused the holy
city Jerusalem, his most precious treasure on earth, to be torn apart so
that not one stone was left upon another, so that the Jews heard the
gospel and did not improve, you must not think that he will give it to
us if we also lie in the same sin. For Jerusalem is so far gone that it
could not be said that a house stood there.

6) But God let this terrible punishment happen at that time, when the
Jewish people had gathered in crowds to Jerusalem for the Easter feast,
and almost thirty times a thousand *) people (as the histories testify)
were there. For God intended to kindle a great fire, therefore He
brought the fires all in heaps. When he had gathered them together like
a great funeral pyre, yes, like a forest, he led the Romans over them,
so that they set it on fire and burned it. Josephus says that from the
time of the siege until the city was conquered, ten times a hundred
thousand were slain and died of pestilence, and seven and ninety
thousand were taken captive. They were so despised and worthless that
thirty of them were sold for a shilling. So Christ also had to be
smelled, whom they had sold for thirty pieces of silver.

7 Now this is the miserable and pitiful punishment that God has
inflicted on His people, which He brought out of Egypt with such great
glory and miraculous signs, which He placed in the land of Canaan, which
He had been their father, and which He has destroyed.

*) one hundred thousand [*a b*] D. Red.

**818 L.3, 4-7.** On the tenth Sunday after Trinity. **W. XIII,
1853-1856. 819**

spoke and dealt kindly with them. But because they despised his word and
did not want to follow him, he let such wrath and terrible punishment
pass over them 2c.

(8) The Lord sees such sorrow, that it is not far off, and weeps for
it, saying, If thou knewest, thou wouldest have considered in this thy
time what was for thy peace. But now it is hid from thine eyes."
Therefore you go safely, as if there were no need for you. But it will
not remain so long, it will have to break; and is already before the
hand, without that it is still hidden and you do not see it.

(9) Here it may occur to one why our Lord God hides the punishment?
Why does he not let it go immediately? Answer: He does it to prove his
patience, and to see if we will mend our ways and seek mercy. For if he
should strike us with thunder and lightning as soon as we deserve it,
none of us could live seven years. That is why he keeps the punishment
to himself, to give us time and space to mend our ways. This is fitting
for God, who thereby praises his mercy toward us. The devil, however, is
an angry spirit, he will not do it; if he could beat you to death with a
straw, he would do it, and would not tarry long. But God is merciful,
that is why he wants to draw out the punishment, but not let it go at
all.

(10) This makes people sure that not only do they not improve, but the
longer they stay the worse they become. As you can see: An adulterer, a
usurer, a thief, because the punishment does not come as soon as
possible, makes himself believe that there is no need for a long time,
that he may well atone for his lust. But beware, do not let yourself be
seduced or deceived. For here you hear that God may hold back and hide
the punishment, but that is not why it remains outside. Therefore, turn
back at times, repent and improve yourself. This is what Christ means
here when he says: "But now it is hidden from your eyes"; as if he
should say: Do not be deceived that the punishment is hidden. You will
kill me and shed my blood, as you did with other prophets before me. I
will keep silent, let it happen and suffer it. This is what makes you
think that it is

will always go on like this and probably remain unpunished. For this
reason, no one is serious about becoming more pious and better. But
beware, you are not exempt from punishment. If you could be persuaded to
believe it, you would think about escaping the punishment. But you do
not believe it; that is why you go so safely, let the time of your
visitation, in which you will be warned and you could come back to
grace, rush by, are safe and do not improve. This is the very sin for
which God's wrath will overtake you and hasten you.

(11) Study diligently and notice what God considers to be the greatest
sin, which He can least tolerate nor suffer, namely, that His people did
not recognize the time of His visitation. For the Lord is silent here
about all other sins, and remembers only this, that they went safely
there and not only did not turn away from the prophets' admonition and
threat, but also persecuted them and shed much innocent blood, until, as
the Scripture says, Jerusalem became full of blood here and there (just
as Germany today sins horribly with manifold persecution of the Word and
its servants). Alongside this sin, adultery, fornication, usury,
avarice, stealing, indulging, drinking and the like went on with power.

(12) Christ says here that I have punished such iniquity with the
word, and have taught you to be godly and to amend your ways. For this
cause I sent my prophets, John and my apostles beforehand; indeed, I
myself appeared, preached, performed miraculous signs and did everything
that might serve to correct you. Now all other sins, great and many as
they are, should not harm you, but be forgiven and remembered no more
for eternity; Jerusalem should stand well and remain unchallenged by the
enemy: if only you knew the time of your visitation. For I come to you
not with the sword, not with the club, but meekly and a Savior. I preach
and cry, Repent, amend your ways, and be godly. Hear and follow before

820 **3,7-9. On the tenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, i8S6-i8ss.** 821

the wrath comes with power. So I seek you out.

(13) Yes, it will not end there. You make all your sin greater by not
wanting to recognize, accept or suffer the visitation. That is why, as
the saying goes, "He who cannot be advised cannot be helped. What devil
would want to be the barber of the sick person, who would take the razor
out of his hand and stab him, the master, in the body? This is exactly
how you Jews deal with our Lord God. He lets you offer forgiveness of
sins through me, wants to be your merciful God, gladly forgetting and
forgiving everything: only that you still stop sinning and accept his
word. But you go to me, blaspheme me, say: I have the devil, call my
preaching heresy, want to put me on the cross on top of it, will not be
satisfied sooner, you have done it. But that is the devil, when God not
only wants to forgive sins and be merciful, but also wants to give
great, high gifts, so that one turns his back on him and blasphemes his
grace in the most horrible way. If it comes to that, I can no longer
hold on, the punishment must come. For where one cannot suffer
forgiveness of sins and God's grace, there is neither counsel nor help.

14 And this is the main cause that the wrath of God is so exceedingly
great and terrible. For just as the Jews would neither see nor hear His
word, so God would not see or hear their cries, prayers, worship and
other things, and His wrath would not be quenched until Jerusalem was
destroyed, that not one stone was left upon another. Purely from and
everything is it turned to the ground. That is what they wanted to have.
This is the terrible example that the evangelist has written for our
correction, that we should not despise God's word and let the time of
our visitation pass without fruit.

(15) It is especially to be noted that the Lord says, "But now it is
hidden from your eyes. For so it is common that one does not think that
God will punish, but because God out of kindness will punish with the

If you go away and wait for correction, the world will think that you
will always remain silent. But beware, saith Christ; though ye see not
the punishment, yet think ye that, if ye amend not, it shall not remain
without. For even though God has tarried for a time, He has laid so many
nets and ropes everywhere, set so many mouse traps for the sake of the
wicked, that it is impossible that you should escape from Him at length.

16 He has commanded father and mother, lord and lady of the house, to
have respect for wicked children and servants. Whoever will not let them
defend themselves, he commands the secular authorities, who punish by
Master Hansen; he is a very rough preacher, has such a harsh voice that
he can scream your head off your neck. The devil is also still there,
who can punish you with pestilence, hunger, water and fire (if you do
not want to improve yourself) out of God's decree. Therefore, let no
one think that he will lead it out and escape punishment. If thou wilt
not be pious, and wilt not let the word of God guide thee, then thou
must let the executioner or the devil guide and lead thee without thy
thanks; but truly with thy harm and destruction.

(17) Therefore make no distinction between the punishment that is
hidden and that which is certain. For the punishment of sins is certain
in every case, though it be hid. But that it is hidden deceives men. As
Solomon also says, "It is not good that people should not be punished
soon, and that our Lord God should remain silent for so long, for they
will only become more wanton.

18 A thief who steals today, when it suits him, steals again tomorrow,
and thinks he will always get away with it; this finally brings him to
the gallows. If he would think to stop stealing when the time comes, he
will not stop. So do adulterers, usurers, and in sum all sinners: the
better they like their behavior, the more heated and lustful they become
about it. For they do not see this definition or sentence, although the
punishment is hidden.

**822 D. 3. s-12. on the tenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
18S9-1862... 823**

is that it is nevertheless certain. How it finally turns out that,
according to the proverb, the jug goes to the well until it breaks.

Therefore beware, and be not deceived. Even if the force is already
hidden, it is nevertheless certain and does not remain outside. As the
Gentiles have learned from experience, and therefore have said: When our
Lord God wants to come and punish, put on woolen socks, so that he may
walk quietly and not be heard. Learn this, and therefore do not be sure
that our Lord God will not strike quickly; but be afraid and beware. For
he has so many angels, so many servants, so many plagues, war, famine,
pestilence, that he may well strike you. He can make the air full of
fire and burn you. He can drown you in water, strangle you with poison,
by untimely or otherwise unhealthy fruit. In sum, there are a thousand
and one thousand ropes and nets that God sets for the wicked and
unrepentant sinners.

020 This then is the cause that our dear Lord Christ so faithfully
warns, and weeps, saying, Behold, O Jerusalem; because the punishment is
hid, thou thinkest that it shall remain without; but thou art far from
it. For the punishment is not hidden, that thou shouldest be free; but
that thou shouldest be struck the more surely, if thou wilt not know the
time of thy visitation. If then thou wilt not abuse such delay, but use
it aright, cease from time to time to sin, keep thee here to the word,
and counsel shall be given thee; if not, thou must go down.

(21) In this way Peter preaches to us, 2 Pet 3:15: "Consider the
patience or longsuffering of our Lord," he says, "for your salvation.
That is, let it be thought to be your salvation, let it be for your
good, that you be not condemned. For if God were to punish us in all
ways, as and according to what we deserve, then, as I said above, none
of us would live beyond seven years. Well, he does not, but is
long-suffering, sticks to himself, and forgives the punishment. This,
saith Peter, take heed; let it be for your salvation's sake, that ye
should say: O Lord, I am sorry to say that I have sinned much and often,
and now in

dem, now in another. Now the punishment doesn't come, but it passes.
But what does it mean? Certainly nothing else, except that even though
the punishment is hidden, it will certainly come. Therefore, dear
Father, forgive me, and I will repent and amend. This saying of Peter is
very well to remember, that the patience of God is our blessedness.
"For God," he says shortly before, "does not want anyone to be lost,
but that everyone should turn to repentance." Therefore, where God
forgives the punishment, it is for our good. But whoever does not remit,
but continues in sin and abuses such patience of God, the jar must
ultimately break. As you can see, because the thief does not want to
desist from stealing in time, he will finally be handed over to the
executioner; a lewd woman who does not want to desist from her lewdness
will finally become a disgrace before everyone. But God has proven it
especially with the city of Jerusalem, even though he hides and holds
back the punishment, that he will finally come and not give us the
disobedience.

Therefore let everyone fear God, everyone, great and small, young and
old, learn that if he does wrong and will not desist from it, the
punishment will not remain outside. For Jerusalem stands as an eternal
example, the holy, beautiful city, which even the pagan histories praise
as having been longe clarissima urbium Orientis, the most glorious, most
famous city in the Orient; it is gone and destroyed, so that no one
knows where a house has stood, because it has not refrained from sins
and has not turned to the Word. This. The Lord gives us this example in
today's Gospel, so that we should take it to heart and amend our ways,
or know that if we do not remit our sins, do not follow the word, and do
not want to accept it with faith, that God will not remain outside with
the punishment, even if he forgives it for a time; which, as I said, is
for our good, so that we may take advantage of the time and remit our
sins. If, however, you do not want to improve yourself, but only to
become more insolent and to comply more with your will of courage, know
that the evil hour will come before you know it.

**824 8.3,i2-i4. On the tenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xni, 1862-i87i.
825**

Our Lord God will also make you cry out, but will not hear you.

23 For he did likewise with the Jews. The siege lasted a short time,
from Easter until the autumn moon. Every day they had such a sacrifice
in the city, such singing and praying, that it was a miracle. But it was
all in vain. God had stopped his ears and would not listen. Cause, he
therefore hid and delayed the punishment, so that they would mend their
ways and recognize the time of their visitation. But it would not be
with the hardened people. Therefore, when he revealed the punishment, he
also hid himself and would not be found. As Hosea also threatens the
kingdom of Israel in chapter 5, v. 6: "They will come with their flocks
and herds to seek the Lord, but will not find him, for he has turned
away from you"; and Isaiah chapter 1, v. 15: "When you lift up your
hands and pray, I will not hear."

(24) Let us therefore diligently keep this example in mind, so that,
since God will not remain outside with the punishment, we may fear Him;
and since He does not strike us as soon as He sees fit, but gives us
time to repent, we may also love Him as a merciful Father, and say: O
dear Father, You will certainly not let sin go unpunished; so grant me
Your grace and the Holy Spirit, that I may amend myself and escape the
well-deserved punishment. So whoever goes to repentance shall find
grace.

25. Jerusalem would still be standing today if the Jews had recognized
themselves in this way, humbled themselves and said, "Dear God, we have
done wrong by being such bad boys and strangling your dear servants the
prophets. Now thou hast given us the holy gospel through thy Son: give
us grace, that we may be instructed, and become more godly. If they had
done this, there would have been no need; the Romans, with all their
power, would have had to leave them alone and stay at home. But because
they continued in sin, saying, "Oh, there is no need; do you think that
God will let the city go down like this, where he himself dwells and has
no other place of worship? Oh no,

nothing will come of it. There it went so that not one stone remained on
the other. And now the poor Jerusalem, destroyed, devastated, and
ravaged, stands as an example to all who are wantonly wicked and do not
want to mend their ways, so that they must also suffer such punishment.

But to others who accept God's word and amend, this history is held up
for their comfort and instruction, so that they may learn that if God
hides the punishment, it is for their peace and good, that God will
graciously forgive their sins if they cease and amend. For it is no
wonder that we sin; but to defend sin, to persist in it unrepentantly
and stubbornly, is something that God cannot tolerate; rather,
everything must come to nothing; especially when He comes with the
gracious visitation of the Word and would like to call us to repentance.

27 So poor Jerusalem is gone, and nothing hath overthrown it, but the
great title, that it was called the city of God, his own house, and his
own habitation. This made the Jews sure that they thought: Should
Jerusalem perish? Nothing will come of it, God is more concerned;
therefore, even if the whole world were to come, it would not be able to
harm us, God will not let His dwelling place be desolate. On such title
and grace they sinned, asking for no sermon. This pushed the bottom out
of the barrel and brought them into all misfortune.

Because God, out of His special grace, is also visiting us with His word
today, but we in both parts are very badly opposed to it, the bishops
are persecuting it, we are misusing it for our avarice, hopefulness and
other sins: so I fear that Germany will actually have to suffer a great
defeat, whether by the Turk or otherwise by war, famine and other
plagues. Therefore, let us take this example to heart, that Jerusalem
was so miserably destroyed because it did not accept God's word, but
despised it: so that we may learn to honor God's word, to hear it
gladly, and even if we sin, to repent and amend. This is the first part
of today's Gospel.

**826 L. 3, i4-i6. On the tenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, is7i-is73.
827**

29 After this the evangelist tells how Jesus went into the temple and
began to cast out those who were buying and selling inside, saying, "My
house is a house of prayer, but you have made it a den of murderers."

(30) This is done by Christ out of a special power, and is to be
respected like other miraculous signs, which we cannot imitate.
Otherwise, so many great and mighty nobles, who had their enjoyment of
it, would have resisted him and not allowed it, nor would they have
yielded to him alone, who without a sword but with a scourge (as the
other evangelists report) undertook such a thing.

(31) That they should suffer such violence and harm, and keep silence,
is a sign that the Lord has spoken to them just as he spoke to the Jews
in the garden, when they all fell back to the ground behind them. We
will slowly imitate Christ in this. Therefore, no one should interpret
this history to mean that the preachers wanted to lay hands on them and
use force in the same way as Christ did here. For if Christ had not
wanted to use more than human force here, he alone would have achieved
little against so many.

(32) We are not to look at the work alone, but also at the cause. The
Lord attaches this to the words: "My house is a house of prayer, but
you have made it a den of thieves. What could move the Lord to such a
harsh word? For they committed no murder in the temple, but waited for
their trade, namely, that they had there their exchange bank, with the
cattle large and small, as one needs for the sacrifice. Market held. For
the Jews, who lived far from Jerusalem, could not bring out from their
homes what they wanted to sacrifice. The servants of the high priests
were sent so that there would be livestock and perhaps money for
sacrifice. For the temple had its own special coin, as one finds now and
then in the histories.

This seems to be more praiseworthy than desecrating. For since God
Himself ordered and commanded such worship, who would consider it wrong
that it should be so

promotes and faithfully helps that he goes well in the Schwang? But they
had a different opinion. The priests pretended that they were doing it
to promote the service; but they would not have cared so much about the
service if it had not carried so much. That is why they were concerned
about the money and not about our Lord God. They were driven by such
avarice that they could preach nothing but sacrifices; they praised such
worship just as the monks and priests praised their sacrifice of the
mass, that one would thereby put away sin and come to God's grace. This
has brought the people together and driven them to abandon the right
worship (which means to fear God and trust in His goodness, and to
diligently keep to the word of God); they have continued in sin with all
certainty; they have let themselves think that if they only slaughter
and sacrifice, there will be no need. As you can see in the prophets,
they preach very strongly against their sacrifice for this reason.

34 This is the real sin, which is called murder, because not the body
but the souls are murdered for eternity, namely, when people are taught
to trust in their own works and not in God's goodness and mercy. Christ
could not suffer that. We are not to suffer it either, but to prevent it
as much as we can by the word (for otherwise we are not commanded): that
people refrain from trusting in their own works and merits, as if they
wanted to put away sin and become blessed by them; and that they give up
their hearts and put their trust in God's mercy alone, who for
Christ's sake wants to forgive us sin and make us righteous and
blessed. After this, people should also be called pious, not following
their own thoughts, but the word of God and keeping to it. Whoever does
this is in need of the temple and its office. He who does not, abuses it
and is a murderer of souls.

35 Hosea also gives this title to the priests in the kingdom of Israel,
and it almost seems as if the Lord had seen such a saying of Hosea here,
because he says Cap. 6, 9: "The priests together with their companions
are like the priests of Israel.

[828 **3, 16-18. on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1873-I87S. 1884-1887.** 829]{.underline}

the storms that lie in wait and choke in the way that goes down to
Shechem. This is to indicate the damage they were doing with false
teaching. For since they were supposed to point the people to the
sacrifice of Christ, they pointed them to the slaughter of cows and
oxen, as if everything had been arranged and nothing else was needed for
eternal life. This was well received in the kitchen, for they always had
their share. But people were not only deprived of money, but also of
soul and blessedness. Christ could not stand that, so he threw
everything into a heap.

36. but how he was more wonderful then

*) Ströter - strings, bush thieves. D. Red.

Thus it can be seen that God still allows such punishment to be
inflicted in the church against the idolatrous spirits and false
preachers. Therefore, with the godless bishops, priests and monks, who
hold so strongly to the mass and other idolatries for the sake of their
avarice, one day will find that God will expel them and overthrow their
fair, whether it be the Turk or someone else.

That is enough of today's Gospel for this time. May God, the Father of
all mercies, for Christ's sake, through His Holy Spirit, awaken our
hearts to His fear, and graciously keep us in the Word, and guard us
from all sorrow bodily and forever, amen.

**On the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 18:9-14.**

Now he said to some who presumed themselves to be pious, and despised
others, the like: Two men went up into the temple to pray, one a
Pharisee, the other a publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed to himself
thus: I thank thee, O GOD, that I am not like other men, robbers,
unjust, adulterers, or even like this publican; I fast twice a week, and
give tithes of all that I have. And the publican stood afar off, neither
would he lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying,
God, be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you: This man went down
justified into his house before him. For he that exalteth himself shall
be abased; and he that abaseth himself shall be exalted.

In today's gospel, our dear Lord Christ teaches us how to be righteous
Christians and humble. For through this virtue alone one comes to grace.
But where this virtue, namely humility, is not present, God cannot be
pleased or gracious. As we see here in these two persons, the Pharisee
and the tax collector.

2) The Pharisees were among the Jews, like the monks in the papacy, had
special clothing, special days for fasting and prayer, and practiced
holiness so much that the other people were vain sinners against them.

*) Held in the house, 1532 and 1533.

they were. Therefore they also had the name that they were called
Pharisees. But "Pharisee" in Hebrew language means as much as a
special one, who separates himself from the common crowd and wants to be
something special.

(3) The tax collectors, on the other hand, were just like the castles
and bailiffs in our country, who paid and accepted water rates and land
rents and other things from the Romans for the aforementioned money, and
then scourged and scraped the people as they wished. That is why
everyone considered them to be miserly and public sinners, who had such
an office, in which they were stingy and caused all kinds of trouble to
the people. Therefore it was not to be supposed that one of them had

**830 2.3, 18-20. On the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1887-188S. 831**

Just as it was not to be assumed that there was a mischievous one among
the Pharisees.

4 But our dear Lord Christ makes a different judgment here, saying that
the tax collector is pious and righteous, but the Pharisee is a sinner,
and a very great and shameful sinner. For Lucas makes it very vexatious
and so vile, *) that it is a wonder. For thus he begins the similitude,
"There were some that presumed to be righteous, and despised others."

5 These are two ugly vices of the Pharisees, that they not only thought
highly of themselves, which would have been sin enough; for hopefulness
is a devilish sin: but despised others also. Then think, what is the use
of such a hypocrite, if he immediately prays and fasts himself to death,
because the devil sits in his heart with such hopefulness that he puffs
himself up and says: "If I did not make myself holy, I would have to
wait a long time for our Lord God; but I fast so much, I pray so much, I
do this and that, which others do not do: I give my tithe faithfully. If
the others could give the priests nothing but straw and stubble, they
would; but I am not like that, I am more pious 2c.

(6) Thus the two most abominable vices abound in the holy man, that he
is so excellently hopeful and presumptuous, and so deeply despises
others, saying, They are nothing but robbers, unrighteous men, and
adulterers; but in particular he masterfully depicts the publican. He,
he says, stands there, scourging and scraping everyone, taking what he
can. I am not such a bad boy, praise God: I am a living saint against
whom to reckon 2c. Such pride and hopefulness is also a very annoying
vice in the eyes of the world, as the common saying testifies, "If you
are something, be it; but let other people be something too. How then
may it be before our Lord God? It must be a thousand and a thousand
times more contrary to him, where one wants to be presumptuous and
hopeful against him.

(7) That this gospel is primarily

*) disagree [*b c*].

Our dear Lord Christ is teaching us what true righteousness is and how
to distinguish and recognize it from hypocritical righteousness. As if
to say, "You will find a man who walks as a living saint; he fasts, he
gives alms, he does not break marriage, he does no one wrong, he likes
to go to preaching. Who can interpret all this otherwise than that he is
a pious man? But I tell you, if you want to know him rightly, you must
not look at such appearances, which even a rogue can lead; but you must
look at what it means to be righteous before God. For this Pharisee is
pious because of his outward life, so that one should wish, as far as
outward conduct is concerned, that all the world were as he is. But this
is not yet enough, and beware lest thou rest and rely thereon. For here
you see how under such a holy life there is such a great devil's hope.
For the sake of such hope, the devil could not stay in heaven; Adam and
Eve could not stay in paradise; how could he stay in the church?

Fasting is right, praying is right, tithing is right, keeping a pure
marriage, not robbing, not doing wrong to anyone, is all right and good
in itself. But the Pharisee is so disgraceful with such hopefulness that
it becomes pure devil's muck. For so it goes in the world, whoever does
good to another, that he may catch him and make him his own, does him
more harm than good. As the saying goes: Nihil carius emitur, quam quod
donatur: Good given is received most dearly. How can God be pleased with
holiness, since one wants to throb with it and pride against it? There
holiness becomes a twofold mischievousness.

(9) So does the hypocrite here also: O God, saith he, seest thou also
that thou hast in me such a righteous man? The world is nothing but
robbers, unrighteous men and adulterers; but I am righteous 2c. In such
hopefulness, let him do what he will, even if he sweats blood and lets
himself be burned with fire, it is an abomination before God and the
greatest sin. Therefore Christ speaks here:

**[832 D. s. M-23. on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
i88s-isW. 833]{.underline}**

If you want to be pious, be right, and beware that you are not hopeful
saints. For though ye stumble, or sometimes fall into the mire, it shall
not grieve me so, as if ye had all holiness, and were trustworthy.

(10) Therefore conclude this lesson with a subtle and significant
saying: "He who exalts himself will be humbled; but he who humbles
himself will be exalted. So that everyone may learn to be humble and not
despise anyone. For this is humility, that I think nothing of myself,
but much of others. But he who thinks highly of himself, and thinks how
he is learned, beautiful, rich, pious, is called hopeful. As the
Pharisee does, he considers his fasting, tithing and other things, and
therefore thinks highly of himself. This is what the Lord has forbidden.
On the other hand, the tax collector is not seen as a pious man, but as
a man of true humility. For he boasts nothing, and asks only that God
may be gracious to him. This also, saith the Lord, learn ye to say, I
can boast of nothing: for though I would boast that I am learned, rich,
mighty, yet our Lord God may say, Dear man, whence hast thou? Did you
get it from yourself? No. Where from? Is it not my gift? Yes, Lord, it
is yours. Why do you boast then? If any man should boast, it should be I
who give thee all things. Thou shalt not do it, but say, Though I be
rich, yet I know that thou canst make me poor in an hour; though I be
wise and learned, yet thou canst make me a fool with a word. That would
mean to be humble and not to boast about yourself and to despise others,
because you are more beautiful, more pious, richer than others.

(11) That would be fine if we used such hope against the devil and
said: I have God's word, I know it; I have done so much good with it, I
have taught, comforted, admonished this one and that one; I have helped
this one and that one with almsgiving; I know it is a good work; and in
spite of the devil, you should blaspheme it'. Against the devil, I say,
such things go, that they may be praised; for we have it not from him.
But against God, since we

If you have everything, you should not boast, but humble yourself.

(12) After this, one should not despise one's neighbor either, but
think thus: Since all the gifts of our Lord God are His own and come
from Him alone, even though I have more of them than my neighbor, I know
that our Lord God can pronounce a judgment between me and my neighbor,
who has barely a tenth of my gifts, and be as favorable to him as to me.
Why should I boast or exalt myself? If I have much, I should be afraid
not to misuse it, and always think: God does it according to his
pleasure; to one he gives much, to another little. But it may well
happen that he is more merciful to him who has little. Cause: he who has
much must give the more account; but he who has little may endure the
less.

(13) But the Pharisee does not do this here; he goes out on a limb: I
am not like other people; neither am I like this tax collector. I tithe;
the tax collector robs alone. I cheat no one; so this one scarfs and
scrapes all the world. In sum, the Pharisee makes himself think that he
is alone and has everything; the tax collector is nothing and has
nothing. But, thou double-minded wretch, shalt thou not say, True, I
tithe diligently, I fast and do as much as I can; but I know not how to
build upon it. Dear Lord God, it is your gift, and do you think that
this tax collector is more pleasing to you than I am? So he should have
lifted him above himself, or even let him go beside him, saying, "It
matters not whether I have much or little, but whether anyone has a
gracious God. Why then do I want to defy and despise others, because it
all depends on God's mercy, and not on what each one has for gifts. But
he does not do so, but defies in his piety, and even as he stands before
God and prays.

14 Therefore the Lord has forbidden us not to be presumptuous because of
our piety. Again, he wills that no one should despair because he has
already fallen into sin and been deceived by the devil. For we all have
one God, who has bestowed his mercy upon us, as

834 **D. 3, 23-25. on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1892-1895.** 835

a mantle, over the pious and the sinful, over the learned and the
unlearned, over the rich and the poor; for he is the God of us all.
Therefore, we should not exalt ourselves, but be humble: do not look at
whether we have much and others have little. For God can be more
gracious and gentle to him to whom he has given little than to him who
has much; indeed, he can strip you naked again, and clothe one who is
naked and bare more beautifully and adorn him with more excellent gifts
than he does you. Why then would you despise others and exalt yourself?

(15) In the world there must remain such inequality of persons,
statuses and gifts that one is considered more and higher than the
other. But for this reason we are not unequal before our Lord God. For
since nothing but grace counts with Him, it is impossible for anyone to
boast and be proud before Him. Let them all humble themselves, and know
that although we are unequal among ourselves, God is not unequal for
that reason: He has no other heart or eye for him who has much than for
him who has little. So that we should all learn to hold on to his grace
and mercy. For both. The righteous and the sinner, the rich and the
poor, the strong and the weak, are both of our Lord God. What we have,
we have all from him; but of ourselves we have nothing but sin.
Therefore let no one exalt himself above another, but let him humble
himself and fear. For though there be good, yet is it all the gift of
our Lord God. He shall boast of it, but not you: but you shall use it
with thanksgiving and in the fear of God; for he cannot suffer pride,
nor throbbing, nor defiance. .

16. But just as no one should exalt himself on account of his piety or
other gifts, so God does not want you to despair when you find yourself
a poor sinner, but to trust in His goodness and take comfort in it,
saying, "Well, if I do not have as much as this one or that one, I have
the same God, who will also be gracious to me. Therefore I will be
content, I will go, I will wait for my position and office in the
measure that God has given me; I will not despise anyone,

I do not want to exalt myself, nor do I want to worry that others have
more than I do. For I am content that I have the same God that they
have; and that God is not therefore an unequal God, although we men are
unequal among ourselves. This is what the Lord means when he concludes
this parable, saying, "He who exalts himself will be humbled, but he
who humbles himself will be exalted." As if to say, "If I find such
saints who are able to give it to me, the less they think of themselves,
the more I will give them. On the other hand, whoever has something, and
therefore wants to be worthy of hope and high esteem, I will take from
him one thing after another, until I finally cast him in disgrace into
the abyss of hell.

17 If the Pharisee had not been so hopeful, but in all humility had
brought his gifts home to God, saying: "Lord, you have shown me much
mercy, that you have so graciously protected me from this and other
sins; this is your gift, which I rejoice in, but I do not exaggerate it,
nor do I despise anyone because of it; for you can take it again if you
wish 2c.God would have given him even more gifts from day to day and
could not have been hostile to him. But because he is foolish, and
judges others, and despises them, and says, I am all, the publican is
nothing; then our Lord God strips him so purely that nothing remains in
him to be praised. For there it is written in the judgment of our Lord
Christ, "The publican went down justified before him." That is, the
Pharisee is unjust, condemned and belongs in hell with the devil. What
does he get out of his boasting? On the other hand, the tax collector
who says, "God, be merciful to me," becomes a saint in the Church and
has a merciful God, as he prays.

(18) This is what Christ wants to teach us all, that we should know
from day to day what we are and what we have. If thou hast money, a
sound body, a house, and a farm, have need of them; I am well pleased
with them, and will gladly give them thee, and will give thee more; but
boast not, neither despise any living man for them. Remember, when you
see one who does not have what you have, that he can have as gracious a
God as you. Therefore despise him

**836** 3, 25-27. on the eleventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, iM-iM.
**837**

Do not let him walk beside you, and God will be praised by both;
otherwise the false saints will dishonor and revile God, even though
they do not do so with their mouths and in public.

19 For he who would judge by the words alone must say that it is not
wrong for the Pharisee to say, "God, I thank you. For the true saints
also use such words in their prayers, but with a different heart. For
when they thank God for something, they confess that it is His work and
gift; they did not receive it from themselves. But this is not the
Pharisee's opinion; otherwise he would have said: That I am not an
adulterer, nor a robber, nor an unjust man, O Lord, I have no one to
thank but Thee. For my sake, if it had been out of your grace, I would
have kept house just like other people. For we are all equal; one may
not boast of anything above another. But this Pharisee does not think
so, but even turns back, saying, "I thank thee that I am not as other
men." So he draws all his virtue into himself, as if he had it from
himself and not from God. For otherwise he would say: You have given it.
He does not do that, does not pose himself differently, as if he were so
rich and could give to God; thus he does not thank God, but himself, his
reason, his free will and powers, that he was able to do so much.

(20) Now it is true: to whom God gives something special, he should
recognize it and esteem it highly. For what would it be that you would
deny that you are no more learned or better than an ass or any other
unreasonable animal? Thus, to whom God gives money and goods, he should
not be so unreasonable as to say: I am a poor beggar and have nothing.
Whoever has something good

If a man has done something, helped and advised poor people, he should
not promise that he will say, "I have done nothing good. No, it should
not be like that; God's gifts should be recognized, praised and held in
high esteem. But besides this, one should humble oneself and say: My
God, it is yours and not mine; you have given it, otherwise I would have
to give it as well as others; I thank you for it. That would be right,
if we thus humbled ourselves. But the goods of our Lord God are not to
be esteemed small or small, but to be recognized and esteemed great; and
yet not to be proud, nor to despise others, but to say, as has often
been said, Dear God, it is your gift that you have given me; if another
does not have it, there is no harm in that, for he has just as gracious
a God as I have: why then should I despise him?

21 The Lord wants to teach us such humility in today's gospel and warn
us against pride. For it is decreed: He who exalts himself shall be
thrown down again. God has not given it to His own people, but has
rejected them for the sake of pride. Other great kingdoms were also
destroyed because of such sin. Lucifer was therefore cast out of heaven,
Adam and Eve out of paradise.

22 Therefore learn to say, Lord, what I have is yours; you gave it to
me, you can take it away. In this way the hope will remain outside. For
who would insist on what is uncertain? But whoever does not want to do
this and thinks that he has everything of his own, finds here his
judgment that God wants to strip him so clean that he will keep nothing,
and on top of that he will be unjust and of the devil. God grant His
grace that we may remember such teaching and keep it, amen.

[**838** 8.3.27-29. On the twelfth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
igse-isoo. **839**]{.underline}

**On the twelfth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Marc. 7, 31-37.**

And going out again from the borders of Tyri and Sidon, he came to the
Sea of Galilee, in the midst of the border of the ten cities. And they
brought unto him a dove that was dumb, and they besought him that he
would lay his hand upon him. And he took him from the people specially,
and put his fingers in his ears, and spit, and touched his tongue. And
looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said unto him, Hephatha, that is,
open thyself. And straightway his ears were opened, and the band of his
tongue was loosed, and he spake aright. And he forbade them, that they
should tell no man. But the more he forbade, the more they spread it
abroad. And were astonished at the measure, and said: He hath made all
things well: he maketh the deaf to hear, and the speechless to speak.

This is a poor and light gospel, because it does no more than tell of
the miraculous work that the Lord did here on the dumb and deaf man. Of
this and other such miraculous signs your love often hears in the year
that Christ has shown Himself and let it be seen that He is the Savior
who wants to help and assist us against the devil's wrath. Therefore,
we may give special thanks to God for such a blessing, that he has given
us such a man, who wants to help us out of pure grace, against
everything that the devil can inflict on us.

For the fact that this poor man is so injured that he can neither use
his tongue nor his ears like other people, these are all blows and
stings of the wretched devil. In the eyes of the world, it seems that
everyone thinks they are natural infirmities; for the world does not
know the devil, that he causes so much harm, makes people mad and
foolish, causes them all kinds of misfortune, not only in the body but
also in the soul, so that they die of fear and sadness and can have no
joy; but we Christians should believe that such defects and infirmities
are nothing else but the devil's blows; he causes such misery on earth
and does harm wherever he can.

3 Therefore, we should thank our dear Lord God that He took care of our
affliction and gave His Son, our

*) Held in the house, 1533.

He has sent the Lord Christ Jesus to help this poor man and has also
graciously protected us so that we are not also afflicted with the same
plague of the evil enemy. For every man, if he has healthy eyes, ears,
hands, feet and other limbs, should believe that it is not a natural,
harmless growth, as the world sees it; but it is only the gift of God.
But because the world does not believe this, but, because it is so
common, considers it to be a naturally bad thing, God must sometimes
allow this to happen, so that the devil makes someone dumb and deaf,
blind or even kills someone, so that everyone may learn that God has
allowed the devil to do this, and thank God all the more diligently for
having so graciously protected us from such evil.

4 It is also the work of the devil to blind the hearts with false
doctrine, so that they will not see or accept the truth. But all God's
works are good, for he is good and creates nothing but what is good. The
devil, however, is evil; therefore, where God has decreed it for him, he
does no good. Like a tree that bears beautiful good apples, but when the
vermin come and destroy it, the fruit becomes wormy and perishes. This
is not the fault of our Lord God, who created the tree good, nor of the
tree and the fruit, but of the worms and the vermin.

So it is with us humans, too. God

**840 k. 3, 29-W. On the twelfth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, 1900-1903.
841**

is a God of life, therefore he gives a healthy body and fine, dexterous
limbs. But the devil, wherever he can, and God has given him such, he
corrupts the body and does harm. Therefore, we should learn what such
evil reflects on us, that it is the devil's sting, which is bitterly
hostile to all people, but especially to Christians, and does no good.

Now it is terrible that the wicked, evil, powerful enemy should cause so
much distress. But against this we are comforted in today's gospel, of
a certain help against such an enemy. For there we see, as John says 1
John 3:8, that the Son of God appeared to destroy the works of the
devil. Because the devil came to paradise to break the work of our Lord
God and to make disobedient evil men out of the holy, pious people, Adam
and Eve, and he succeeded in such an attempt, the Son of God thought
again how he could take revenge on his enemy. He therefore became a man
and made whole and better what the devil had broken; he also broke the
devil's work, sin, death and hell, and, as we see here, he loosed the
tongues that the devil had bound and opened the ears that he had stopped
up. Christ came to do this work, and does it for and for among his
Christians, as we will hear further on. Let this be said of the
miraculous sign and work of our Lord Christ, so that he has shown
himself today to be a helper of the wretched, and to heal all the
afflictions that the devil has brought upon us, and to deliver us from
his tyranny.

7 By this miraculous work the Lord also wants to show us how these two
things especially belong to a Christian, that his ears are opened and
his tongue loosed; and that he wants to practice this work daily in his
church against the devil. The bodily benefit, that he gives healthy ears
and tongue, he also lets happen to the heathen; but with the Christians
alone goes this spiritual benefit, that he spiritually opens their ears
and loosens their tongue. For this is ever certain, that all our
blessedness

We have the truth only through the word of God. What else would we know
of God, of the Lord Christ and His sacrifice, and of the Holy Spirit?
Therefore, this is still today the greatest miracle and highest
blessing, to whom God gives such an ear that gladly hears His word, and
a tongue that honors God and does not blaspheme.

(8) Our opponents, the papists, are a thousand times more wretched
than this mute here. For they have deaf ears; and though they hear
God's word, yet they cannot and will not hear it. Just as we see in the
case of the unbelieving Jews: when our dear Lord Christ preached the
most beautiful sermon about the forgiveness of sins and eternal life,
they became mad and foolish, not only not wanting to hear it, but also
blaspheming. So all those who do not want to hear God's word are still
deaf and dumb, and much more yearly than this poor man here. For they
cannot do anything else with their tongues but blaspheme God and speak
the worst of His word, the highest treasure. But those who gladly hear
God's word, and to whom Christ says, as here to the mute, "Hephatha,"
ear, you shall stand open: these are they who are rightly helped against
the devil. For God has shown us no other way on which we can go to
heaven, but his dear word, the holy gospel. Whoever hears it gladly,
heeds it diligently, and loves and enjoys it, is helped. This is the one
miraculous work that still goes on daily in Christianity, that our ears,
which the devil has blocked through sin, are opened again through the
Word, that we hear God's Word.

(9) The other thing is, that he also stirreth up the tongue, and
maketh us to speak, as Paul saith Romans 10:10: "If a man believe with
his heart, he shall be justified; and if he confess with his mouth, he
shall be saved." Through faith in Christ we come to forgiveness of
sins. Then confession must follow, that we are not dumb, but speak as we
believe in our hearts. This then makes a true Christian; all other works
do not make a Christian.

(10) It may well be that a monk fasts and watches, and hurts his body.

842 **L. 3, 32-34.** on the twelfth Sunday after Trinity. **W. xm,
1903-1905.** 843

for a Christian: but by this he cannot become a Christian; for he lacks
that, that he is still deaf and dumb. He will not hear the word, much
less confess it. But a Christian hears, and believes, and afterwards
confesses. These two things make a Christian whole. So our dear Lord
Christ is still doing this work daily in his church, in the spirit and
through the word; which work he did there bodily, so that he might be
seen to help us against all the harm the devil does to us, but
especially against spiritual harm, so that we might believe in him and
learn to put our hope in him.

Now we must also see what the Lord means by the special splendor here.
The people bring the poor man to him and ask him to lay his hands on
him. So he approaches him, leads him away from the people, puts his
fingers in his ears, pricks them out and stirs his tongue with them.
Then he looks up to heaven, sighs and says: "Hephatha. All of this is a
special gift that the Lord performs especially in this miraculous work.
Since we have now heard what it is to be quite dumb and deaf, we must
also see why the Lord wanted to use a special ceremony or ostentation
for this miraculous work, when he could have accomplished such a work
with a few words. For we see through and through in the gospel that it
is only a matter of a word; when he wants something, it happens.

(12) But the Lord is doing so much for the sake of spiritual miracles.
For he wants to show how much effort it takes to make a deaf man hear
and a dumb man speak. He wakes up Lazarum with one word. To the gouty
man he says: "Get up and walk"; there he was already helped. But with
this deaf and dumb man here he does not deal so briefly and badly; but
needs a special gesture, that he reaches into his ears with his fingers,
and with the saliva stirs his tongue before, looks up to heaven, and
sighs; then first of all he says: "Arise"; to indicate to us, if we
want to be freed from the devil's bonds, and a

If we are to have a ready tongue and open pure ears, it must be through
the outward word or ministry, and through outward signs. For we must
first hear the word, and then not leave baptism and sacrament behind;
then the Holy Spirit will be present to make ears and tongue free.

(13) Therefore, beware of the evil spirits, who despise the outward
word and sacrament, and wait until God speaks to them in their heart.
No, says Christ, there is my finger, the outward word, which must
resound in the ears. There is my saliva, which must stir and moisten the
tongues. So my work will be right and finished. As you can see, where
the outward word goes right, you will certainly find Christians. Where
it does not go right, you will not find any. For as the shepherd is, so
are the sheep.

(14) Therefore, let every man think that he may be found on this path
and gladly hear the word of God. For God will not reveal Himself without
the Word in your heart. If you are to see and know Him, it must be
through the Word and the outward sacraments alone; otherwise the Holy
Spirit will not do His work. As God teaches us from heaven, saying,
"This is my beloved Son, whom you shall hear." Item, Christ commands
his disciples: "Go into all the world, teach and baptize all nations";
item: "He who hears you hears me." Then our dear Lord Christ commanded
to open one's mouth, preach the gospel to the people, and baptize them.
This is the right way, by which we must be saved; otherwise it is all in
vain and lost. "He that heareth you," saith he, "heareth me."

(15) After the ministry of preaching, God has also ordained father and
mother, lord and lady of the house, and temporal authorities in the
government. They are not there for their own sake, but sit in God's
stead: you should also hear them, as far as your outward life and all
your actions toward others are concerned, and know that when you hear
them, you hear God. But if they abuse their office, if they speak
against the word of God, and if they command, they shall not be heard.

**[844 L. 3, 34-36. on the twelfth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
i9os-i9os. 845]{.underline}**

For you should be more obedient to God than to men. And, as reported,
you shall first hear God in the church through His servants; then first
of all men, as your father, mother and authorities; what they say to you
on account of their office, that God says to you. Therefore also think
that you accept it and follow it. Now it is ever true that ours is not a
man who thinks he would walk a hundred miles to such a church when our
Lord God Himself preached; for everyone would want to hear the voice.
But our Lord God says: I will make it nearer to thee, that thou mayest
not run so far after: hear thy pastor, thy father and mother, and thou
hast heard me; for they are my disciples and ministers; when thou
hearest them, then will I speak unto thee in thine heart, as unto this
deaf man, that thine ears shall be opened, and thy tongue shall be
loosed, and thou shalt henceforth be a hearing and speaking man, no more
deaf and dumb, as before.

(16) But how is it done? Children and servants in the house let their
parents and rulers preach and say what they want, but they do not do a
thing unless they are forced to. It is the same with the authorities,
they create and say whatever they want, so you will not find one among
hundreds who would seriously think of obeying such an order. Especially
now, when it is necessary, for the sake of the great danger Germany is
in, that one should be pious and improve oneself, keep to God's word
more diligently and beware of all trouble; for this the secular
Christian authorities faithfully admonish their subjects. But it will
not go away, and the world acts as if it deliberately wanted to be worse
than it was before we had the word.

17 Just as it is in the home and in the government, so it is also in the
church, that there are very few who listen to the sermon with real
earnestness and open their ears properly. Most of the townspeople and
peasants are hostile to the church servants, if only they could feel too
sorry for them, give nothing and take everything, which they would
gladly do with all their hearts, as one unfortunately sees everywhere.

18 Therefore the punishment follows, because one does not want to hear
God, who speaks to us through father and mother, through worldly
authorities and church servants, that the longer the devil plugs the
ears the harder, and the longer the tongue is bound and made heavier, so
that one cannot hear God's word, nor speak of it. On the other hand,
the devil unplugs the ears, so that one likes to hear his lies,
perversions, false teachings, fornication and other things; he also
loosens the tongue, so that it blasphemes God and is annoying to
everyone. Such a reward tends to follow where one despises the word; and
it hardly serves people right, they want it that way and not otherwise.
Above this, the temporal plagues will not remain outside, but will
certainly follow, as pestilence, war, the Turk and all misfortunes; so
that such boys, according to what they have deserved, will receive their
punishment, as one can already see before one's eyes. God help us that
we may mend our ways and become more pious.

19 This is the reason that the Lord looks up to heaven, sighs, and
immediately says in anger: "Hephatha, open yourself. For it grieves
him, since God would gladly help and free people from the devil's bonds
through his word, that they will not let themselves be helped, and
hasten to their own destruction and urge God to punish them.

(20) Therefore let us mark this miraculous work carefully and
diligently, and follow the examples of the pious people who praise the
Lord Christ here, that he has done all things well, so that the deaf
hear and the speechless speak. He still does this, as I said, in
Christianity, with his finger and spittle, that is, through the holy
sacraments and the outward word that he preaches, so that the ears of
the deaf are opened and the speechless are made to speak. By this, and
by nothing else, the Holy Spirit wants to have his effect in us. Mark
this well, and be all the more diligent to do it; for this is the
nearest and surest way that our ears may be opened, and our tongues
loosed, and we may be saved. May our dear Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus,
grant us this, amen.

846 **L. 3, 37. 38.** on the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. **W. xm,
isc "8-isii.** 847

**On the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**L "e. 10, 23-37.**

And he turned to his disciples, and said in particular, Blessed are the
eyes which see that ye see. For I say unto you, That many prophets and
kings would see that ye see, and have not seen; and would hear that ye
hear, and have not heard. And, behold, a certain scribe stood up, and
tempted him, saying, Master, what must I do to inherit eternal life? And
he said unto him, How is it written in the law? how readest thou? And he
answered and said, Thou shalt love thy Lord God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and
thy neighbor as thyself. And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right:
do this, and thou shalt live. But he, desiring to justify himself, said
to JEsu, Who then is my neighbor? Then answered JEsus, and said, There
was a certain man which went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell
among the murderers: and they stripped him, and smote him, and departed,
leaving him half dead. And it came to pass about this time, that a
priest went down that same street; and when he saw him, he passed by. A
Levite came to the same place and saw him, and he passed by. And a
certain Samaritan journeyed, and came thither: and when he saw him, he
lamented him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, and poured oil
and wine into them, and lifted him up upon his beast, and brought him to
the inn, and nursed him. The next day he traveled and took out two
pennies and gave them to the innkeeper, saying to him, "Take care of
him, and if you give any more, I will pay you when I come back. Which of
these three do you think was the closest to the one who fell among the
murderers? And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said JESUS
unto him, Go thy way, and do likewise.

(1) This is a long gospel; therefore we will take only one or two
pieces from it, that we may the more easily remember and learn from it.
The first part is that the Lord Christ here highly praises his word, the
holy gospel, and speaks especially to his disciples:

**Blessed are the eyes that see that ye see. For I tell you, many
prophets and kings would see that which you see, and have not seen it;
and hear that which you hear, and have not heard it.**

2 With this he wants to comfort us against the misery we see on earth,
where there is no more despised thing than the gospel. For all other
doctrine, lies and heresies the world may hear and tolerate; but the
gospel it will neither hear nor see, but blasphemes and persecutes it to
the utmost, putting heartache on those who preach and hear it. How then
the examples unfortunately more

*) Held in house, according to *a in* 1533, according to *b in* 1532;
Röhrer gives the year 1533. D. Red.

for there are too many in all Germany and in many other kingdoms. The
Lord sees this, comforts his disciples and says: "The world reproaches
and blasphemes the gospel, but he who has the grace to have it and to be
comforted by it, has blessed ears, he may thank God from the bottom of
his heart that he has come to it and may consider it delicious, which
the world despises so highly. Therefore, it is certainly true that you
are more blessed than David and all other kings. For this has been the
highest desire of all holy patriarchs, prophets and kings, that they
would have liked to experience this time, and to see and hear me. But it
could not be granted to them. But this grace and blessedness has
happened to you; therefore look and thank God that it has happened to
you that you can hear and see me.

(3) The Lord sees what poor, miserable people we are. If we do not
have such a treasure of the holy gospel, then one error always falls
upon another, and it is not possible for anyone to be able to

**848 2.3, 38-40.** On the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. **W. xm,
isii-isi4. 849**

save. As we have unfortunately experienced too much in the papacy, it
has finally come to the point that we have taken the devil for a
preacher and believed him, what he has lied about masses, pilgrimages,
purgatory, and other things through the poltergeists and his lying
preachers. There is no other way, where the word is not, than that one
accepts and believes all kinds of error and lies. And if people still
think they are on the right path to salvation, they are running straight
to hell and the devil.

4 Again, when we have the gospel, we find a misery that is almost more
terrible, namely, that everyone despises it, and the least part accepts
it for the better. Therefore we are miserable and poor people. If God
does not give us His word, we cannot do without it without harm to our
souls' salvation. Again, if he gives it, no one wants it. For this
reason, nothing would be better than for our Lord God to come soon with
the Day of Judgment and smite everything in one heap. For neither
punishment nor mercy helps the ungrateful world. But as it says here:
Blessed are the ears that hear and accept, for eternal joy shall follow.

This is the first part, where our dear Lord Christ complains that he
offers and gives his word to the world, and with the word forgiveness of
sins and eternal life; but it does not want it, but despises it.
Therefore he turns especially to his disciples and says: "Blessed are
you who have the word of God and hear it, and have not long since died
before it came. I tell you, the greatest and highest kings and prophets
would have liked to have seen and experienced it. The world is still so
wicked, if it can have it at once, that it asks nothing about it, and
even despises and blasphemes it. Do not turn away from such distress,
but think that you need such grace and mend your ways. For this is the
very reason why the Lord is here concerned, that he would like everyone
to hear the word with earnestness, and not to despise it, as the world
does, and we see in all classes, from the highest to the lowest, what
the gospel cannot pursue, that it despises.

The least part accepts it with gratitude and improves. They alone have
blessed ears and blessed eyes.

In the second part, the Lord shows us the fruit of the holy gospel,
namely, the good works that should follow when one has heard the word of
God. He illustrates this with a fine example of the man who went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and the murderers fell upon him, beat him,
and robbed him, and left him for dead. Meanwhile a priest came, and saw
the poor man, but took no notice of him, and went his way. A Levite also
passed by and saw him, but he did not care about the poor man. Finally
comes a Samaritan, who had not the name that he should be holy; but was
a Gentile, who belonged nothing to the poor man, who was a Jew; for he
was not of his own kind, like the priest or Levite, but a stranger. The
latter saw the poor man, and taking his accident to heart, soon got off
his horse, poured oil and wine into his wounds, bandaged him up and laid
him on his animal, but he went on foot and led him to the inn. When he
could not stay there for half an hour, he ordered him to the innkeeper
and gave him two pennies to wait until he came back.

(7) This is the true picture in which the Lord illustrates what the
true fruit of the word and Christian love is, namely, that the word will
make people like the Samaritan here, soft, merciful people who cannot
well see that someone is in need. But when they see it, they dare to do
their own good, and help with what they can. But I am talking here about
poor people who do not go in for begging, like the lazy, useless, idle
beggars who can bring no one to any work and run away all over the
country. Such pranksters should not be given anything. But where there
are really poor people, there is a Christian heart so skillful that it
does like the Samaritan here. He thinks, "Even though I am not a Jew
like this man, I am still a human being like him, and I have one
Creator. Therefore he belongs closer to me than an unreasonable animal,
and for this reason I do not want to leave him lying there. On, dear

[850 **L. 3, 40-43. on the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1914-1917.** 851]{.underline}

Brother, stop here, let me help you 2c. So do to him as a father does to
his child. These are called true saints.

(8) But the saints of the sticks, such as the priest and the Levite
here, who think highly of themselves, naturally have no mercy on the
poor, but are horrible, hard people. For they think that our Lord God is
happy that they serve him; therefore they think that they are not
allowed to do anything to other people or to serve them. The priest here
was holy by virtue of his office and birth; he exalted himself to such
an extent that he asked for no one else; just as the text here says of
him that he had seen the poor wounded man, but had passed by and had not
taken care of his need.

(9) But now they are the displeased saints, to whom God is especially
hostile, who see that their neighbor is in distress, and can help, and
yet do not. What can they rely on? Nothing else, but their holiness,
that they think that when they have said mass, sacrificed, sung and done
other things, they have done it all, not atoning to our Lord God with a
sack of oats. These are called cane saints and stone saints, yes, the
devil's saints, who make themselves believe that our Lord is indebted
to them, and that they are indebted to no one.

(10) This likeness is against such shameful saints. For the Lord also
has before him such a proud saint, a scribe, who not only wants to be
seen to be pious, but also to prove the Lord Christ false, and to be a
better doctor than he is. For since the Lord praises his preaching so
highly, saying, "Blessed are the eyes that see, which ye see"; for
many kings and prophets have desired to see and hear it, but it has not
been so good for them: this seems too much for the scribes; think of
themselves: If they had Moses, what can he preach better or higher than
Moses preached? He therefore asks and says, "Master, what shall I do
that I may be saved?" As if to say, "You will not be able to teach me
anything better than Moses taught us. Therefore, not only are those
blessed who hear you; those who hear Moses are also blessed.

and have heard are also blessed people. You do him a little too much. It
would be enough if you were a doctor, like Moses; but that you throw
away Moses as a wicked preacher who does not show the right way to
salvation, and want to be a better preacher, that is too much praise.

(11) The Lord understands such a heart and mind very well, and
therefore will not answer his question, but makes him so angry that he
himself must confess: Even if you have Moses and the law, you still
cannot be saved. So he asks him, saying, "How is it written in the Law?
How do you read?" The scribe soon finished answering, and said, "Thou
shalt love God with all thy heart, 2c. and thy neighbor as thyself."
This,-he lets himself think,-is the right core and the main teaching,
since no one could indicate anything better. And it is true, Moses
cannot teach anything higher and better. But what does Christ answer?
"Do this," he says, "and you will live." As if to say, "This
teaching is good and right, but it does not help you or all men. Cause,
you do not and cannot do it. The Christian scholar feels this, but is
ashamed of it, for he cannot say that he has done it, and yet he does
not want to confess that he has not kept this commandment. Therefore he
raises another question, and says, "Who is my neighbor? This is what it
means to lead this highly learned doctor to the board. For the fact that
he asks who his neighbor is, it is freely known that he has not loved
his neighbor, since he has not yet come to know his neighbor. What does
Moses and the law help him?

(12) Therefore the Lord took him by the hand in the hood, with the
likeness of a wounded man, and said, A priest saw him, and passed by;
and so did a Levite. The two were just as pious as you 2c. But the
Samaritan took care of the poor man. Now say, which one was the neighbor
of the wounded man? The scholar answered, "The one who showed him
mercy"; he would not name the Samaritan, the trustworthy gleaner.

13. therefore the lord gives him a good

**852** L. 3, 43-46. on the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1917-1920. **853**

Slack, and saith, "Go thy way, and do likewise." As if to say, Thou
art as pious a saint as the priest and Levite; Thou wilt not help thy
neighbor with a penny, whether he die now; And askest yet what thou
shalt do, that thou mayest inherit eternal life? Hast thou not poor
friends, poor neighbors, afflicted people? Is there not misfortune,
anguish, and distress enough in the world? And thou art such a rude
teacher that thou first askest who thy neighbor is? If you want to be
holy, love your neighbor as yourself, as the Samaritan did here. This is
called forcing. *) As if the Lord should say, Thou hast not learned so
much in thy life as to know who thy neighbor is, let alone to have loved
him as thyself. In whom then is the fault? Thou hast Moses and the law.
If these things be sufficient unto salvation, there is no more need of
thee. But is it not true, though thou hast Moses and the law, yet it is
nothing to thee; thou remainest a sinner as before, and hast no more in
the law than that it is thy debtor's book, and bears witness against
thee, and accuseth thee before God for thy sins. This means that you are
still far short of salvation. '

(14) But if any one desires to understand truly and thoroughly why the
law does not make us blessed, let him take only these two pieces before
him, of which the Christian scholar speaks here, and see diligently what
is meant by loving God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself;
and he will find how difficult and impossible a thing it is, unless the
Holy Spirit be given into our hearts through the Lord Christ and his
gospel. It is soon said: I love God; for he does not come to us
personally, and therefore does not need to be tasted hard on him and to
do much harm. But see how we behave toward poor people, and it will be
found out whether we love God.

15 Therefore, if you want to 'know who loves God rightly, do no more,
for see whether the children honor their parents, whether the servants
are obedient to their lordship, whether one

*) Zwagen, that is, to wash the body or parts of the body.

Cf.: to wash the head. D. Red.

keep the church servants well and honestly; then you will see finely and
actually who loves God or does not love God. For of the children, God's
command and word is written: You shall honor father and mother. Yes,
says a monk and a nun: I will leave father and mother; I will go to a
monastery and honor you and love you, who are God in heaven. No, says
God, you have my word and hear my command; if you now love me, you will
also love your father and mother, honor them, and show them all love.
That is then called loving GOD. But the unholy people do not ask for
such obedience, but want to prove their love for God with other works,
since God has not commanded anything of them. So the children, even
though they remain with their parents, still want them to be dead and
under the earth, only that they might have their will to be brave. One
must say that they do not love God.

(16) It is the same in other estates. A prince has his officials, and
he commands them to keep the house properly and faithfully. If you ask
them whether they also love God, not one of them will say no, but all
will boast: Yes, I love God; why should I be an enemy of God? Yes, dear
one, tell me, why are you disobedient and unfaithful to your prince? If
you loved God with all your heart, yes, with half your heart, you would
serve your prince much more faithfully.

(17) So there is no servant or maid in the house, though they know
nothing of God, and are negligent and unfaithful, who would suffer this
reproach, and confess that they are enemies of God, or that they do not
love him; and yet they prove it by being so disobedient to their
overlords, to whom God is called to be obedient. But because they do not
love God and do not ask anything according to His command, they remain
disobedient, unfaithful, lying, deceiving and using themselves of all
evil deeds. So learn now that loving God is not as easy a thing as you
think. It is soon said, but it does not follow in the work.

For to love God is to keep His word and command. As Christ says, "He
who loves me will keep my word."

854 **L. 3, 46-48. on the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm.
1920-192z.** 855

For if you love God, you cannot despise His commandments. What does God
mean and command the servants and maids 2c.? Yes, what do they promise
their rulers that they will do? Isn't it true that God demands, and
they pledge, and take their wages, food and drink, that they will be
faithful, follow, and do with diligence what they are obliged to do, and
with their service, work and diligence promote the benefit and piety of
their lordship. That is why in some places they are called marriage
servants, so that they help to keep house and improve the married
couple's food by their work and faithful service. But where do you find
such servants and maids? The greatest disobedience, the greatest
carelessness, pride, evil words, neglect, corruption, doing harm, and
often stealing and robbing, is common now. Therefore they do not love
God, indeed, they are enemies of God, for they do not respect His word:
otherwise they would certainly be more pious and diligent. Just as they
love God and are diligent about His word, so it is with them that there
is neither happiness nor salvation among such servants; they must remain
robbers and beggars all their lives.

There is no need to speak of priests and church servants here; it is
known everywhere how the officials, castles, judges, burghers, farmers
and neighbors treat them and hold them in lower esteem and contempt than
cows and sows. But God has diligently commanded above all things that
they be held dear and of value, and especially that they not be deprived
of what is theirs, as is seen in the prophet Malachi. And Christ himself
says, "A laborer is worthy of his food." Therefore, just as you should
be afraid of sins when you steal from your servant or maidservant, so
you should be afraid of sins when you steal from your pastor what you
owe him, knowing that God will take from you ten times more in another
place, with storms, death of livestock, fire, water, and the like, than
you steal or withhold from your pastor.

20 Thus it is seen that the world not only does not love God, but hates
Him, despises Him, and is hostile to Him. That it is sheer to suffer

that she would not love him, if only she were not also an enemy of him.
Oh no, says everyone, God forbid, should I be an enemy of God? Yes,
indeed, you are an enemy to him. For if you murmur against your father
and mother, against your rulers or authorities, and do not do what you
are commanded to do, you despise God, have him, and are an enemy to him.
For it is his command that you should obey and honor them by obedience.
To the same command thou art hostile; for thou wilt not do it, neither
wilt thou hear it. Who can say otherwise than that you are also an enemy
of God?

(21) Citizens and peasants also boast that they love God. But when
God's command is held up to them that they should not be stingy, that
they should not sell too cheaply, that they should act faithfully 2c.:
the more one preaches, the more foolish they become, and they do only
more out of pure defiance and will of courage. What, they say, does it
concern the priests how I keep house? should he master me? Well, if it
does not concern the priests, it concerns God; but you see how he will
reward you in time, with pestilence, with dear time, with fire, with
water, with the Turk, with the mercenaries, and with all kinds of other
plagues; they will take away your thalers and guilders purely, and will
not know how to thank you for it: otherwise, if you were a Christian,
you could earn favor and thanks from God and men, and would increase in
wealth from day to day.

22 Thus it is seen everywhere that people not only do not want to hear
the word of our Lord God with diligence, but they also persecute it. Not
only the pope, the bishops and tyrants, but also in our part citizens,
peasants, the nobility, and others in all classes. They should honor
God's word and abide by it, live kindly with their neighbor, and
especially give to the church servants what they owe. But if they could
still take much, they would do it with cheerful courage, making
themselves believe that they had only done it well.

(23) Therefore, let us learn diligently and remember that whoever has
the word of God should also love God, that is, he should love God.

**[856 L. 3, 48-si. On the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1923-1926. 857]{.underline}**

render his obedience, and diligently obey the word, saying, O Lord Jesus
Christ, thou hast opened mine eyes unto me, that I might see how thou
hast redeemed me from sins by thy death, and hast made me an heir of the
kingdom of heaven and eternal life; now, dear Lord, I thank thee for
such great unspeakable mercies; I will also gladly do again what I know
thou wilt have me to do. You have commanded me to honor my father and
mother; I will do it with all my will and gladly. Thou hast commanded me
to serve my lordship faithfully, to work diligently and to be obedient;
I will do it gladly. You have made me a housemother, a householder; dear
God, I will be pious, I will do with pleasure and love what I am to do,
and I will rather live over it than not follow you, or not faithfully
preside over my children and my servants, or annoy them. This is the
right fruit that should follow from the word, and is called loving God
rightly from the heart. That God should not honor such pious, obedient
Christians, who honor and love God and His word, and should not give
them happiness and salvation, is not possible.

(24) But let each one go home into his heart and see how far he loves
God. For, as now reported, loving God is not done with thoughts alone,
as the mad monks think; but to love God means, as the Lord says in
another place, to love one's neighbor. For thus says God: If thou wilt
love me, remember and love thy father and mother, thy child, thy wife,
thy husband, thy lord, thy wife; this will I have of thee. Then look
around you, if you do this everywhere, and you will find out whether you
love God or are an enemy of God.

(25) For, as I said, they are few; indeed, Christians alone have the
Word of God and love Christ, though not as fully as they ought. They
say: Well then, I will again gladly do to my neighbor what I ought to
do. But if at times I am overtaxed with anger, impatience, and other
things, let me be sorry from my heart, and I will return. Christians do
this; others, who are not Christians, do not.

(26) Therefore we can conclude that commoners and peasants, children
and servants, officials and subjects, are all of the devil: for they are
enemies of God, for they do not respect his word and command (as you can
see). That he created them, gave them body and soul, food and drink;
yes, that he gave his only begotten son, for this they sing him a little
song, that is called Odium, I don't like yours, I don't want yours,
and if they could, they should probably still tear him down from heaven,
so dear are they to his word and command. Ei now, love in that name!
Does that mean to love God, to be so bitterly hostile to God and his
word; and on the other hand, to love the devil and follow his will, who
has thrown us into sin and eternal death, and takes all pleasure in our
being so disobedient to God?

(27) Thus the world in general is a servant of the wicked devil in
hell, who delights in making us enemies of God and not doing what he has
commanded us to do. The wicked enemy has already hung sin and death on
our necks; and if he could spoil grain and wine this very hour, and
cause us all to die of hunger, he would gladly do so. Nevertheless, we
serve such an enemy, who means us so evil and poisonous, and meanwhile
we let the gracious God in heaven, who has given us everything, and
especially his Son, and with him has given us eternal life, preach to us
in vain, and do not want to obey his command.

(28) Now strike dead and choke, dear God, that we should not love
thee, who givest all manner of temporal and spiritual gifts. But with
love and will we should gladly serve him who puts all plagues on us here
and gives eternal death there.

(29) Therefore, learn what it means to love God. This Samaritan loves
God, not that he has given anything to God, but that he helps the poor
wounded man as much as he can. For thus says GOD: If thou wilt love me
and serve me, do it to thy neighbor, he needeth it; I need it not.
Therefore, this Samaritan serves our Lord God in heaven with his money,
animal, oil and wine. Not that our Lord

858 L. 3, si-83. on the thirteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1926-1928. 859

God for his person, or he does it to our Lord God; he does it to his
neighbor. But it is called done to God, and God is served by it, because
God has thus commanded and commanded it.

(30) The other thing, that the world should serve God with, he has not
commanded to go to St. James, or to Rome, or to build churches, or any
other such thing. He wants one to serve and help the other. You must not
look for me in Rome, he says, you will find me at home in your house,
with your wife, child, servants, rulers, authorities; item, in your
neighbor's house, in the gates, in the market and everywhere. Do what
you can do for friendship, love and service to anyone, and I will take
credit for it and boast that you have done it for me. How could he put
it closer to you? But the devil blinds the world so that it cannot see
what it really means to love God and to be an enemy of the devil.

(31) Therefore strive to learn to follow the example of this
Samaritan, who took care of the wounded man in his distress, helping and
caring for him as he would have wanted someone else to do and care for
him in such distress, thus bringing praise that he loved God and his
neighbor. This, I say, you shall learn to do. For this fruit shall
follow in them that have the word. But if it does not follow, they are
false Christians; like this priest and Levite here, they are cane
saints, yes, devil saints. For he who passes before his neighbor also
passes before God. Therefore, beware of the world's example, which is
hostile to both God and neighbor, but show love toward everyone, and God
will not let it go unrewarded. But whoever does not love God and wants
to pass by his neighbor in distress will certainly receive his
punishment in due time. Let everyone be guided by this.

32Thus this gospel gives us a beautiful and very useful and necessary
teaching on how we should conduct our lives if we want to be among the
multitude that loves God rightly, namely, that we love our neighbor.

and prove all good things to him in his distress. God will accept this
as if we had done it to Him.

But the Lord gives the scribe the same answer to his answer as before,
saying, "Go and do likewise. He wants to indicate once again that he
has never done such a will of God, nor can he do it. So that he must
confess, even though he has Moses and the law and knows that it is not
enough for salvation. But if he is to be saved, he must first have
forgiveness of all his sin through the Son of God, and then also receive
the Holy Spirit, who awakens the heart to willing, right obedience. For
without the Holy Spirit's help, which we receive only through the Lord
Christ, it is impossible for us to do even the least bit enough for the
law. For where the Holy Spirit is not, the heart remains unclean and in
sin. Therefore, even though the outward works of the law follow, it is
only hypocrisy, since God cannot have any pleasure in it.

(34) Therefore the judgment of our Lord Christ is sound and certain,
that they only have blessed eyes and ears, which see and hear those
things which his disciples see; and they only, which see not, neither
hear, but Moses and the law, by which the heart is not changed, but
abideth as it was in the beginning, wicked and unclean.

35 From this it is easy to answer the papists' objection against us,
that they say: Christ says, "Do this, and you shall live," and
conclude from this that one can be saved by the works of the law. For
the Lord wants to show the scribes and all of us with such a word that
it is impossible for us to follow the law unless our hearts receive the
Holy Spirit first through the gospel and are cleansed from sins.
Therefore these things are spoken according to the law, which also means
that we must do God's will, but it does not follow that we can do it.
Christ must work this in us through the holy gospel and his Holy Spirit.
For this reason the Lord introduces this likeness to the one who fell
among the murderers, so that

[**860 8.3, 53-58.** on the fourteenth Sunday after Trinity. **W. xm,
1928-1931.1944. 861**]{.underline}

to indicate how great misery is upon us all, and that only through him,
the right Samaritan, can we be freed and delivered from it.

(36) For we poor men have fallen among the worst of murderers through
sin, that the devil and death have become powerful over us, and have not
only stripped us and robbed us of all the spiritual goods that God has
granted and given us, but they have also wounded us and beaten us, that
is, because of sins we have fallen into all kinds of misery, calamity
and misery. In such misery we should lie down because of the priest and
the Levite, that is, because of the law; for they pass by and do not
help the poor man. As Paul says: By the law no man is justified, nor
absolved from sins. But in the end we find the Samaritan, our dear Lord
Christ, whom his own people would not accept, but took him for your
heathen and possessed man. He takes care of our suffering, washes and
binds up our wounds with wine, and pours the blessed oil of his grace
into them, and takes our sin upon himself, which he bears in his body,
and thus leads us into the right inn, that is, into the Christian
church,

and commands the host to take care of us, that is, those who are in the
ministry and preach the word.

But, alas, the greatest number, as we see in the pope, bishops, and the
same vermin, maintain such ministry very badly; that the church is like
a hospital, which has an unfaithful, industrious, unprofessional
hospital master, where the sick are maintained very badly. For they
should preach God's word, so they pursue it; they should lead people to
Christ and thus help them from sins, so they only put them deeper into
it. Nevertheless, we see that our dear Lord Christ does not want to let
such a hospital disappear. If the pope and bishops do not want to preach
rightly, they may leave it alone and wait how they will be rewarded in
the end. Meanwhile, our dear Lord Christ raises up poor, miserable
people who are despised in the world, who preach his word and care for
the poor sick, so that they may come to forgiveness of sins and eternal
life through the gospel. For without this preaching it is impossible
that we could come to such treasure. Therefore, we may well thank God
for such beneficence, and pray that He may preserve us in such grace and
make us blessed, amen.

**On the fourteenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 17, 11-19.**

And it came to pass, as he journeyed toward Jerusalem, he passed through
the midst of Samaria and Galilee. And when he was come into a market,
ten leprous men met him, which stood afar off, and lifted up their
voice, and said: JEsu, dear Master, have mercy on us. And when he saw
them, he said unto them: Go and show yourselves to the priests. And it
came to pass, as they went, they were cleansed. And one of them, when he
saw that he was healed, turned again, and praised God with a loud voice,
and fell on his face at his feet, and gave thanks unto him. And this was
a Samaritan. And Jesus answered and said, Were not ten of them clean?
But where are the nine? Has no one else been found who has turned back
and given glory to God, except this stranger? And he said unto him,
Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath helped thee.

*) Held in house 1532; after *a* and *b* and after Röhrer, 1533. D.
Red.

[862 **L. 3,ss-s7.** On the fourteenth Sunday after Trinity. **W. xm,
1944-494s.** 863]{.underline}

In today's Gospel, you will hear at the end how the Lord praises faith.
Your faith, he says to the Samaritan who was a leper, has helped you. So
he gives credit, not to himself (otherwise he would say, "I have helped
you"), but to faith. With this, he wants to provoke us to believe in
God with all confidence according to such an example, and to be sure of
what we believe, that we will have it through Christ. If we believe in
forgiveness of sins and eternal life through Christ, it shall be yes; if
we believe that God is gracious and merciful to us for Christ's sake,
He will be gracious and merciful. So that everything should be
attributed to faith, not to God, who alone does it. So that everyone may
learn, where we do not obtain something that we would like and need,
that it is not because of God, but only because of our unbelief;
otherwise, if we believed firmly, we would certainly have it.

(2) This then is the first lesson of today's Gospel, that we should
know that everything we can provide for and comfort ourselves in God
should be yes. But whoever does not believe in God and does not want to
provide anything good for Him, let him not think that he will get
anything. As Jacob says in his epistle, Cap. 1: For he who wants to deal
with God and ask something of Him, must not doubt or waver, saying,
"Who knows whether God will give it to me, or whether I am worthy of
it? No, not at all; but thus you shall say, "I know what I ask of God,
that He will gladly do and give it for Christ's sake. And if he does
not do now and in this way as I would like, he will do it in another
time and way.

For a fickle heart that does not believe, nor does it think for certain
that it will obtain anything, will never be granted. For God can give
him nothing, even if he would like to. It is like a vessel that is held
in one's hands, and yet one does not want to hold it still, but moves
it back and forth, so that one cannot pour anything into it; and even if
one would like to pour something into it, it still misses the mark and
perishes in vain. So it is for an unbelieving, wavering heart also

done. God would gladly give us what we need, but there we stand, like a
mad beggar, holding out our hat that he might throw something in for us,
and yet we will not keep still. Our Lord God does not want to throw His
gifts away in vain, so that they fall by the wayside and are lost. It is
just as if you had a candelabra or a bottle in your hands and wanted
someone to pour wine into it, and yet you always wanted to throw it back
and forth with your hand. This would make a very unwilling host,
especially if he were to give you the wine and not take any money for
it. He would say: Always roll yourself, do you think I want to pour the
wine on the ground? It is just such a thing with a wavering, unbelieving
heart; God cannot pour anything into it, even if he would like to.

4 Again, if one does not waver, but keeps still, he will gladly give. As
we see here in the ten lepers, who stand and cry, "Jesus, dear Master,
have mercy on us. They keep still, and do not doubt that he will help.
Therefore, as they believe, so shall it be done unto them. We should
keep this in mind so that we may learn to trust in God's goodness, and
not waver in our hearts, but keep quiet in everything we ask for, be it
health, food, happiness, wisdom, or righteousness. For God will gladly
give all these things, provided they are for His glory and are useful
and good for our salvation. He does not sometimes hesitate to try us if
we want to persevere with prayer and faith. This is the first part of
today's Gospel, that we should pray in firm faith and not despair of
God's gracious will through Christ.

5 The other piece is a very frightening example, that ten of them
initially have such a fine faith and are healed, and yet the nine fall
away again and do not give thanks to the Lord Christ because of such a
blessing.

(6) Such an example should serve us to be grateful and to guard
against the shameful vice of ingratitude. For it is our Lord God's
will, and not unreasonably, that we should have the honor of thanking
Him for all His benefits.

[864 **L. 3, 57-6". On the fourteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
1948-1951.** 865]{.underline}

We should do this willingly and gladly. For it is a thing that does not
cost much effort and labor. For what harm can it do you to turn to God
and say, "O Lord, you have given me healthy eyes, healthy hands and
feet, this and that; I thank you from my heart for it, for it is your
gift. So what harm can it do you to thank your father and mother, your
master and wife, your neighbor, if a good thing has been done to you by
them? After all, it does not break your leg, and the only thing that
matters is to see whether it has been done to you. So the Samaritan does
here, returns to the Lord and gives thanks. It cost him not a penny but
a few words, and yet it pleases the Lord so much that it is a miracle.

(8) People are also pleased with gratitude, and it does them good;
they are also provoked by it to help more at another time. The heathen
have said that ingratitude is the greatest vice. Therefore, if one
scolded someone for being ungrateful, he was scolded to the highest
degree. Nevertheless, we learn that such ingratitude is very wicked, and
is most common to those who deserve all the thanks they get from us,
such as: Father and mother, who dare to give their children life, limb,
honor, property, and all that they have. But how do the children reward
them? What do they experience in them? It is seldom that a child is
grateful. That's what the wretched devil does. It's the same in other
classes.

9 Therefore learn to beware of the great and shameful vice, from which
the spring runs dry, from which all faithfulness and good deeds flow
among men. For where one finds an unthankful heart, the desire and love
to help and to do something too good for such people vanishes. For
whoever helps other people should receive no other thanks than to be
given in return, that is a very annoying thing. The first word is to
say, "All is lost with the wretched man. Let him always go, I would not
look at him, that I help him with a penny. So people become unwilling.
This is what shameful ingratitude does, and yet it is a very common vice
in the world.

(10) Therefore, if you wish to be devout Christians, learn to be
grateful first to God, our gracious Father in heaven, who gives and
sustains life and limb; and then give all that pertains to eternal life.
Then also be grateful to your parents, friends, neighbors, and all who
have shown you good, and show them good again; so that, though you
cannot repay them by works, yet you may show yourselves grateful and
kind by words. This is good for you, and God wants it from you. But the
least part does it. For since the world cannot be made to show gratitude
with words, it is no wonder that people cannot be made to repay; as the
saying goes: Nihil citius senescit, quam gratia: Beneficence is soon
forgotten.

In monasteries, the young monks who gave them only a cut feather were
accustomed to bend down and say: Benedictus Deus in omnibus donis suis:
God be praised for all that he gives us. This was not a wicked way; for
it was done so that the young people would be accustomed to accept
everything with thanksgiving to God and man. Therefore, although it was
not always so in the heart, it was nevertheless fine that the words were
spoken. Thus it is written in the 116th Psalm, v. 12, 13: "How shall I
repay the Lord for all his benefits that he has done for me? I will take
the cup of salvation and preach the name of the Lord," that is, I will
praise, extol and give thanks to him and say that he has done me good.
Yes, dear child, says our Lord God, I have just had enough.

(12) But the kind Father can obtain it from few people. Most of them
persecute his word and blaspheme him, regardless of the fact that
everything we have we have only through him and from his graces. And
this is not enough; his only begotten Son, whom he gave us to comfort us
against sin and eternal death, they still hang on the gallows. This may
ever be a world that God should be justly hostile to and do it no good.
But he will not be angered, he remains kind and merciful, and helps
everywhere.

[866 **2.3,60-63. on the fourteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
issi-issi.** 867]{.underline}

Therefore, it is not enough that we learn to be thankful, but we must
also become accustomed to the virtue that can suffer ingratitude. This
is only God's virtue and the virtue of right Christians. For there are
enough examples before our eyes, which testify that the world cannot do
such things. The Greeks had very fine people who faithfully stood by
their country and risked life and limb for it. But as soon as they found
that gratitude was not forthcoming and that they did not enjoy such
favors, but that people wanted to add to them and squeeze them, they
became impatient about it. So that just as they had protected the
fatherland against the enemies before, they helped the enemies against
the fatherland afterward, and became the worst enemies. This is our way
and nature; but it is an evil way, which we should renounce, and take
God's way to us, who, though he is hostile to ingratitude, as a
shameful, great vice, yet he is not moved by it to be also evil; he
always remains good and gracious to everyone who needs his help.

(14) He who wants to be a Christian, let him learn that he will not
earn thanks everywhere with all his good deeds, faithfulness and
service, but must also suffer ingratitude. But we should not let
ourselves be moved in this way, so that we no longer want to serve or
help others. For this is a Christian virtue and the true fruit of faith,
that when thou hast done thy best, and it is thrown into thy hand, thou
be patient, and say, Nay, thou shalt not offend me with this, nor make
me displeased; I will suffer it, and yet help where I can. Wilt thou be
ungrateful? I know one above us in heaven who will thank me in your
stead; I would rather have that than have you thank me. That is, to be
Christian, and as Solomon calls it, to heap burning coals on the head of
the ungrateful.

You will never learn this art from the world. She does the antithesis.
If you do not want to be grateful, she makes you think that what she has
done is gone and lost, that she will no longer use her good deeds so
badly. But it is our Father in heaven, since we have such art from

He makes his sun shine, not only on the pious who thank him for it, but
also on the wicked who do not thank him, but misuse all the gifts. He
could also say to the right half: I have let the sun shine for so many
years, I have given grain, wine and all kinds of fruits and benefits;
but I deserve little thanks; therefore I will let it shine no more, and
let the ungrateful world die of hunger. But he does not do it, the
gracious father. No, he says, the ingratitude of the world should not be
so great that it should make me angry with it. If it will not be
grateful, yet I will be merciful, and will find the ungrateful well in
his time.

16 We should also learn this art if we want to be Christians in a
different way. For this is the way of Christian love, that it bears and
endures everything, and yet does not allow itself to be made bitter. But
there are very few of them who have such love; therefore there are also
very few true Christians. Otherwise we would gladly do good to people
and help them, and yet not be annoyed by the ingratitude, nor let it
seem strange to us, as it does to the world: it hurts it, and annoys it
very much, when the good deed is not repaid. But think and be accustomed
to it. If you have done good to someone today and he escapes you
tomorrow through ingratitude, do not let yourself be challenged. For he
will know how to enjoy such ingratitude. Go on, and say: If it is lost
in him, quickly bring another, and he will also do well. If he will not
do well, bring the third, and so on, that you may learn to say, as our
Lord Christ says here, "If ten have not been healed, where are the
nine?

17 The dear Lord deserves little thanks, but he is content that one of
the ten should come back and thank him. He would not have asked about
the others if he had not done so to show how hostile he is to
ingratitude. As if he should say: "Be thankless, you will not escape me
like this; I will ask where you have been, that you have never thanked
me for giving you life and limb, and for creating everything.

**868** D- 3,63-65. on the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
iss4-iss7. **869**

I have what you need. Then you will find out what a shameful vice
ingratitude is.

18 Therefore we must be accustomed to learn from the example of our Lord
Christ that we can despise ingratitude. For experience shows, and
everyone can see, that when our Lord gives us ten good years, we hardly
thank Him a little for one; indeed, what is more, we always misuse the
best years in the most shameful way. If God gives a rich year with wine,
grain, and other things, there are miserly people who buy it up and wait
for a theurung. Others think that because much has grown, they must kill
all the more, indulge and drink; thus they thank God for His blessing.
Thus, hardly a tenth of His gifts and goods are thanked to our Lord God.
We should be accustomed to this, and not let it hurt us, but let it be
enough for us, if we find one among ten who is able and willing. The
others will find it in their time. For they shall not so bear it away to
our Lord God, who will have thanksgiving.

(19) Therefore your love has these two lessons from today's Gospel:
the first, about faith; the other, about the two beautiful virtues, that
we should be thankful and learn to suffer ingratitude along with it. We
are to learn gratitude from the Samaritan, and follow his example, so
that we are not found ungrateful to God and man. But from Christ we are
to learn, even if we do good to someone, and

But we do not deserve thanks, because we do not want to be angry with
them, much less repay others. For as I said before, it is a very wicked
vice in the world to make people displeased and disgruntled by
ingratitude, and often have to pay off ten of them to an ungrateful
person. But if you are a Christian, do not do this. If nine deceive
thee, be content, that only the tenth be justified and thankful. For
Christ himself does not find people who would be grateful for such a
great benefit; would you then have it better than he? Therefore let it
come to the ninth, you will have no more harm than Christ. But you will
have to have harm, that neither happiness nor salvation will be with the
ungrateful people.

20 In sum, we will be fine Christians if we first have a firm faith and
trust in God's goodness; then we are not only thankful, but also able
to suffer ingratitude. For we will have no better than Christ our Lord.
We should prove all good things to the people, but wait that there will
be hardly one of them among ten who is well disposed and will be
grateful. And it may well come to pass that it is he who gives thanks,
and since it is well appointed, when one has least confidence and hope;
as the Samaritan is here. May our dear Lord God grant us His mercy, so
that we may mend our ways and earnestly shun and flee the shameful
ingratitude towards God and man, amen.

**On the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 6, 24-34.**

No one can serve two masters. Either he will hate one and love the
other, or he will cling to one and despise the other. You cannot serve
God and mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; neither for your body, what
ye shall put on. Is not life more than food? and the body more than
raiment? Look at the birds of the air: they do not sow, they do not
reap, they gather.

*) Held in house, 1532; after *a*, 1532 and 1534. D. Red.

[870 D. 3,65-67. on the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, is56-iWi.
' 871]{.underline}

not into the barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not
much more than they? Who is there among you who can add a cubit to his
length, though he cares for it? And why do you care for clothing? Look
at the lilies of the field, how they grow; they do not work, nor do they
spin. I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed as
one. If God so clothes the grass of the field, which today stands, and
tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more do it unto you, O
ye of little faith? Therefore shall ye not be anxious, saying, What
shall we eat? what shall we drink? wherewith shall we be clothed? The
heathen seek after all these things. For your heavenly Father knows that
you have need of all these things. Seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Therefore
do not worry about the morrow, for the morrow will take care of its own.
It is enough for every day to have its own plague.

This is a rich gospel and a long sermon against avarice, to which our
Lord God is especially hostile, because there is no other vice that
hinders the gospel more and does more harm to Christians. And yet we see
that the whole world is drowned in it. For everyone cares day and night
how he will be fed. And this is especially good for avarice, that no one
is satisfied with what God has given him; they all want to have more and
go higher. To whom God has given a beautiful house, he would like to
have a castle; if he has a castle, he would like to have a village, and
so on: no one is satisfied, everyone would like to get higher and have
more. Otherwise, if there were no stinginess and pride, we would all
have enough, and there would be no such worries, scratching and scraping
among the people. The Lord would like to counter such un-Christianity
with this sermon, and for this reason he does it very strongly. "No
one," he says, "can serve two masters; he will either hate one and
love the other, or be attached to one and despise the other." There you
can see that the Lord is worried that mammon will hinder his service.

2 Therefore it is not a gospel for the young people. For they have the
grace, praise God, that they would rather eat cherries than count money;
they also care more for a beautiful apple than for a red florin; they do
not ask what the grain is worth; for they are sure in their hearts and
certain that they will find food.

3 This sermon is especially directed to the fathers of the household and
to those who are in office, and most of all to the preachers who are in
trouble in the world, some of whom have been killed by

They are forced to think about how they will feed themselves and their
wives and children. The Lord comforts them here, wants to relieve them
of such worries, and says: "They should look at the little birds:
because God provides them so abundantly, they will also have their
party, so that they will not die of hunger.

(4) That this sermon does not particularly concern the young, for they
think that the kitchen and cellar have already been provided for, and
let others take care of them. But we old fools have the particular
misfortune of providing for our belly and always fear that we will die
of hunger.

Since our dear Lord Christ so harshly rejects the idea that one cannot
serve God and mammon at the same time, it is necessary that we learn
what it means to serve God.

According to the common usage in the world, "to serve" means nothing
else than to do what one has commanded. That it is said in the same way:
I serve my lord, as if one said, I do what my lord commands me. That
therefore the service is not ordered on the mere person, but on the word
and command. For masters and wives of the house must not keep the
servants to eat and drink; they can do it themselves. But let them see
to it that they do and perform that which they have commanded them.
Wherefore if a servant be a wicked man, and suffer his lord's word and
command to stand, and do that which others call him to do, it is not
serving the right lord.

(7) In this way we must also speak here of worship: that serving God
means nothing else than hearing what he says and doing it gladly and
diligently. What

872 **D.3.67-6S. On the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
I96I-ISM.** 873

But what does God mean? First of all, it means to hear Christ and accept
the good gospel. This is the only, right, pleasing service we can do to
God, for His command is there before our eyes.

8. According to it, God commands that the children honor their father
and mother, that the parents nourish, nurture and teach their children;
that a woman love her husband and take care of the household, and that
the husband nurture and protect her. 2c. Wherefore the children honor
their father and mother, with the same they serve God. For there is
God's command for them to do so. So servants and maids in the house, if
they do diligently what they are commanded to do, they serve not only
their rulers, but God in heaven; for there is His word that requires it
of them.

(9) So, too, in other states, each one could enter into God's command
and service, if only we would learn what it means to serve God. For as I
said, the service of God is not in the work, but in the word and command
of God. It has a great reputation before the world that a monk forgives
himself everything and goes to a monastery, leads a strict life there,
fasts, watches, prays 2c. There is no lack of work, but there is a lack
of command, because God has not commanded him to do this; therefore it
cannot be praised for any service. Again, it is a very small thing for a
maid to cook, wash, sweep and do other household work in the house. But
because God's command is there, such a small work cannot be praised
otherwise than as a service to God, and far surpasses all monks' and
nuns' holiness and hard living. For there is no command of God; here,
however, it is God's command that one should honor father and mother
and help to keep house.

(10) So it is called serving God where one does what God has commanded
and does not do what God has forbidden. And so the whole world would be
full of God's service: not only in the church, but also in the home, in
the kitchen, in the cellar, in the workshop, in the field, among
citizens and farmers, if only we would send ourselves into it properly.
For it is certain that God does not only

The Lord wants to order and maintain the church and world regiment, but
also the home regiment. Therefore, whoever serves, father and mother
first, then the children, and finally the servants and neighbors, all
together serve God, for it is His will and command.

Then a poor maid might first have joy in her heart and say, "I'm going
to cook, I'm going to make the bed, I'm going to sweep the house, who
told me to do it? It was my master and wife who told me. Who then has
given them such power over me? God has done it. Well, it must be true
that I serve not only them, but also God in heaven, and that God is
pleased with me. How can I be more blessed? It is just as much as if I
were to cook for God in heaven.

(12) Thus a man, with all his toil and labor, could be cheerful and of
good cheer, and nothing would sour him, if he thus sent himself to his
service and occupation. But the devil fights back tooth and nail, saying
that there is no joy in it, but that everyone is displeased with what he
is supposed to do and is commanded to do; that only people have no love
for it, and God no service.

(13) If money were to buy it, so that one could come to the state of
knowing that he was serving God in it, don't you think we would give
everything we have for it? What did the mad monks and nuns do for the
hope that they would think that they were serving God? But as I also
said above, they lacked it, since it is all up to them. For if you ask
who called them to run to the monastery, it is impossible for them to
say that God told them to do so; but if they want to confess the truth,
they must say that they thought it was possible to serve God in this
way. But the wretched devil thanks them for that. For that is just as
much a thing as if I had my maid make a fire, and she wanted to sweep
the parlor for it. With such service she would do me little favor, I
would not thank her very much; especially if she still wanted to defend
this and boast: "Lord, sweeping the parlor also makes me angry.

**[874 8.3, 69-72. on the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
iWs-1968. 875]{.underline}**

Thank you for a good year, I should say, who called you? You should have
warmed my room now; that's what I asked you to do, not sweep the room.

(14) It is the same with monks and nuns: they praise God's service,
and yet God has not told them to do so. Therefore, if you want to serve
God rightly, stay in your profession and status, however small it may
be; and listen first to God's word in the church, then to your
authority, rule or parents' word, and follow it. That is, to serve God
rightly.

(15) Therefore, let each man learn diligently for himself, whatever
his station, and know well what it means to serve God, namely, to do
what God commands through preachers, through father and mother, through
masters and wives in the house. If you do this, your heart can be finely
guarded against God, and your work or service will not become sour or
difficult for you, because you know that God is pleased with it and that
it is called serving Him. And what you do in your house is just as much
as if you had done it to our Lord GOD up in heaven.

(16) This is the most beautiful and best adornment, since a human
being is adorned above all other creatures, which also walk in obedience
to God. For there we see that the sun and the moon, the earth and all
creatures walk along in God's order and obedience, and accomplish that
which God has commanded them to do. The sun gives light to all the world
by day, the moon by night, the earth yields all kinds of fruit every
year. So does the water. What command does it have? What should it do?
It shall bring fish, says God in the first book of Moses. It does this
everywhere, except where people, through their sin, do not withstand
God's blessing and hinder His command. Thus all other creatures walk in
the most beautiful adornment, that is, in the service of God. Christ
says here that even Solomon was not so beautifully adorned in all his
glory as a little flower in the field. What does a flower do? What is
its command? Nothing else, except that it should stand there, bloom
beautifully, smell well, and

and let them be used. If God so highly praises a little flower, what do
you think is the adornment of a human being when he is found in the
command and obedience of God?

17 A maid who adorns herself for dancing is a worldly ornament. But if
you want to judge rightly, you have to say: It is dirt compared to the
adornment, if she goes in her office and profession, waits for the
children, the kitchen, the house, and does what she is commanded to do.
For thus the 45th Psalm praises the Christians, and says v. 10: "In
your adornment go the daughters of kings." What kind of adornment can
this be, since we know that Christians on earth are poor, miserable and
despised? It is a spiritual ornament, and is not called silver, pearls,
velvet, or gold pieces, but the command of our Lord God. Such jewelry
shines more beautifully than the sun, for it is God's jewelry. So he
who walks in our Lord God's command walks in our Lord God's own
ornament.

(18) If I were to wear the emperor's ornament, or if a beautiful
young woman were to walk in the ornament of the queen of France, that
would be a glorious and delicious thing in the eyes of the world, since
everyone would open their mouths about it. But in truth it is nothing
compared to this spiritual adornment, when a woman walks along in
obedience to God, loves and values her husband, and brings up her
children finely and well, and is tidy and diligent in housekeeping;
compared to such adornment, pearls, velvet and golden pieces are like an
old, torn, patched beggar's cloak. For it is an ornament that has
God's word and command and walks in God's obedience.

19 This is the right crown and beautiful golden chain, as Solomon says
in Prov. 1, v. 8, 9: "My son, obey your father's discipline, and do
not forsake your mother's commandment; for this is a beautiful ornament
for your head, and a chain for your neck."

20 Here on earth this obedience seems to be nothing special. But in that
life, there it will seem, when God will say and praise: My child, come
here, you are an obedient child, a faithful handmaiden, a

**876 3.72-74. On the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm, iWK-E.
877**

a pious servant. There you will see that obedience to God and His word,
even in such lowly ranks, is more adorning than all the world's
adornment.

(21) Let this be said of the first part, that you may learn what it
means to serve God, and not let Mammon's service hinder you in this.
Now let us look at the consolation, and learn how to resist avarice.

22.*) First, the Lord says, "No one can serve two masters." Name two
lords; the one is called God, that is the right Lord, whom we owe to
serve. The other lord is called Mammon, which is not the right lord;
therefore Christ wills that we should not serve him. But how to serve
God we have heard.

(23) But what it means to serve mammon, the Lord himself indicates
here, namely, to provide for life what one will eat and drink, and to
provide for the body how one will clothe himself. And the whole sermon
is to the effect that we should not take such care at all; for it is not
only a vain care, which we have no need of and can do nothing with, but
such care also hinders the right service of God. Therefore, we should
beware of it and become accustomed to serving God and to trusting Him
that He knows what we need and will provide it for us and gladly give it
to us if we only seek it from Him.

(24) To such trust we have a great advantage, that we see that God has
already given us life and limb without our care. Now let all the world
judge. Is it not true that if all food were in a heap, it would not be
so dear to you as your life? So your body is dearer to you than all
clothing. Are we not wretched, ungrateful people, since God should be
justly angry with us? We must confess that He has already given us the
most and the greatest of Himself and without being asked, and yet we do
not want to trust Him that He will also give us the lesser. It would
ever hurt a rich man if he had given you a thousand guilders, so that
you would not be so

*) Held in the house in 1534.

much would you provide for him, that he would also give you an old pair
of shoes. This is what we do in truth to our Lord God in heaven when we
provide food and drink, since he has already given the greatest and
most. But how such mistrust pleases him, we may consider.

(25) Just as we must learn and confess in ourselves, in our bodies and
lives, in our eyes, ears, hands, feet, and all our limbs, that God is
gracious to us, that He has given us much, and that He has done us good:
so the Lord sets before us the examples of other creatures, that we may
learn by them to trust in God and not to worry.

26 For the little birds fly over before our eyes, in small honor of us,
so that we might take off our little hats against them, and say: My dear
doctor, I must ever confess that I cannot do the art that you can. You
sleep through the night in your little nest without a care in the world;
in the morning you get up again, are cheerful and in good spirits, sit
down on a little flower, and sing, praise and thank God; then you look
for your food and find it. Fie, what have I learned as an old fool, that
I do not do the same, when I have so much reason to do so! Can the
little bird leave off its worrying, and in such a case keeps itself like
a living saint, and yet has neither field nor barn, neither box nor
cellar; it sings, praises God, is happy and in good spirits; for it
knows that it has one who cares for it; he is called our Father in
heaven: why then do we not also, who have the advantage that we can
work, build the field, gather the fruits, pour them out and keep them
for the need? Yet we cannot leave off this shameful worrying.

Therefore, we should not forget this example of the birds. They are
without any worry, cheerful and in good spirits. And why would they
care? They have a rich chef and waiter, called the Father in heaven, who
has a kitchen as wide as the world. Therefore, they fly where they want,
so they find the kitchen well ordered. The same heavenly Father, Christ
says here, would have your kitchen master

878 **L. 3.74-76. on the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
1976-1979.** 879

and waiters would also like to be, if only you could believe it, or
wanted to have.

28. But unfortunately we learn that the whole world is a bunch of
desperate miserly people, who do not trust God, do not serve God, but
mammon; and only deal with how they may collect a lot of money. If they
manage to get it, they are in good spirits. If they do not, they are sad
and sorrowful and worry day and night. But is it not true, if thou hadst
a house full of florins, and the house were also golden, and the Elbe or
the Rhine flowed with gold, and were thine own: what could such help
thee, if there were nothing else, no corn, no beer, no wine, no water?
You will never eat the gold.

29 This may be called a shameful mammon service, which the pagans also
mocked, and a fable was made of a rich king in Phrygia, called Midas: he
was so stingy that he wished that everything he touched would turn to
gold. Such a wish came to him, as he had desired: if he touched his
skirt, table, benches, bed, door, everything became gold as soon as, the
knife over the table, the bread and drink also. But he had to die of
hunger in the end, the miser, he had well wished. Therefore curse
avarice and flee it, whoever can; for one will never eat either silver
or gold. Nevertheless the world is so blind and mad, when it has food
and drink, that it still wants gold and money. Just as if it did not
need what God gives, and had to have what He does not give.

(30) Therefore, let him who is a Christian take better heed, and let
not avarice pass him by; but learn to trust God, who has already proved
Himself in us and in the whole creature, that He will provide for us and
will not let us suffer any lack. As the Psalter also especially praises
the young ravens, that God provides them with their food and
nourishment, although the old ravens leave them in the nest and no
longer come to them, nor do they corrode them. For this is God's order
for and for, where He gives life, that He also creates that it may be
preserved. And if he does this to the cattle, how much more does he want
it for the people,

and especially to his Christians, to whom he has given not only life and
limb, but also his only begotten Son, that they should live not only for
time, but for ever. This is what the Lord wanted us to learn, and to
drop the shameful unbelief that avarice arouses.

For what do we accomplish by worrying ourselves to death? It would be a
very foolish thing for a little man to sit in a corner and spend his
life worrying and thinking about how he might grow taller. Do you not
think the whole world would mock him and think him a fool? The same
thing, saith Christ, the world doeth, when it careth how it may make
money and goods; no man careth richly. It is entirely up to him whether
God gives his blessing, and not up to worry. If God's blessing is
there, one has it; if it is not there, whether one has it or not, one
will not be able to enjoy it or keep it, as the examples before us show.

This should also be a cause that should provoke and move us to faith:
that worry not only hinders faith and is against God, but also hurts us
and troubles us, and yet we do nothing with it. That is to say,
miserliness, worry, and unbelief (for where one is, there is also the
other) are honestly praised; that if we only wanted to use our reason,
we should become hostile to such vices and guard against them.

But the Lord will not leave it at that, and tells us to open our eyes
when we are in the field or in a garden, and look at the little flowers;
there we will also find a good doctor, who would gladly teach us the
highest art, so that we can trust God and provide ourselves with
everything good for him. For there are flowers of all colors, adorned in
the most beautiful way, so that no emperor nor king is equal to them in
adornment. For all such adornment is a dead thing. But a flower has its
color and beauty, that it is a natural, living thing. And it does not
have the opinion that it grows like this. Here it is that Christ says,
"God clothes the grass of the field in this way.

880 **L. 3:76-79. on the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1930-1982.** 881

(34) Just as he says above, "The little birds do not find their food
by chance, but God the Father in heaven provides it for them and
arranges that each little bird has its place and is fed. It is the same
with the little flowers, as you can see. For if it were not for God's
special order and creation, it would never be possible for one to be the
same as another, to have the same color, leaves, number of leaves,
veins, seeds and other measurements. If God takes such care with the
grass, which stands only to be seen and to be enjoyed by cattle, is it
not a sin and a shame that we still doubt whether God will provide us
with clothing?

35 For just as we have an advantage over the little birds; we build the
field, we reap, we fill the barns and cellars, and can make a supply for
ourselves, at least for one day; since the little birds have none, and
yet are fed: so, saith the Lord, we also have an advantage for clothing.
There is so much flax, flax and hemp being grown, so many sheep being
raised, so much spinning and working going on in every house: how can a
man be so devoid of faith that he does not hope to get something out of
it, especially if he keeps on working?

For we must make a distinction here. Not only is work not forbidden, but
it is also commanded to the highest degree, and so commanded that all
diligence and care be put into it, and that it not be idle, lazy, or
careless. But to care for food, drink, clothing, and other things, that
is most forbidden. For such care is an indication that we do not trust
in God to sustain us. Therefore, God is blasphemed most of all.

So that both must be and remain with each other. The first, that you
wait with all diligence of your work. For this is what God commanded man
in paradise: that he should eat, that he should also work. The other is
that you also be a Christian and believe. But to believe means to trust
God, that he is our Father, that he knows what we need, and that he will
gladly and graciously give it to us.

let go. Worry cannot get along with such faith; but as soon as worry
starts, faith falters, indeed, it is over.

038 Therefore the Lord forbideth, saying in short, Be not anxious: work
ye shall, it is your command; and let me be anxious: for this is my
office, that I am your father, and I can do something with my care; ye
can do nothing with it. Therefore let it be done; or if you will not let
it be done, know that you are no longer my servants; you are the
servants of Mammon; whom you love, but me you hate; to him you cling,
but me you despise. How one sees then publicly at the world examples.
Yes, if someone knew how to win ten or twenty guilders this hour, that
he would leave such profit behind, or delay a little, and go to the
sermon first? Winning money is more important to him, and he thinks he
can get the sermon at another time. But it is true that whatever you do
to God's word, you have done to God. He who despises it and prefers
money has despised God and hates God. Just do not make a gloss, the text
is too loud that you can not pass.

039 Therefore this is the preaching of Christians, that they should not
be anxious, nor say, What shall we eat? what shall we drink? wherewith
shall we be clothed? The heathen, saith the Lord, seek such things, not
knowing nor believing that they have a Father in heaven. But you have a
Father in heaven, who has given you life and limb, even his Son, who
knows what you need. But how can you think him so unmerciful and hard
that he would not give you, and let you die of hunger and perish?
Therefore do as you see your children do toward you: they lie down at
night and sleep without any care; they care nothing where they will take
a piece of bread or soup in the morning, for they know that their father
and mother will provide for them. Do ye likewise, little children, saith
Christ here, toward your Father which is in heaven, and there shall be
no need. But do not be anxious, for that would be an indication that you
have no need of your Father in heaven.

**[882 L pp. 79-81. on the fifteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
1982-1988. 883]{.underline}**

comforts; otherwise, you would drop all worry and hope for everything
good.

40 Therefore the Lord concludes this sermon thus, saying, "Seek first
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all the rest will be added
to you. This is a necessary teaching and an excellent promise. The world
asks and seeks for its kingdom, so one must have money and goods, which
are all uncertain and unstable. On the other hand, God has another
kingdom, an eternal kingdom, which we Christians should seek. This
kingdom, says Christ, is within us. And it means nothing else than
hearing the word and believing, that is, trusting God from the heart and
considering Him as a Father. Where such faith is, God dwells, and
righteousness, that is, forgiveness of sins, follows immediately. Let
this, says Christ, be your first, hold to the word, hear it diligently,
practice it and believe.

(41) Therefore, if you have sought God's kingdom and righteousness
first, be content, and do every man in his place as he ought; for
Christians are not to walk idly, but to work: then it shall all fall to
you. For can God be so pious and gracious that He gives everything to
the wicked, who not only do not serve Him, but also persecute and
blaspheme His word, and bring upon Him all shame and dishonor: how could
it be possible that He should leave you, who love Him, gladly hear and
promote His word, and put all your trust in Him? So the Lord teaches
that we should keep the word, believe and be godly, and let go of all
worries; then God will give us everything we need.

But what happens? Most of them go away and do not heed God's word,
preferring to go drinking and gambling and dancing rather than going to
church to preach. Such naughtiness brings with it all kinds of sin. That
there should be happiness, and that God should not be with

Sickness, poverty and all kinds of misfortune should punish such, that
is not possible. Then there is another evil, that most of the people are
careless, lazy and careless with their work; or even though they work
and let it get sour, there is no measure of feasting, gambling and other
things, that one lets pass on a holiday what one has worked for the
whole week. Our Lord God has forbidden both, that one should not go idle
and should not waste, but what one has worked for should be kept in good
counsel.

43 Therefore saith the Lord, The birds neither reap, nor gather into
their coops. As if to say: You do both, and you should do both, that you
work, and afterward put the profit behind you and keep it for the need.
But whoever will not do it, what can God do that there is neither
happiness nor salvation? You may blame your nefarious, unchristian life,
your idleness and your wastefulness, and not God, who would gladly give,
if you would only be a Christian, hear the word, believe, drop your
worries and work. As he says here, it should all fall to you. But you
don't want it. When you should go to the sermon, you lie in bed and
laze around, or go for a walk, or go drinking. When you should be
working, you do the same. A little bird must work and fly out to its
pasture. Our Lord God, who wants to feed it, does not want to throw food
into its nest. So do the same to him, be godly and diligent in your
work, and let God take care of the rest, as he will provide your food.
But, as reported above, do not be stingy and be content, for God does
not want to suffer the same.

44 This is the teaching of today's Gospel. May our dear Lord God give
us His Holy Spirit through Christ, so that we may improve and become
more devout, amen.

[884 L. 3.81.82. On the sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm.
198K-19S0. 885]{.underline}

**On the sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 7, 11-17.**

And it came to pass afterward, that he went into a city called Nain; and
many of his disciples went with him, and much people. And when he was
come nigh unto the gate of the city, behold, a dead man was carried out,
which was an only son of his mother; and she was a widow; and much
people of the city went with her. And when the Lord saw her, he was
sorry for her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he came and touched the
coffin, and the bearers stopped. And he said, Young man, I say unto
thee, Arise. And the dead man arose and began to speak. And he gave him
to his mother. And fear came upon them all, and they praised GOD,
saying: A great prophet has arisen among us, and GOd has afflicted His
people. And this speech of his went forth into all the land of Judah,
and into all the surrounding countries.

(1) There is much to preach about today's gospel. But we will only
stick to the two pieces: the first, how we are to comfort ourselves
against death, for such comfort and teaching is most important; the
second, about Christian mercy and compassion, which we should have for
one another.

(2) Your dear ones hear here of a poor widow who has lost her husband,
and when her only son finally dies, she is miserable and poor
everywhere. For in Judaism it was especially considered a misfortune if
there was no son in the house, because the Jews' rule was that they
should have heirs. For this reason, this woman is a miserable, sorrowful
widow, and has the appearance that God is hostile to her and has even
forgotten about her, that he first takes her husband and then her son.
Therefore, it is no wonder that she despaired of God.

Our dear Lord Christ takes care of this woman, has compassion on her,
and makes the son alive and gives him back to her, so that the joy
becomes ten times greater than the sorrow was before. And it is a
miracle that she did not immediately fall down and die of joy.

4 For this reason we should take note of this history, so that we may
learn to strengthen our faith and make it firm. For the Lord Christ is
not concerned here only with this woman.

*) Held in the house, 1533.

He wants to teach us all how small the matter of death is, so that we
will not be afraid of it, but will go with a patient heart and not pay
attention to death and other misfortunes, because we have such a Lord in
him who can easily help and turn away death and all misfortunes. For see
here how quickly and easily this woman is helped, since she had to
despair of all help. For who would hope that the deceased son, who was
now being carried to the grave, would come back to life?

5 Now that all hope is gone, our dear Lord Christ comes and does no more
than say, "Young man, I say to you, arise. Immediately the dead man
rises and lives. Then we must confess that death is like life in the
sight of the Lord, and it is the same to him whether we live or die. For
if we have already died, we have not died before him. If it is only a
matter of one word to him, then death is gone and life comes again. So
that Christ rightly says in the gospel, "God is a God of the living,
and not of the dead." For although Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other
holy patriarchs died to us, yet they live to God.

6 Therefore we are to learn from today's gospel of this widow's son
the great power that God will demonstrate to us through Christ on the
last day, when He will call all men forth with one word.

**886** s, 82-M. On the sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
1990-1994. **887**

from death and make the faithful eternally blessed. This will happen in
a moment, so that we do not doubt that it is both in the Lord Christ:
the power to do it, as he proves here, and the will to do it. For here
is the example. The widow's son is dead and has lost his hearing and
all his senses. But as soon as Christ speaks to him, he hears. This is a
strange and wonderful story: he who does not hear, he hears; he who does
not live, he lives. And yet nothing more happens, for Christ's opening
his mouth means that he rises. The one word is so powerful that death
must depart and life come again.

7 Because we see that Christ can so easily snatch us out of death and
bring us to life, and we see here that he will gladly do so, for there
is no one to ask him; the poor widow's need grieves him, and he goes
uninvited and brings her son back to life: therefore we should accept
this example and not be afraid of death, but take comfort in the Lord
Christ. For for our sake this has happened. As if to say, "I know that
you are afraid of death, but do not be afraid; do not let your hearts be
troubled. For what can he do to you, though he be evil? He can frighten
you. But learn, on the other hand, that you not only see how you feel,
and so follow your fear; but also look at me, what I can do and what I
will gladly do, namely, that I can awaken you from death just as easily
as you awaken someone on the bed and from sleep. And I will do it with
pleasure and gladly. So that neither the will nor the strength and the
ability are lacking.

8 It must follow that the deceased, who lie in the churchyard and under
the earth, sleep more quietly than we do in our beds. For it may well
happen that you sleep so soundly that they call to you ten times before
you hear once. But the dead hear of a single word of Christ and wake up
again, as is seen here in the young man and in John 11 in Lazaro.

9 Therefore death in the sight of our Lord is called

God not death. Before us it is called and is a death when we die; for we
lie there and cannot help ourselves. But before God he is such a silent
sleep that Christ cannot speak a word, we hear it and become alive from
it.

(10) This is what our dear Lord Christ would have us imagine, so that
we would not be frightened when pestilence or death itself comes, but
would learn to say, "What can you do, death, when you are most evil?
You have hideous teeth, which you bare, and you frighten me; for I do
not like to die. But I will not look at what you alone do, and how you,
like the executioner, draw the sword; but I will think and see what our
Lord God can do, and what he will do, when you have strangled me,
namely, that he is not afraid of you, and asks nothing of your raging
and strangling; but he says, "Death, I will be your death; hell, I will
be your pestilence." If you can strangle my Christians, I can strangle
you again and make them alive.

This is the comfort which the Lord holds out to us in today's Gospel,
that Christians, though they die, are not dead, but sleep, and sleep so
quietly that Christ can awaken them with a finger, even with a single
word. Now this is a small honor to death, that when it is most angry, it
will do no more, and shall do no more, than to put a man to sleep, that
Christ may raise him up again from sleep with a word; as he says John
5:25: "The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and shall come forth; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of judgment."

The Christians have the consolation; Turks and Jews do not have it, our
papists do not have it either. They know well that they must die, and
that God's judgment and hell are before them. But what do they do? They
do not set their heart and hope on Christ, but run against him with
their masses, buying indulgences, fasting and other things. And they
take Christ for something else

888 **L. 3,8s-87. on the sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
1994-2001.** 889

Nothing, but for a judge who is there to condemn and judge. This is an
abominable error, and the wicked devil himself, that they make Christ
more evil than death itself. That is why they are afraid of the last day
and have a stupid, despondent heart.

(13) Christians do not do this. They know that Christ will judge the
unbelievers on the last day who do not want to accept the word or
believe. But there they make a distinction and say: I have been
baptized, and I believe in my Lord Jesus Christ, that he died for my
sin, and by his resurrection has purchased for me righteousness and
eternal life. What then would I fear? He is not my enemy, but my friend
and advocate with the Father. Therefore, although the last day comes, or
I die, it does not matter. My Lord Jesus Christ watches death a little
while as it strangles me. And when death thinks that I am finished, that
I have died, I only sleep; and sleep so sweetly and quietly that the
Lord Christ cannot open his mouth, I hear it and rise to eternal life.

14 Let us learn this, and let us be mindful that we do not fear death
and the last day. For Christ does not come to judge and condemn us; he
comes, as he came to the wretched widow and her son, to raise us from
death and restore us, so that we may hear, see, speak, and do other
things. So he will come to all of us who believe in him and make us
blessed. But those who do not believe, he will judge.

(15) Therefore we must learn to desire and believe in this Savior, and
in firm confidence of such help and grace become more and more certain,
and not be afraid of death and the last day. But he who fears follows
the old Adam and his flesh, and not the Lord Christ, nor his word. For
it is certain that Christ will come on the last day and wake us up again
from death. For this reason, the bodies of Christians now rest in the
grave and sleep until Christ comes.

and knock at the grave, and say, Up, up! There we shall arise as from a
gentle, sweet sleep, and live and rejoice forever with the Lord Christ.

16 Thus a Christian should have a different heart than Turks, Jews or
Papists; they become fainthearted, frightened and despondent in the last
moves, so that they do not know which way to turn. And it hardly serves
them right. Why do they not also learn and believe that Christ is a
Savior of believers, but a judge of unbelievers? Why do they not hear
the gospel, but persecute it, which teaches that we should take comfort
in the Lord Christ, that he will be our physician, helper and savior
against death and the devil? But they stop their ears, and will neither
hear nor believe, and seek other ways and means, by which they may trust
to escape death. Christ cannot tolerate such things and must be the
judge of the unbelievers, since he would gladly be their savior if they
believed in him. For they are enemies of him and do not want to accept
his kingdom. Therefore Christ must prove himself as a judge against
them. But to the pious who take comfort in him, he wants to create peace
and tranquility for eternity.

17.*) According to this teaching, which is called the teaching of
faith, we should also learn to be merciful from the Lord Christ. You
often hear about love during the year, that one should serve the other.
But to be merciful is something more, namely, to take care of other
people's sorrow and misery. For example, if I have a poor or sick
neighbor, I should not only help him gladly, but his misery should also
make me miserable, as if it were my own business. As we see here in the
Lord, he is a stranger, an unknown guest; but when he sees the misery of
the widow, he accepts it as if it were his own son, weeps with the
mother, comforts her and helps her.

18 This is the example of love, which is to follow faith, and will not
remain outside it, provided faith is righteous. Lest we do as the
wicked, reprobate people do, whose now out of the ma-

*) Held in the house, 1532.

890 L. 3:87-90. on the sixteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm. 2001-2004.
891

There are many, even among us, who have hearts of stone and wood, and
still make a laughingstock of it when they see that their neighbors are
in trouble; indeed, it grieves them that anyone has a penny. But it
should not be so with Christians; they should show mercy where they see
need, and be glad when other people are well off. As Paul says, to weep
with those who weep and rejoice with those who rejoice, and not to do as
the stones and blocks do, who rejoice in other people's misfortunes,
and would that no one had nothing but they.

(19) Now mercy is twofold, as necessity is twofold, spiritual and
corporal. In bodily distress, one should run to help and advise in
whatever way one can, when one sees that the poor people are not able to
help themselves.

20 Spiritual distress means distress of the soul. As when I see a young
person growing up, not wanting to listen to the sermon, even despising
it, unable to pray, lewd, disobedient, and full of bad manners. If one
admonishes such a person, and it does not help, punishes him with stern
words, yes, also orders rods and shillelaghs, so that the sin and
naughtiness will be prevented in time: that is mercy practiced. For
where the soul has such evil upon it, it is far more dangerous and worse
than when the body is sick. Therefore one is obliged to show mercy to
such a person as one can, with words, blows and rods.

(21) Yea, saith thou, it is an abominable mercy to put rods upon the
skin. How should one do it? If it is necessary, there is no way around
it. Doctors sometimes have to remove a leg or arm so that the body can
be saved. It is the same here. For such punishment is inflicted so that
you may become pious and be destroyed from the devil and his kingdom. Is
it not true that if you fell into water, you would thank me for catching
you by the hair and keeping you strong, and not ask that the fight hurt
you? If then you can suffer in bodily hardships and gladly suffer that
you are hurt, because it is your benefit, why would you here

Since it is not a question of temporal life but of eternal life, and not
of the body but of the soul?

(22) It is also a work of mercy, which God wants to reward, where
there are wicked children or servants in the house, to take an oaken
roll of butter in the hand and smear their skin with it. This is a
spiritual ointment against the sickness of the soul, which is called
disobedience to father and mother, to master and wife in the house. It
is a work of mercy to look at a person in his misery and suffering and
help him.

(23) Especially father and mother in the home with children and
servants, and the rulers in the government with their subjects, should
see to such mercy, and be careful that they do not become unwilling or
lazy to show such mercy, as commonly happens. For he who would be
merciful and not punish sin would show a twofold unmercifulness to his
neighbor, and for that reason incur God's wrath upon himself. The
physical sorrow can also be great. As when someone falls into the water
or fire, one does not look for how to attack you quietly and not hurt
you, but how to save you. Why then would one look for the same in
spiritual distress and need? Therefore hard words, hard blows and all
seriousness are to be used to save the poor people and to bring them out
of the devil's nets into obedience.

(24) Therefore notice the example of our dear Lord Christ here, and
learn what mercy is, namely, such a virtue as takes care of one's
neighbor's affliction. But this, as I have said, is of two kinds. A
bodily sorrow, such as being sick, being poor, and the like. If you let
such misery in your neighbor go to your heart in such a way that you do
your own harm to help him, this is right and well done, and is called
serving not only your neighbor, but also God, who will also reward it.
Spiritual sorrow is sin; as in the house, disobedience, indiscipline,
evil words and deeds. There is called mercy, if one speaks evil to the
servants and throws. If it will not help, then order the rest to the

**[892 L. 3,9". 91. on the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2004-2006. 893]{.underline}**

Executioner; for it must be punished. For the executioner is also a
merciful preacher; for otherwise evil men can neither be advised nor
helped, they corrupt themselves and other people with them, where mercy
was not exercised on them and they were not defended with the sword.

(25) So beheading and execution, though it looks terrible and hurts,
is a work of mercy. For if it were not, you would not be able to eat a
morsel with peace, nor keep a whole spot on your skin. Therefore, learn
to be merciful, each in his work, and help not only where there is
physical pain, but also where there is spiritual pain.

26 These are the two lessons of today's gospel. One is the doctrine of
faith: that we should be fearless when things go wrong, and especially
when we are about to die, and think that we have such a Helper in the
Lord Christ, who has a word that

is almighty. Therefore we should not despair of him. We can despair of
ourselves and of people; indeed, we must despair of them. For they
cannot control death, it is too powerful for them. But in GOD and his
Son JEsu we should be bold. For what we cannot do, he can; what we do
not have, he has. If we cannot help ourselves, he can, and will do it
very gladly and willingly, as can be seen here. Where there is such a
heart that confidently holds on to the Lord Christ, it is doing the
right service that pleases God. The others, who despair and despair, are
hostile to Him and do not consider Him to be God, otherwise they would
take comfort in Him. The other doctrine is that we, like Christ, should
accept our neighbor's distress and let ourselves be comforted. May our
dear Lord God grant us His grace to learn both, and to join the pious
people here in the Gospel in praising the Lord Christ for His good
deeds, even for eternity, amen.

**On the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Luc. 14:1-11.**

And it came to pass, that he entered into the house of one of the rulers
of the Pharisees, on a sabbath day to eat bread; and they kept watch
over him. And, behold, there was a man before him, addicted to water.
And JEsus answered and said unto the scribes and Pharisees, saying: Is
it also lawful to heal on the Sabbath? But they held their peace. And he
took hold of him, and healed him, and let him go, and answered and said
unto them: What man is there among you whose ox or ass falls into the
well, and he does not immediately bring him out on the Sabbath day? And
they could not answer him again. He said the same thing to the guests,
when he saw them sitting upstairs, and said to them: If you are invited
to a wedding by someone, do not sit at the top, lest a more honest man
than you be invited by him; and when he comes who has invited you and
him, say to you, "Leave this one," and you will have to sit at the
bottom with shame. But when thou art bidden, go and sit down at the
bottom, that when he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee,
Friend, go up. Then you will have honor before those who sit at table
with you. For he that exalteth himself shall be humbled; and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted.

In today's Gospel there are two pieces: the first concerns worship, how
to act toward God; the other, how to act toward people.

*) Held in the house, 1332.

(2) But here a question of the first part arises: Whether it is better
in the sight of God to keep the Sabbath, or to help men and do them
good? For this is what the Pharisees are here to do, that they hold on
to the Lord Christ, which he did with the water addiction.

894 **L. 3, A-94. on the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2006-2009.** 895

He will do what is good for him: If he does not help him, they think, he
may be reproached for being unmerciful and doing no good to the people;
but if he helps him, he is ungodly and does not keep the Sabbath; thus
he may be convinced that he is disobedient to God and his word. Now let
the good Lord do what he will, but he is caught, for they go astray on
both sides. And especially do they mean it dangerously with the breaking
of the Sabbath. For with the Jews it was a great holy thing about the
Sabbath, because they kept it firmly. But what does the dear Lord Christ
do, who is a prisoner and, according to the Pharisees, has lost
everything? He goes through the midst of them and does what is right,
puts the Pharisees to shame, and drives them in such a way that everyone
sees that they are all fools, even though they have the name that they
are the spiritual rulers who teach and lead the people, and are
therefore considered to be great doctors.

(3) This then is the sum of this bargain, that he saith unto them
blandly under their eyes, they know not what it is to keep the sabbath,
and to sanctify it. Your thoughts, he says, are these, as if keeping the
Sabbath holy meant walking idly and doing no work on it. No, this is not
how you must keep the Sabbath; but to keep the Sabbath holy means to
listen to God's word and to help your neighbor as much as you can. For
God does not want to keep the Sabbath so holy that one should leave
one's neighbor in distress or neglect it. Therefore, if I serve my
neighbor and help him, even though I work, I have kept the Sabbath right
and well, for I have done a divine work on it. This teaching of the
Sabbath, then, is primarily intended to help us understand the third
commandment, what it is and what it requires of us, namely, not that we
should celebrate and do nothing, but that we should hear God's word and
do and live according to it. What does this say and teach us? It
instructs us that, according to the other table, we should love one
another and do all good. This is what God wants you to hear and learn on
the Sabbath. It must follow that you do not desecrate the Sabbath with
such good works.

004 Therefore saith Christ, Ye Pharisees are such rough teachers, that
ye call it breaking the sabbath to do good. This is what is preached
most on the Sabbath, that we should love one another. But what does
loving mean? It does not mean to deal with thoughts, but to be favorable
to one's neighbor from the heart, to comfort or punish with the word
where it is necessary, and to be helpful to him with counsel and action,
and thus to help him in body and soul. As John says, 1 John 3:18:
"Little children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed
and in truth." This, says the Lord, is what God commands you to do on
the Sabbath; indeed, what is more, He has appointed the Sabbath so that
you may hear and learn to be kind to your neighbor in word, and helpful
in deed where it is needed.

Thus the Lord punishes the false saints, who made a wrong mind out of
God's word, and boasted that they kept the Sabbath, when they showed so
little love that they would not have given a shirt or a pair of shoes to
a naked man. Rascals are those who turn back the word of God. For where
God's word commands and says, Love your neighbor and do him every good,
they say, Oh no, I would break the Sabbath with this. This is called
unrighteous teaching, and God's command is even wrong. For God tells
you on the Sabbath to love your neighbor, to care for him, and to do him
every good in all that he needs in body and soul. As you can see in the
example that the Lord introduces here. Is it not a disgrace, he says, if
an ox or an ass falls into the water on the Sabbath, you do not break
the Sabbath by helping the poor little animal? Therefore, if it is not a
sin to help cattle on the Sabbath, are you not great saints, that you
can love oxen and donkeys, run them down with ropes and poles, help them
out of the water and save them, and forbid that a poor man should not be
loved or helped on the Sabbath?

(6) So it shall be with all them that would master and teach the Lord
Christ, that they catch themselves, and openly denounce the Lord.

[**896** L.3,94-W. On the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2009-2012. **897**]{.underline}

The Pharisees, who think that the Lord cannot escape them, either help
the poor man who is addicted to water or not. But he gives them such an
answer that they are ashamed and do nothing more against him, saying,
"You hypocrites, you are unholy and break the Sabbath. What you seek in
me you will find in yourselves. For "to sanctify the Sabbath" means to
hear God's word and to do holy works, to love one's neighbor and to do
to him what he needs, to be obedient, to be merciful, to be helpful,
comforting, to give food and drink 2c. This is what one should do on the
Sabbath, and is called serving God rightly. For he has no need of other
foolish services; nor does he want people to howl in church all day
long, as our papists are wont to do. He wants us to hear his word and to
live and do according to it.

7) This is the reason for the beautiful saying of the prophet Hosea
Cap. 6, 6: "The Lord delights in love more than in sacrifice, and in
the knowledge of God more than in burnt offerings. What is the knowledge
of God? Nothing else, but hearing God's word. Cause, without the word,
no one will know anything about God. But when the word comes and says: I
am the Lord your God, who sent my Son and gave him to die for you, who
received you in baptism 2c.: by such a word we learn to know God, that
he is gracious and merciful; which reason can neither know nor learn by
itself. But from this it follows, because one comes to the knowledge of
God through the Word, that it means to serve God and to sanctify the
Sabbath rightly, if one hears God's Word and lives and does according
to God's Word. This is what the unholy hypocrites, the Pharisees, do:
they do not hear God's word, nor do they act on it; yet they want to
have the name, they do not break the Sabbath.

(8) So do our papists, kings and princes, who are still opposed to the
Word, hear mass every day; this is the high, special service, which they
cannot observe every day. But on the other hand they hear in one

In a month, in half a year, yes, often in a whole year no sermon. And
even if they hear a sermon, they hear nothing from the Scriptures or the
true Word of God, but vain man's words and lies. This is their worship,
that they may sanctify the Sabbath or feast day. This can be done in no
other way than by listening to God's word and practicing the works that
are held out to us and commanded in the word.

(9) For this reason, we Christians should observe the Sabbath every
day. For we are to hear God's word every day and live our lives
according to it. However, Sunday is set aside for the common people, so
that everyone may hear and learn God's word on the same day and live
according to it. For the other six days the common man must wait for his
work and earn his living. God will gladly let this happen, for he has
commanded the work. But the seventh day He will sanctify, that no work
shall be done on it, but that every man may be free to exercise himself
in the word and works of God, and to do, not the temporal things, but
the things which God requires and wills in His word.

(10) This is the first part of today's Gospel, that everyone may
learn that it is called serving God and sanctifying the Sabbath rightly
and well, when we hear God's word and do according to it. Therefore,
when you go to the sermon, when you read a gospel, it is called serving
God, and is much more pleasing to Him than all sacrifice and holiness,
as Hosea says.

11 The other piece teaches about humility. For thus the Lord himself
interprets the parable at the end: "He that exalteth himself shall be
humbled; and he that humbles himself shall be exalted." This you shall
learn, that it is true not only in the sight of God, but also in the
sight of men; for all men are of this nature, that they are enemies to
those who hope. On the other hand, it must be a particularly evil person
who is hostile to a humble, pious heart. It is natural that everyone
should love him; as you can see, when a maiden in the house is willing
and obedient, and with a simple, bad heart does as she is told, the
ruler is soon in the dark.

**898** L. 3.96-W. On the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2012-2015. **899**

The people have taken it into their hearts that they cannot be hostile
to such husbands and wives (servants). So it is natural that everyone
loves humble, conscientious, quiet people.

(12) Again, no one can be kind to trustworthy people. As soon as
father and mother notice disobedience and pride in a child or servant
(for these two bad manners are commonly found together), so that they
say, "I must not do what you tell me to do," then father and mother
think how to break their pride and humiliate them, or push them out of
the house. Secular authorities do the same. Whoever is proud and does
not want to be obedient, they teach him with a rope or a sword through
Master Hansen.

(13) How is it that no one can suffer pride? Not in any other way,
except that God wills it, and his word stands there and says: He will
confidently help to humble those who are proud and hopeful. As can be
seen in all classes: what is rich, learned, sensible, beautiful, strong,
powerful and mighty, as soon as they have fallen into hope and have not
willingly given themselves down, God has overthrown them, so that they
have had to fall. For thus it is written: Deus resistit superbis: God
Himself sets Himself against those who are arrogant. Whoever then takes
upon himself such a heavy enemy, which he cannot bear, must fall, and no
power nor strength can help him.

(14) On the other hand, he who is humble wins the heart of God and
men, so that God and all his angels, and after that the people, regard
him as a particularly noble treasure. This is followed by happiness and
blessing; as one can see that often the son of a poor citizen or farmer,
to whom his father does not have to give three pennies, becomes a great
lord, since princes and lords have to take notice of him because of his
intellect and art. Where does such good fortune come from? From the fact
that our Lord God cannot leave it alone: what is humble, he adds to it
with his grace and mercy, and all that he has. As the 113th Psalm says,
v. 5 - 8: "Who is like the Lord our God? who has set himself so high,
and looks on the lowly in heaven and earth. The

He raises the lowly out of the dust, and lifts up the poor out of the
dung, that he may set him beside the princes, beside the rulers of his
people. This is what God does to the humble. But those who are proud and
want to be on top, against them He lies down with all disfavor, and does
not stop until they are down.

(15) This should move us to humble ourselves, and the children and
servants of the house to be obedient, and to remember: God wants me to
do what I am told; I am not to be hopeful, but humble. This I will do,
and not worry about it, even though I am in a lowly condition. For I
know that if I conduct myself in this way, God will not let me be so
low; he will lift me up.

16 So it was with Saul: he was obedient to his father, tending donkeys,
and considered himself the least of Benjamin. To such a donkey driver
God sends the prophet Samuel and anoints him king. For because he was
humble and unworthy of hope, God extended to him all grace and mercy.
But what happened? When Saul was king, his heart swelled so that he
became proud and asked nothing of our Lord GOD and His word. Therefore,
just as God had lifted him up before, so afterward He brought him down
again, so that he stabbed himself in despair, and his family was cut
off.

(17) David was a fine, strong, sensible young man. But he was also
humble and did not exaggerate. He remained a shepherd and did what his
father told him to do until Samuel came looking for him and anointed him
king. The story tells how he had seven brothers, all of whom were proud
and hopeful and despised their young brother David. But God said to
Samuel, "You shall not look at the form or the person, but you shall
anoint as king the one I will show you; I do not like the others. Also,
since God exalted him, David was able to remain humble; otherwise, if he
had become proud, God would have overthrown him like Saul. But because
he remained humble, even though he had already been driven out of the
kingdom, he was restored to it; and God still does him such a great
honor that he

[900 L.3,99.100. On the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2015-2017.2026. 901]{.underline}

promises him that Christ will be born from his tribe.

18. all these things are written and preached to us for this reason,
that we should be humble and beware of the hopefulness, and not say, as
the wicked housemaids do, "Well, who may always lie in the kitchen,
washing dishes and sweeping up? Must I not always do what I am called
2c. Behold, if thou wilt be proud, what is it that God will do against
thee? For he does not lie, he cannot suffer hope or pride, as we see
before our eyes. For what do you think the fault is, that everywhere in
the world it is so bad, that everywhere so much rough, un

of skillful, unfortunate men and women? Nothing else, because when they
are young, everything wants to be proud, no one wants to do what they
are called and should do. Therefore our Lord God lets them go like
swine, so that they will never learn anything righteous. For thus it is
decreed: That which is lifted up shall be brought down; and again, that
which is brought low, he cannot leave it; he must lift it up. Praise and
thanks be to God that he teaches us this day, and give us his grace that
we also follow this teaching for the sake of his Son, Christ Jesus,
amen.

**On the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 22, 34-46.**

But when the Pharisees heard that he had shut the Sadducees' mouths,
they gathered together. And one of them, a scribe, tempted him, saying,
Master, which is the chief commandment of the law? And JESUS said unto
him, Thou shalt love GOD thy LORD with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind. This is the noblest and greatest
commandment. But the other is like it: You shall love your neighbor as
yourself. In these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
When the Pharisees were together, Jesus asked them, "What do you think
of Christ? Whose son is he? They said, David's. And he said unto them:
How then doth David in the spirit call him a LORD, saying, The LORD hath
said unto my LORD, Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy footstool? Now if David calls him a Lord, how is he his son? And no
man could answer him a word, neither could any man from that day forth
inquire of him.

(1) In today's Gospel there are two main passages: the first is about
the scribe who asks what is the most important commandment in all of
Moses; the second is about the Lord Christ asking the Pharisees again
what kind of man Christ is, since David in his spirit calls him his
Lord.

(2) The first question is an indication that the Jews have fallen into
such great blindness that they have forgotten the Ten Commandments,
which little children know. Therefore, a child should ever be able to
answer such a question:

*) Held in the house, 1533.

(3) The first and greatest commandment is, Thou shalt not have other
gods. The Pharisees and scribes, however, had fallen into the
foolishness of disputing the highest commandment, one saying that it was
sacrifice, another that it was almsgiving, and a third that it was
fasting and special clothing. 2c. As you can see, it works when people
have fallen away from the commandments of God and His word, and have
undertaken other works, out of their own thoughts, without God's word.
As has happened to our monks and nuns: they have run into the
monasteries, have set themselves an obedience, have practiced chastity
and poverty.

902, **D. 3, ivo-103. on the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2029-2032.2040.** 903

They swore, all without command, until they lost God's word altogether,
and forgot what faith and love were, and praised nothing but the
wretched monastic life for the state of perfection.

Now, praise God, a child of ten years can say better what is a perfect
state than all monks and nuns. Cause, they think only of their monastic
life. But a Christian says: To be perfect means to fear and love God,
and to do all good to one's neighbor. For God has never commanded
anything else to be done. Neither priests, monks nor nuns know this, I
know this for certain, otherwise they would drop such their own foolish
presumption and go to the right obedience of the Ten Commandments.

5 But where does such ignorance and blindness come from? Nowhere else,
but that men forsake the word, and fall into outward works, which have a
peculiar appearance. As when one keeps special days, dresses special,
does not eat and drink what others eat and drink. This makes people's
noses gleam. But one loses the highest works and commandments, that one
should love God and do all good to people. As we see here in the
Pharisees and scribes, who, for this very reason, question the noblest
commandment in the Law, that they themselves are not of one mind about
it, and one considers this to be best, the other that.

(6) Therefore this example is a good warning, that such high people
have been so blind, and have not known which is the greatest or least
commandment; and yet have been teachers, who should lead other people,
and instruct them in the right worship. As our mad monks and priests
still are. Ask one, if thou wilt, of good works, and what thou shalt do,
if thou wilt be saved, he will not direct thee to the Ten Commandments,
but will tell thee that thou must become a monk, hear mass, go on
pilgrimage to the saints, fast 2c.

(7) But this is called turning away from the Ten Commandments and the
right way into the land of milk and honey, which is finally the reward
of the teachings of men, when one does such works, since God has
commanded nothing of them. Since

people are blinded, so that they no longer see the Toe Commandments, but
even lose them. For otherwise one should ever be so witty, and be able
to say: This is the greatest thing that God has commanded and commanded.
But Pharisees and Christian scholars, priests, monks and nuns cannot.

Therefore, let us beware of such error and flee from our own devotion.
Again, let not the Catechismum be a small doctrine, teaching the people
what they ought to do. For there we hear that one should love God and
have no other gods; that is, one should prefer and esteem nothing
greater than God and His word, and rather leave everything and suffer.
Then, if you do this, you are in the highest state.

(9) Yes, they say, this is what the common Christians do; I will do
something special: a common Christian does not get up at night to pray,
I will get up for supper; he eats meat, I will eat fish; he dresses in a
common way, I will have special clothing made for me 2c. So it finally
comes about that the blind people are so busy with their own devotion
that they forget the commandments of the toes.

10) Therefore it is not a bad doctrine when the Lord says here that the
greatest commandment is to love God, and the other is equal to the
first, that one should love one's neighbor as oneself; for in these two
pieces is included everything that can be preached and taught of good
works. From this fountain it shall all spring and flow in again. For
there it is decided: If you want to serve God, it can be done in no
other way than by loving God and your neighbor.

(11) This teaching will be judged very severely on the last day. For
what has happened in the papacy is well known to everyone. Whoever
wanted to serve God did not remember the Ten Commandments, but became a
monk, ran to Rome, to St. Jacob, called on this and that saint, served
him with fasting, celebrations 2c. Such things were called worship in
those days. But to serve means to do what you are commanded. Therefore
must

*) Held in the house, 1532. *a b*] D. Red.

[904 **L. 3, 103-108,** On the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. **W.
XIII, 2041-2043.** 905]{.underline}

follow, whoever wants to serve God rightly must do what God tells him to
do, not what seems good to him. But what does God mean? It says that if
you want to serve God, you must not walk or run far, nor give much money
for it. Love God and your neighbor. But how could God make His service
closer to you and more generous than this: if you love your neighbor and
do everything good for him, God will consider it as if you had done it
for him? This is a strange doctrine: if you do good to your neighbor,
that it is a service of God and is done by God Himself.

12. Such teaching, I say, will make a strange noise at the last day.
For the wicked, says Christ himself, will say, "When did we see you
hungry and thirsty?" But Christ will answer and say, "Inasmuch as ye
did it not unto the least of mine, ye did it not unto me." That it is
therefore certain and decided, if you give a poor Christian a shirt, a
skirt, yes, even a cold drink of water, you have given it to Christ. And
let no one make any distinction here.

(13) But is this not the wicked devil, that we let this pass us by,
and do not realize that we could so easily serve our Lord God Himself,
and yet we do not? We think that if we knew where to find Christ, we
would run to Him and bring Him everything we have. But what need of such
thoughts? We hear here that the other commandment is equal to the first.
It must follow that our Lord God will gladly accept it and regard it as
if it had happened to Him what we do to our neighbors.

14 Yes, you say, our Lord God is in heaven. There is no harm in that; he
is also here on earth. Therefore, if you see a Christian in distress,
know that Christ is in distress and in need of your help. As he himself
says, he will mourn over us at the last day, because we have made him
suffer hunger and thirst.

(15) But, as I said, it is a pity that we have this doctrine so
clearly, and yet we throw it to the winds as if it were all lies.

and fables. Such unbelief and disobedience will not be excused by saying
that we did not know. For here it is: The other is equal to the first.
Therefore, he who loves his neighbor loves God. Therefore the judgment
on the last day will be like this: If you had served your neighbor, you
would have served me, and I would have paid you abundantly. But for your
sake I would have died and perished. We should beware of such a
judgment, for eternal damnation will follow.

In the papacy it was a very mean thing that old horsemen, warriors,
lawyers and such like people, who let themselves think that they had
been in a damned state, said: They had served the world until now; they
now wanted to start and serve God. For this reason, many of them ran
into the monasteries and became monks or hermits. But it was a devilish
seduction. For he who wants to serve God should not hide in a corner,
but remain among the people, and serve them with whatever he can, and be
sure that he is serving God with it; for he has commanded it and said:
The other is equal to the first. But he is not served by the monastic
life, for he has not only commanded nothing about it, but it is also
contrary to love and the right worship of God, as the Lord preaches
here.

(17) It was the same with the Jews. They did all kinds of evil to
their neighbor and thought that if they only slaughtered many cows and
calves, they would have done well. But what does our Lord God say in the
50th Psalm v. 8-10? "I will not punish you because of your sacrifice,
for your burnt offerings are always before me. I will not take bullocks
from thy house, nor goats from thy stalls: for all the beasts of the
forest are mine, and the cattle that go by thousands upon the
mountains." So he says in other places that he has no need of their
gold, their temple, or anything else; but if you will serve me rightly,
I will send you down to your neighbor. Thou hast wife, child, servants,
neighbors, princes, lords, and all manner of estates; there thou shalt
find enough to do; there serve me: if thy child be not obedient and
godly,

**906** 2.3,ios-io8. On the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2013-2047. **907**

If the servant does not do right, punish him or show him the door; if
your neighbor is poor, afflicted, sick, help, serve, comfort him; be
willing and obedient to your prince, and you have done it for me.

18 That such things will not enter our hearts is to be pitied. For what
we have sinned and done wrong against God, He will not impute to us, but
will forgive; only if we serve our neighbor and do him good, God will
reward us abundantly for what we have done for him.

(19) Now if anyone does not know what the world is like with its
nature, and how it does not keep God's promise or threat, let him learn
it here. For what do citizens and peasants do other than to strike our
Lord God in the face, to scuffle and to trample underfoot, without any
shyness? since everyone is only concerned with how he can become rich
and increase his wealth, so that his neighbor may die or perish in the
process. Whoever could believe that what he does to his neighbor is done
by God, would be heartily shocked by such unfaithfulness of the world.
But there is no one who believes it to be true; as the Lord himself says
in Matt. 25 that the wicked will say at the last day, "Lord, when did
we see you hungry or thirsty?" But it will not help them. For just as
the Lord says here, "The other commandment is equal to the first"; so
Christ will also say there, "Inasmuch as ye have not done it unto one
of the least of these, ye have not done it unto me."

This is the first teaching of today's Gospel. May God grant that we may
take it to heart, and that each one may look upon his neighbor, when he
serves him, as being served by God: then the whole world would be full
of God's service. A servant in the stable, a maid in the kitchen, a boy
at school, they would be true servants of God and God's servants, if
they would do with diligence what their father and mother, their master
and their wife in the house tell them to do. So every house would be a
true church, in which nothing but pure worship would be practiced.

would. But no one wants to take it to heart; no one wants to serve his
neighbor. Everyone only sees how he can serve himself and create his own
benefit. Therefore, as one could serve God through the love of one's
neighbor, so the world serves the devil, because it does not respect the
neighbor's love at all. But this will come to a bad end. For how should
this please our Lord God, since he has brought his worship so close to
us that each one could make a golden church out of his house and
chamber, adorned with precious emeralds and pearls: and yet we wilfully
refrain from doing so, and would rather serve the devil than God.

(21) Therefore learn here that he who serves his neighbor for the best
serves not only his neighbor, but God Himself in heaven. For it says
here that God will take care of such service as if it had happened to
Himself. Otherwise Christ would not say: "The other commandment is
equal to the first. But whoever does not want to be moved by this, so
that he could establish a kingdom of heaven here on earth, and make a
house of God or church out of his own house and estate, let him always
go away. For just as you could make a paradise and heaven for yourself
here if you served your neighbor (for this is called serving God in
heaven): so, if you do not serve your neighbor, you make a hell for
yourself on earth; for you serve the devil, who belongs in hell. And it
does not matter if you do not yet see or feel this. In time it will
become clear that you will see it and feel it, and you will cry out for
your own great disobedience. Therefore, it is necessary that we learn
this well and always practice love towards our neighbor. For God has
already given us mouths, eyes, hands, feet, money, goods, reason and
other things, so that we can comply with His command and keep ourselves
in His service.

22) Just as this doctrine of the love of God and neighbor belongs to
the life here on earth, so the other doctrine of the Son of Christ
belongs to it, so that we may learn how to enter the world after this
life.

**908 D. 3, 108-110. on the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2047-2030. 909**

better and eternal life may come. For this will not bring us to heaven,
that we know how to love God and our neighbor, if we already attack such
love with works, as best we can; as the Pharisees thought: they thought
that if they had Moses, they would need nothing more. But Christ shows
us here that this will not help us to eternal life; we must go higher
and actually learn what Christ is and what Son he is. The Pharisees knew
well that he should be David's son. But Christ is not enough here. If
Christ was no more than David's son, he would have to die like David
and have only a temporal kingdom. But Christ has an eternal kingdom, and
David, his Father, calls him a Lord in spirit. How then is it that
Christ should be both David's Son and David's Lord?

23 This is the question that the Pharisees could not answer, just as
even today no Jew can answer it. In such a question one hears nothing of
the neighbor, of love, nor of good works; but it is only for this reason
that we learn that the Son is Christ. Whoever knows this will not lack
the way to eternal life. For it is not enough for eternal life that we
know the law and what we are to do; cause it must also be fulfilled with
the work. But this will be found very slowly in us, because our hearts
are sinful and evil. Therefore it is necessary to learn diligently what
Christ is. Therefore the Lord asks his question like this: You are to
tell him which son Christ is, who was David's son according to the
flesh. But because David calls him not a son, but his Lord, and such a
Lord as sitteth on the right hand of God, and unto whom God will lay all
his enemies for a footstool: with this question the Lord willeth to
awake the Jews, and us all, that they may esteem Christ more highly, and
look on him with other eyes, than that he alone should be the Son of
David.

24. for he also is David's Lord, that is, he is not only man, but also
truly God, eternally born of the Father,

Otherwise David would not call him Lord, since he was no more than a man
and only David's son. For David is one of the greatest saints and the
most learned king, and yet he calls Christ, who is his son, a Lord. As
if David wanted to say and freely confess: O, my Son is far above me. I
am also a king, and am called his father; but he is my Lord, and such a
Lord as sitteth on the right hand of God, and by the commandment of God
ruleth over all his enemies. For since he is a man, it is good to reckon
what enemies he has, namely, the devil and death; as Paul also concludes
from this Psalm, 1 Cor. 15:25 ff. If then the devil and death are to lie
at the feet of this Son of David, since he is their Lord, it must follow
that there is divine power and omnipotence in this Son of David,
otherwise he should be no more able to resist death and the devil than
other men.

Thus the Lord leads us on the right path to eternal life. The law is a
very good, useful and necessary teaching, for it tells us what we should
do if we want to live to please God, serve Him and escape the punishment
of sin. But such teaching serves only here in this temporal life. But if
after this temporal life we are to enter the eternal life, the teaching
of the law is of no help. Cause, we cannot come to life, we would be
free of all sins. Even though the law serves and is given for the
purpose of reducing sins, sins are not put away with it. Therefore we
must have another doctrine concerning the law, which will instruct us
how we may be delivered from sins. For since we cannot do the law
completely, the law helps us to have an evil conscience and to fear
God's wrath and judgment because of our sins.

(26) Against such evil, which the law causes in the conscience, this
question serves, that thou mayest learn what Christ is, and what he hath
done. Christ himself says: He is not only the Son of David, as the Jews
held him, but he is also David's Lord, that is, an eternal and true
God. But what does he do? He declares his divinity, as Pau-

910 **D. 3, 110-113. on the eighteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2050-2052.** 911

lus says, and becomes man, dies on the trunk of the holy cross. Why
this? Because he is the Lamb of God, that is, the sacrifice that God
Himself arranged for the sin of the world. When he died, he rose again
from the dead on the third day into eternal life and sits at the right
hand of God.

27 We are to learn this from Christ and remember it well. For he who
knows this art is helped; he who does not know it must perish in sins
and death. Cause, we are all sinners, and the law not only does not help
us from sins, but accuses us before God, and only makes us real sinners.
We are stuck there, we can neither get behind ourselves nor in front of
ourselves. We are conceived and born in sins; and the longer we live,
the more sin grows and increases with us. For it is not laid upon us
like another burden, which we can lay aside and cast away; it is in our
marrow and legs, and therefore leaves us no rest. As we must confess, if
only we will open our eyes and look into our own hearts. This is the
only salvation and help, that we learn who Christ is. For if you first
know who he is, and then hear what he does, you will be helped. If you
are a poor sinner who has sinned much against God's will, see here, God
sends this Christ to suffer and pay for sinners. But what do you want to
worry about the debt that such a rich gentleman has taken upon himself
and paid beautifully? Therefore, it is only up to you to accept such
death and suffering with firm trust.

So we all have death before us, which no one can escape or save himself
from, be he ever so mighty, strong, rich, wise and holy. But where does
death come from? It is the wages or reward of sins, Rom. 6, 23. Now you
have heard where we find forgiveness of sins: nowhere but in Christ, who
died for it 2c. The same Christ, as he died, did not remain in death,
but rose again from the dead. This is an indication that **he is** also
Lord over death. Therefore, just as through him you have forgiveness of
sins, so also through him hope for eternal life, that

He will also raise you up again in the flesh on the last day and make
you eternally blessed.

29 This means that Christ is rightly recognized and knows what Son he
is, namely, a Son of David; for he is a man, yet also a Lord of David,
as he sits at the right hand of God and has his enemies, sin, death and
hell, as a footstool at his feet. Therefore, whoever needs salvation
from such enemies, let him not seek it from Moses, not through the law,
his works or piety; let him seek it from the Son and Lord of David,
where he will surely find it. The blind Pharisees do not miss this;
therefore they do not respect the Lord Christ; they are satisfied with
the fact that they know from the law how to love God and their neighbor.
If it is impossible to know God, I will not say that one should love God
if one knows Christ. As he says Matth. 11, 27: "No one knows the
Father, except the Son, and to whom the Son reveals it."

(30) And this is also a reason why the Lord now comes forth with this
question. As if he wanted to say: You know that you should love God, but
you will certainly never love God with all your heart, soul and mind,
unless you recognize Christ and know who he is. For how else can one
know what grace and mercy God has shown us? It is not a small thing that
God created us, gave us life and limb, and everything. But all this
serves us only for a little while, because we live here on earth.

But there we see the riches of the abundant goodness and grace that God
does not spare His only begotten Son, but gives Him to the death of the
cross for us, so that we, having been purged of sins, may live eternally
through Him. This is an eternal, inordinate, unfounded love and grace,
which no man can know, unless he knows Christ; for this reason he will
never be able to love God properly.

So we see what the Pharisees and scribes gain from their questioning and
trying. Nothing else, except that Christ convinces them freely and
publicly before everyone that they are far too ignorant of the love of
God.

912 L. 3, 113.114. On the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
20S2. 2070-2074. 913

but do not have a shred of it in their hearts, because they do not know
Christ. But if they do not love God, who has shown them so much grace
and goodness, how can or will they love their neighbor, who needs their
help and cannot show them anything good because of his poverty?

33Therefore, we should let such teaching be dear to us and thank God
from the bottom of our hearts that we are no longer in such a great
blindness.

We are not stuck in the dark, as before under the papacy and the Jews
here, but have the teaching of Christ pure and simple; so that we not
only know how we are to be freed from sins and saved, but also receive
the Holy Spirit, who drives our hearts through such teaching so that we
begin to love God and our neighbor rightly and from the heart. May our
dear Lord Christ Jesus grant this to all of us, Amen.

**On the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 9, 1-8.**

Then he got into the ship and crossed over again and came to his city.
And, behold, they brought unto him a sick of the palsy, lying on a bed.
When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the sick of the palsy, "Be of
good cheer, my son; your sins are forgiven you. And behold, some of the
scribes said within themselves: This one blasphemes GOD. And when JE saw
their thoughts, he said, Why think ye evil in your hearts? Which is
easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and walk?
But that ye might know that the Son of man hath power on earth to
forgive sins, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Arise, and take up thy
bed, and go home. And he arose and went home. When the people saw this,
they marveled and praised God, who had given such power to man.

(1) From today's Gospel, we are to especially notice the gracious
sermon that God has given to men, so that we can speak among ourselves
here on earth: Your sins are forgiven you; so that we, together with the
pious people here, may also marvel at this and thank God from the bottom
of our hearts that He has given such power to men. For it is truly a
great power that one Christian can say to another: My brother, be
undaunted, you have a gracious God; only believe the promise that I make
to you in the name of Jesus, and it shall be as surely true as if God
Himself had said to you, "Your sins are forgiven you.

2 This power began with the Lord Christ, as we have heard, and has
remained with us since then, especially with those who are in office and
have the command,

*) Held in the house, 1533.

that they should preach the gospel, that is, repentance and forgiveness
of sins in the name of Jesus. Other Christians, although they do not
have the ministry, nevertheless, in case of need, they also have the
command to comfort you when you are despondent because of your sins, and
to say to you: "What do you worry about? I, as a Christian, say to you
that you do wrong to yourself, God is not ungracious to you. Through
Christ you shall have all grace toward him 2c. You shall take comfort in
these words as surely as if Christ himself spoke them from heaven.

All things therefore depend on your heart accepting this promise, and
believe it to be true that God will be gracious to you for Christ's
sake. As we see here with the gout-ridden man, the Lord first exhorts
him to faith, saying: "Be of good cheer, my son", do not doubt, "your
sins are forgiven you"; as soon as the gout-ridden man believed such a
word, his sins were truly forgiven.

914 **L. 3, 114-117.** On the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. **W.
XIII, 2074-2076.** 915

4 In this way we must come to the forgiveness of sins this very day,
that we seek the word and believe it. Therefore, if your pastor, or in
case of need any Christian, says to you: God is not angry with you, only
you are not angry with Him; for for the sake of His Son Christ JEsu He
has forgiven all your sins: then you should believe this promise with
all your might, and let yourself be torn apart rather than doubting it.
For if you doubt, the absolution will not help you, even though God
Himself with all His angels would speak such absolution over you
verbally.

For where there is no faith, our Lord God is called a liar, as if what
he promises us is not true, and he will not keep it for us. May God
graciously protect us from such unbelief and sin. Although the devil is
a special master of it and always torments us with the fact that we like
to punish our Lord God with lies, that is, that we do not like to
believe God's promise.

(6) But where the heart believes, our Lord God is honored with the
highest honor, which he holds most dear. For he is regarded as truthful,
and thus as a Lord who cannot lie, even if he speaks of impossible
things. That is why the Lord Christ is so pleased with these people that
they have such a strong confidence in him that he will help the
gout-ridden man, and so he says to him kindly: "My son, you are sick,
the devil has inflicted the gout on you, and God has let it happen
because of your sins; then terror follows and a stupid conscience, so
that you think: Oh, God is angry with me, where will I go? For it is
natural, when God's punishment is seen, that terror is also found
immediately.

7. But, my son, do not let such a thought sink too deeply into your
heart; do not think thus: O what does God ask of me? who knows whether
He will be gracious to me or not; for what am I against God? Do not look
at your sickness, but listen to what I say to you, namely, that your
sins are forgiven you. Therefore conclude, "Gout or no gout, my sins
are forgiven me.

chem faith, neither gout nor any other disease shall hinder me.

(8) So word and faith should be closely united, for there can be none
without the other. He that believeth, and hath not the word, believeth
as the Turk and the Jew: they have faith that God is gracious and
merciful; but they lack the promise, because God will not be gracious
apart from Christ. Therefore, whoever has the word and not faith, the
word does not help. So that word and faith are given in marriage, and
neither can be separated from the other.

(9) A fanatic believes that the last day will come in four weeks. Such
a belief is a loud lie, for there is no word of God in it. The Turk
believes that he will enjoy his mahomet for salvation: but it is a vain
lie, for there is no word of God in it. So also the pope believes that a
Christian must promote himself to heaven by his own works: but it is a
false faith; for the word and the promise are lacking. So it may well be
that one has faith, that is, one has an idea of something and hopes for
something; but because there is a lack of the word, it is not true
faith, but a mere unfounded delusion, since nothing will ever come of
it.

(10) But we Christians do not lack the word. For we have the word
rightly and purely by the grace of God. But we lack faith, because we
cannot hold to the word as firmly as we should, even though those
without the word can believe firmly and strongly. This is caused by the
devil and original sin, which draws us away from the word and the truth
to lies. That is why it is difficult to resist unbelief when we already
have the word. For our flesh and reason do not want to believe in the
word. If it is to believe, it would like to have faith in its hands.

(11) The evil spirit also helps us to do this, so that it does not
want to go anywhere with us; otherwise our hearts should be more joyful
and more confident. For reckon thou, if I could believe it rightly and
perfectly, that Christ saith here to the sick of the palsy, and was said
also to me and to thee in baptism, and that the evil spirit is nowhere
with us.

916 **L. 3, 117-11S. On the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xni,
2076-2079.** 917

in absolution, even in public preaching, it is said daily that I shall
not be angry nor displeased with God: do you not think that I would go
upside down with joy? Would everything be to me vain sugar, vain gold,
vain eternal life? But the fact that this does not happen is a sign that
the old Adam and the devil are always pulling us down from faith and the
Word.

(12) Therefore learn it, it must be both: you must have the word, and
afterward hold to the word with faith, and as much as possible, do not
doubt it. Then you shall have all that the word promises you, and that
you need for the preservation of body and soul. Now those who do not
have the word have very good faith. Without this, it is an inherent vice
that we like to believe a lie; without this, the heart is more swayed.

So the pope and his crowd believe very strongly in the mass, in the holy
service and intercession, in monastic vows, chanting, fasting 2c. But it
is a false, lying faith, and are, to speak with breeds, whores and
knaves together. The heart is a harlot, the false faith is a knave. But
we, who, praise God, have a pure bride (for the Word is ever pure and
good), cannot believe so stiffly and firmly; yet we ought to believe
firmly. But those should not be able to believe firmly, because they do
not have the Word. This is the fault of our old Adam and of the devil,
that through original sin we have fallen from the word and the truth
into falsehood.

(14) We are to learn from today's gospel that we must first have the
word; then we must also firmly believe it. So then it is a divine power
for us, through which we obtain forgiveness of sins and blessedness, so
that we find help and comfort here and there. But if the word is not
there, it may well become a faith, just as the sacrament-obsessed, the
Anabaptists, the Turks, the Jews and the Papists have a faith. But it is
a faith without a word, which is innate in all of us through Adam's
fall, that is, it is a faith in lies, since we can by nature cling more
firmly to it than to God's word.

15 When our dear Lord Christ preached to the gout-broken man and forgave
him his sins, the scribes began to think that Christ was blaspheming God
by forgiving sin. This is also a necessary thing, since much is needed,
therefore we should also diligently remember it. For this can be seen in
all the fanatics and the spiritualists, that they are all in error, that
they do not understand how sins are forgiven. For ask the pope and all
his doctors, and they will not be able to tell you what absolution
accomplishes. For the whole papacy insists on this doctrine: grace is
poured into man by a secret effect; whoever wants to come to it must
repent, confess and do enough.

(16) But if it be asked what absolution and the keys do, they say it
is an outward ordinance kept in the church. So they do not place the
forgiveness of sins on the word and faith, since it must be placed on
them, but on our repentance, confession and satisfaction. But this is
absolutely a false doctrine, by which people are deceived and led into
the wrong way.

(17) So also the Anabaptists say: What should baptism do for the
remission of sins? It is only a handful of water! The Spirit must do it,
if we are to be truly cleansed of sins; water cannot do it. Therefore,
they also take forgiveness of sins away from the word, and do not want
to leave it at that, as the pious people here say that such power is
given to men.

18 The devotees of the sacraments also say that there is only bread and
wine in the sacrament, therefore one cannot find forgiveness of sins
there, the spirit must give it, the flesh is of no use. In sum, no
pagans, no priests nor monks have been able to see that forgiveness of
sins is a power given to men, as it is written here in the Gospel.

(19) Therefore learn here, that you may speak of the matter thus: I
know well, I also confess, that God alone forgives sin. But I also need
to know this, whereby I can tell...

**918 L.** 3,n9-i22. On the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2079-2082. **919**

that my sins are forgiven, or what the means is by which my sins are
forgiven. The Holy Scripture teaches me and all Christians that if I
want to have my sins forgiven, I must not sit down in the corner and
say, "My God, forgive me my sins," and then wait for an angel to come
from heaven and tell me, "Your sins are forgiven. For God promises that
He will come down to me and promise me forgiveness of sins Himself.

20 First of all, this is done in holy baptism; for there is his command
that I should be baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit. And further, with such a command is this promise:
"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved."

21 Yes, you say, baptism is only water! True; but such water is not
alone, there is God's word with it. So when you go to your pastor, who
has such a special command, or else to a Christian, and ask him to
comfort you and absolve you of your sins, and he says to you, "I, in
the place of God, proclaim to you forgiveness of all your sins through
Christ; here you shall be sure that your sins are truly and certainly
forgiven by such an outward word; for baptism and the word will not lie
to you.

(22) Such things were not preached in the papacy, and even today no
papal preacher understands them. Therefore, thank God for such grace,
and learn that God will forgive sin. But how? Not otherwise, for it says
here: that he has given such power to men. As Christ begins here, and
then commands that henceforth in the church, until the end of the world,
one should keep it this way, and preach repentance and forgiveness of
sins in his name.

(23) That therefore every man may learn to seek forgiveness of sins
among men, and nowhere else. For there alone shall it be found; for thus
saith the commandment of our Lord Christ, Verily I say unto you,
Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven," Matt.
18:18; item: "Whose soever sins ye shall touch, they are forgiven them,

Joh. 20, 23. For God does not want anyone to build a special stairway or
staircase to heaven, He wants to be the only master builder.

(24) Therefore, if you want forgiveness of sins, go and be baptized,
if you have not been baptized; or if you have been baptized, remember
the same promise that God made to you at that time, and do not be
faithless. Item, go and be reconciled to your neighbor, then ask for
absolution. And as thou hearest that forgiveness of sins is promised
thee in the name of JESUS, believe it; then thou hast it truly. Then go
to the holy sacrament and receive the body and blood of Christ, so that
you may be sure that such a precious treasure is yours to enjoy.

(25) That one should not despise baptism, absolution, preaching and
the sacrament, but seek and obtain forgiveness of sins in them. For this
is what God has called and ordained your pastor, your father and mother,
and your closest Christian, and has put His word in their mouth that you
should seek comfort and forgiveness of sins from them. For though men
speak it, it is not their word, but the word of God. Therefore believe
firmly in it and do not despise it.

(26) Now when a minister baptizes a child according to the command of
Christ, you hear a man speaking who is as much a sinner in his own
person as you are, but he does it by God's command. Therefore, when he
says, "I baptize you in the name of the Father," 2c. you must neither
hear nor accept the same words as if God himself had spoken them. So
when your sin is forgiven in absolution, doubt as little as if God
Himself had spoken such words. For God Himself pronounces such a
judgment upon you that you shall be free from sin.

(27) To learn and know these things is highly necessary for the sake
of the vile and displeasing spirits of the wicked, who can do no more
than cry out: Water is water. We know this before, but we do not need
them to teach us. But they do not know that with such water the word of
God is water,

920 **L. 3, 122-124. on the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2082-208p.** 921

is. Therefore, it is no longer bad water, but divine water, which the
minister does not give of himself, but God has ordered to be given so
that one may be born again into the kingdom of God and be freed from
sins.

28 As God gives the word, which is His word, not ours, so He also gives
faith in the word, for it is both God's work, word and faith.
Therefore, the forgiveness of sins must also be God's work, even though
God works it through men. Therefore, forgiveness of sins should be
sought in the word that is in the mouth of man and in the sacraments
that are administered by man, and nowhere else, for it will not be found
anywhere else.

29. But who does not see that my works, which I do, are far different
from the word and works of God? How then do the unholy papists come to
seek forgiveness of sins in their own worth? Therefore, when they shall
roll forth on the last day with their works and merit, Christ shall ask
them, saying, Where is my word? I have ordained baptism, sacrament,
absolution and preaching in my church, so that people may receive
forgiveness of sins and be assured of my grace. Why did you not keep to
this? You could not have lacked it; with your works you should and must
lack it.

(30) Therefore, take heed of this teaching and learn what forgiveness
of sins really is, and how one can be sure of it, and where one should
seek and find it, namely, that you should run nowhere but to the
Christian church, which has the Word and the Sacrament. There you shall
certainly find them, and not in heaven; as the Pharisees here think and
think: Christ blasphemes God by forgiving sin; sin no one but God can
forgive. Beware, then, and say: God has put forgiveness of sins in Holy
Baptism, in the Lord's Supper, and in the Word; indeed, He has put it
in the mouth of every Christian man; if he comforts you, and assures you
of God's grace through the merit of Christ JEsu, you shall find it in
heaven.

You must accept it and believe it, not otherwise than if Christ himself
had promised it to you with his mouth, as here to the gouty man.

(31) This is why the spirits of the pagans and the falsehoods err very
yearly, that they snatch away the word of forgiveness of sins. Such
would be done if it were a man's word or a man's water, but here is
God's word and God's water. Whoever wants to take it away from people
or talk them out of it, takes away their forgiveness of sins; there is
no help for it.

For this reason, the Anabaptists and other mobs have lost forgiveness of
sins, baptism, the sacrament, the Christian church and all Christian
works, because they reject the word they hear from their neighbor and do
not consider it to be anything other than the bleating of a cow. Now,
even if God spoke through a cow or other animal, as He once spoke
through a donkey, one should not despise His word, but accept it; why
should one despise it, since men speak it from God's command and order?
For though you hear a man's voice, you do not hear a man's word, but
God's word, and you will surely find forgiveness of sins if you accept
it with faith.

33 This is especially important to remember about this gospel, so that
you can prepare yourselves against the mobs and confront them. For in
the papacy, as reported before, they know less than nothing of such
preaching. For they hold and teach that if a man falls into sin, baptism
is no longer of use to him. But if he wants to have forgiveness of sins,
he must confess, repent, and repent of sin with good works. Thus they
spoke of repentance. The devil does not challenge this teaching, for it
does him no harm and is a truthful lie.

(34) It is true that I should repent and be heartily sorry for my sin,
but this does not bring me forgiveness of sins. By what then? Only by
hearkening to and believing the word and promise, and by giving ear to
the Lord Christ, who speaks to me through his ordained servants, even
through all Christians in time of need,

**922** ". 124-127. on the nineteenth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2035-2087. **923**

I look at my mouth and not at my repentance and atonement.

(35) So they turn back, they leave the word, they do not look at what
the minister or a Christian says by the command of our Lord Christ; they
look only at their repentance and contrition. But in this way they lose
Christ and everything that is Christ. And it is impossible for them to
counsel or help a single conscience. For they have lost the word that
alone can help, and point people to their own repentance and godliness.

But you learn that you can say and teach others about the forgiveness of
sins, that God speaks to us in baptism, in absolution, in the pulpit and
in the sacrament through the church ministers and all other Christians;
we should believe them, and then we will find forgiveness of sins. In
the papacy, they have not taught a word about such faith in God's word,
as can be seen in all letters of indulgence and bulls; instead, they
have based the forgiveness of sins on repentance and their own
satisfaction, that is, on a mere uncertain state of the heart. Let this
be said of the words that are here, that God has given power to men to
forgive sins. Now let us also take the Historia a little before us.

The gouty man here is a picture of all sinners. For it is the nature of
this disease that one can no longer use the limbs; if one wants to pull
the foot or the hand toward oneself, one cannot, indeed, one only
stretches them out more and more. That is why Aristotle compares such a
person in Ethicis to the naughty, impudent youth, which cannot be tamed
nor subdued.

But whoever wants to interpret this disease correctly, let him point it
to the saints of works. The more they think about how they can come
close to God and reconcile with Him, the further away they are from Him.
Item, if they think they do it best, they do it worst, because they are
without faith.

39 If any man therefore would be saved from such a plague, let him come
hither unto Christ, who helpeth marvelously; do not

more than that he says: "Be of good cheer, my son, your sins are
forgiven you. From such a word the joints become finely strong and firm
again, so that one can carry and lift the other. For where there is
forgiveness of sins, there is no longer room for wrath and punishment,
that is, God is no longer displeased with us and then also accepts our
works because of faith in Christ.

(40) The Lord was especially pleased to show this about the gouty man
who was lying on the bed in the way of the disease, stretching out all
his fours. But when Christ called him to get up, he stood up, fresh and
healthy. And since he had been carried from home in the bed, he carries
the bed home himself. This is what the Lord wants us to see and consider
as a sign, so that we may learn how he has power on earth to forgive
sin.

41 The fact that the Lord says "on earth" is especially to be noted,
so that one does not look to heaven or, as the Pope taught, hope for
forgiveness of sins when one has died in purgatory, through the work and
merit of others. For it says here that forgiveness of sins is a power
given to men on earth when one baptizes, administers the sacrament,
absolves and preaches from the pulpit. For what is absolved on earth is
determined to be absolved in heaven. Again, what one binds, that is,
excludes from baptism and sacrament and word, that shall also be bound
in heaven.

(42) By such power that we men forgive or bind sin among ourselves,
God is not deprived of His glory, nor are we made gods, as the unskilful
people speak of it. For we have no more than the office; the same is no
further, unless thou believest. If you believe, you have it; but if you
do not believe, you have nothing. That is why God has bound us together
through such a ministry, so that one Christian should always comfort the
other, give him a friendly promise, and you should believe in the
forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ. This is what it means to be
led to God and to the forgiveness of sins. Whoever dies in such faith
dies blessed and well.

**924** s. 3, i27. iW. On the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2087-208s. **925**

But he who dies, as is taught in the papacy, out of the intercession of
the saints, out of his own merit and that of others, dies wretchedly and
evil; for he has not the escorts which our Lord God gave him and
appointed for him here on earth, namely, he has neither the right word
nor the right absolution. And even though he has baptism, he does not
know how to take comfort in it. The devil has caused this misery through
the pope and is now starting a new one with the mobs. For he does not
like the word, it stings his eyes and blinds him.

44 Therefore the pope, as Satan's dear and faithful servant, has done
away with it altogether, and in the meantime has established monastic
orders, masses, pilgrimages, indulgences and other things. The devil can
well suffer this, for it does him no harm. The Anabaptists also help
this by speaking contemptuously of water or baptism; the devotees of the
sacraments also, who speak contemptuously of the sacrament, just as if
there were nothing but bread and wine.

45 All these have lost the word. Therefore beware of them, and learn
that forgiveness of sins is nowhere else but where the word is. But such
a word is in the

Baptism, the Lord's Supper, absolution and preaching; therefore
forgiveness of sins is also there, and in spite of anyone saying
otherwise! Where therefore the word is, faith shall follow; and the
elbow, which the sick of the palsy could not draw to himself before, is
straight and sure. But where the word is not, one remains gout-ridden;
it is therefore impossible for one to take hold properly.

I have said this in so many words, because the pope and the shameful
sect do so much harm that everyone should beware of them. The pope
points neither to the Word nor to the Sacrament; thus, the mobs cannot
speak more contemptuously than of Word and Sacrament, and nothing is
valid with them but spirit, spirit. But we know that without Word and
Sacrament the Holy Spirit does not want to do his work. Therefore, we
cannot despise Word and Sacrament, but we should and must consider them
great and the noblest treasure.

47. May God grant His grace that we may remain pure in such teaching
and persevere to the end, and be saved, amen.

**On the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 22, 1-14.**

And Jesus answered and spake unto them again in parables, saying, The
kingdom of heaven is like unto a king that made a marriage for his son:
and he sent forth his servants to call the guests to the marriage: and
they would not come. Again he sent out other servants, saying, Tell the
guests, Behold, my supper is prepared, my oxen and my fatlings are
slain, and all things are ready; come to the marriage. But they despised
this and went away, one to his field, the other to his handiwork. And
some of them took his servants, and mocked them, and slew them. When the
king heard this, he was angry and sent out his armies and killed these
murderers and set their city on fire. Then he said to his servants: The
wedding is ready, but the guests are not worthy. Go ye therefore into
the highways, and invite to the marriage whom ye may find. And the
servants went out into the streets, and gathered together whom they
found, both evil and good. And the tables were all filled. Then the king
went in to see the guests, and saw a man there who had no wedding
garment on, and said to him, "Friend, how did you come in and have no
wedding garment on? But he fell silent. Then said the king unto his
servants, Bind his hands and his feet, and cast him out into outer
darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: for many are
called, but few are chosen.

*) Held in house, 1S33.

[926 **D- p. 128-130. on the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
208S-2093.** 927]{.underline}

(1) In today's Gospel, your beloved hears how the kingdom of God is
like a wedding, and like such a wedding, where guests are invited, who
not only do not attend and despise it, but in part they still go,
mocking and killing the servants who announce such a glorious wedding to
them, and invite and ask them to it.

2 Here one should first learn what the word "kingdom of heaven" means,
namely that it does not mean a kingdom on earth, but a kingdom in
heaven, since God Himself alone is King within. This is what we call the
Christian church/ which is here on earth. For this is why the Lord needs
this simile of the wedding, that the Son of the King, our dear Lord, the
Lord Christ, takes the church as his bride. Therefore the kingdom of
heaven is to be understood in this way, that it is here below on earth,
and yet is not a temporal kingdom, but a spiritual and eternal one. For
we Christians here on earth are already more than halfway in the kingdom
of heaven, namely, with the soul and spirit, or according to faith,
until the body also finally comes after.

Therefore, when you hear of the kingdom of heaven, you should not look
up to heaven alone, but stay here below and seek it among the people, as
far as the whole world is, where people teach the gospel, believe in
Christ and have the holy sacraments in proper use. That the kingdom of
heaven means as much as the kingdom of Christ, the kingdom of the Gospel
and of faith. The kingdom of the gospel and of faith.

4 For where the gospel is, there is Christ. Where Christ is, there is
the Holy Spirit and his kingdom, the true kingdom of heaven; and all who
have the Word and Sacrament and believe, and abide in Christ through
faith, are heavenly princes and children of God. And the only thing to
be done is for our Lord God to remove the wall that is still between us,
that is, for us to die, and then there will be heaven and blessedness.

(5) Learn therefore first of all that the kingdom of heaven is called
the kingdom of our Lord Christ, where the word and the faith are. In
such a kingdom, we have life in the

Hope, and are, according to the word and faith, clean from sins and free
from death and hell, without the old sackcloth and rotten flesh still
being missing. The sackcloth has not yet been torn, the flesh has not
yet been taken away; this must happen first, and then we shall have
life, righteousness and blessedness.

(6) To such a wedding, says Christ, our Lord God called and invited
His people, the Jews, at the time before Christ came, through the holy
prophets. For their most noble office was to make the Jews wait for the
wedding, that is, they put their people off, that the Son of God would
become man, and by his death pay for the sins of all the world, and by
his resurrection tear apart the kingdom and power of death and the
devil, and after that let the gospel go out through the whole world, and
let forgiveness of sins and eternal life be preached in his name to
everyone. The holy prophets called the people to wait for such a
gracious sermon and to take comfort in it, hoping for forgiveness of all
sins and eternal life through Christ.

7 But Christ says here: They remained outside and would not come. Just
like the Jews in the wilderness, who desired to come back behind them in
Egypt. After this he sends out other servants, because it was now time
for Christ to come and be heard with preaching and seen with miraculous
signs. For there was John and the disciples of Christ, saying that the
supper was ready, and lacking nothing more, but that they should leave
all things, and adorn themselves, and send themselves to the marriage.
But it was also in vain; they despised it, saith the Lord, and went
away, one to his field, the other to his handiwork 2c.

(8) But are not these wretched, miserable people who, for the sake of
their land or work, despise this glorious meal, namely, the forgiveness
of sins and eternal life, and yet have the hope that it will go well
with them? For otherwise they would not let themselves like the field or
the work so much that they would miss this meal.

**928 L. 3.130-134. on the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2101-2104. 929**

9) But it happens to the dear Gospel in all ways; when it comes among
the people, the game is raised, so that the world becomes angrier than
before and everyone wants to handle it. With it they make so much
trouble for themselves that they cannot wait for this charge. So it
shall also go.

(10) Therefore, let no one be angry with the present world, because
the citizens and peasants are so shamefully stingy, so proud and
arrogant, and especially because their pastors, who invite them to such
a meal, are more unkind, even more angry, than their servants. This, I
say, let no one be angry enough to think, "It is well with the people
in their work of farming or handling; I will do the same to them. By no
means! For our Lord God is a kind host, who can borrow the money for a
while, but he does not give it away. So, now he is watching, letting
citizens and peasants do all they can, despising the gospel and all
faithful admonitions and teachings, collecting money, selling all that
is needed, wood, grain, butter, eggs, keeping silent about it, as if he
did not see it. But if today or tomorrow he comes with a pestilence, so
that they often fall like untimely fruit, or with a war, so that the
mercenaries fall into your house, take what they find, and beat your
skin to the bone, they do not even strangle you, rape your wife and
child, and make you watch, and cry out about it: O how does our Lord God
deal with us so horribly!

(11) Then it shall be found what pleasure God hath had in thy
covetousness, in thy wantonness, and in thy pride. For it will be said:
"Dear one, if you were able to be stingy, proud and wanton before, and
despise my word; now also take it for good, and look behind you at the
score. You have been drinking for a long time. Dear, pay once and hold
out your neck. So it will finally go out. Therefore, it would be good to
let up in time and to improve ourselves, as we are diligently admonished
by the word. We would like to despise God's word and do what we want,
and yet God would not punish us. Yes, one would have to

*) Held in the house, 1532.

order it to us in this way. Further follows in the Gospel:

Some of those who were summoned were even more wicked, attacking the
servants, putting them to all shame and disgrace, and finally killing
them as well. By this the Lord means especially the city of Jerusalem,
which strangled the prophets and finally the Son of God Himself.

013 And what happened? The king was angry and sent out his army, the
Romans, who had to be in his service, kill the murderers, burn the city
with fire, and deal so horribly with the Jews that they sold them more
cheaply than sparrows, thirty for a penny. There was a piteous cry and
lamentation that God in heaven would have mercy on them. But they wanted
it so. They had been drinking for a long time and had been preached to
in vain; so they had to pay the bill once: God did not want to hear them
again. Beware of that.

(14) Without this we have many other things upon us, which are a
grievance to our Lord God: Anger, impatience, avarice, care of the
belly, rutting, fornication, hatred, and other vices, are all great and
grievous deadly sins, which are everywhere in the world with power and
prevail; nevertheless, such sins are nothing compared to the grievous
contempt of God's word, which is so great and common among all classes
and people that it is to be pitied. Now it is certain and true that God
would have patience with the other sins for a while, if only one would
let the word go and hold it in honor. But the world does not want to. It
soon grows tired of the word, despises it, and turns to it like a sick
person for food and medicine; so God must be angry and punish such
inequity.

(15) Over and above this misery, that this sin is so wicked, it is
also a terrible, infernal, diabolical sin, that it does not want to be
recognized like other sins. Everyone considers it a small thing if one
is in the sermon and does not diligently pay attention to it; indeed,
most of the people go along like this, and let themselves think that the
wine tastes just as good under the sermon as at any other time; no one
cares about it, much less does anyone make a conscience of himself about
the fact that he holds the dear word in such low esteem. Such a thing is

930 **L. 3, 134-136. on the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2104-2107.** 931

This is not the case with other sins, for other sins, such as beating to
death, adultery, and stealing, sometimes bring remorse, so that the
heart is horrified and wishes it had not happened, because no one can
consider it right. But not to hear the word diligently, yes, to despise,
to persecute, no one takes no conscience over. That is why it is such an
abominable sin, since country and people must finally be destroyed.
Because it remains unrecognized, neither repentance nor correction can
follow. This is what happened to the city of Jerusalem and all the
kingdoms.

16. Germany also has to answer for it, because sin always cries out to
heaven and does not let God rest, so that he has to be angry and say: I
gave you my dear Son, my highest and dearest treasure, and would have
liked to talk to you, to teach you and instruct you for eternal life;
but I have no one who wants to listen to me. Therefore I must let the
punishment go. As the Lord himself testifies in John 3:19: "This is the
judgment, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their works were evil. As if he wanted to
say, "I would gladly keep silent about the sins of all the others, but
this is the judgment that breaks the neck of the world, that I have sent
my word and they do not ask anything about it. Otherwise they are full
of sins; I would gladly help them by my word: but they will not. If they
will not hear my word, they will hear the devil's word, and I must let
it come to pass; but they will see how it will go over them.

The Christians in the beautiful, large countries that the Turks have now
taken over have fared the same way toward the morning. Hungary is also
almost gone. We Germans and other nations also do not want to hear the
gospel nor suffer. That is why they have to listen to and suffer the
devil's hordes, the Anabaptists and the desecrators of the sacraments.
So it shall be, where one despises the word of God and does not want to
hear it, which is the highest and greatest sin; therefore the highest
and most severe punishment belongs to it.

18. our lord god would have us

fell on their knees before it, and wrote it not only in the books with
golden letters, but also in the hearts. The world wants it least of all,
indeed, can hardly stand that it is written in the books and resounds in
the pulpit. It wants to have the devil in the heart, who also rules it,
that is probably better suited.

19 Therefore be warned, God has sufficient cause to be angry and to
punish for other sins. But this sin is above all, when one despises his
word, and holds those in contempt who invite us to such a wedding and
banquet. Whoever then is in such a sin, let his conscience tell him that
he is not in a small sin, but in the very highest and greatest sin,
which God will tolerate least and punish most severely.

Everyone is now crying out about the great infidelity and about the
avarice that is in the world. It is not less, such cannot remain
unpunished in the length. But that we have the gospel, snore against it,
and under the hour of preaching go strolling in the market, before the
gate, in taverns, or sit and lie in the playgrounds, that is the chief
sin, which far surpasses all others. For this reason, God will certainly
punish them horribly, sending them into error and having them tear down
the spirits of the mob with power, which will sweep them away in heaps.
As has happened in Greece and other countries, where Mahomet now reigns;
he teaches them to believe in the devil's filth, since they had God's
word before, but still despised it.

21 In the papacy it also happened like this: at first the doctrine was
right and pure; but since the people opposed it so foolishly and
ungratefully, God punished the sin in such a way that we ran into the
monasteries, tortured ourselves there in the devil's name, and instead
of divine truth believed gross, harmful, shameful and blasphemous lies.
Now it is again on the way (because this sin must be punished physically
and spiritually) that the devil throws in the sacrament abusers and
rebaptizers. Why does one not want to stay with the word and not accept
it with thanksgiving?

(22) Therefore, as dear as your salvation is to you, see that you
guard against such sin;

[932 **L. 3,i36-iz8. On the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2107-2110.** 933]{.underline}

Honor God's word and hear it diligently and gladly. For if you would do
it for no other reason, you should do it for this reason, that God has
commanded it, and love and serve Him. For it is not a small thing to
serve such a great Lord; he can reward it abundantly. Therefore, every
Christian should be diligent in such service, thinking: "Because my
Lord and God wants me to hear his word, I will gladly render him such
service, so that I can also boast that I have served my God for a day or
an hour. Such a cause should be enough to move us to the word.

023 But there are other and greater causes. For God promises thee,
saying, If thou hear my word diligently, and keep it, thou shalt be the
master of the devil, that he may flee thee, and not come nigh thee. For
where my word is, there am I also. But where I am, there the devil shall
not be found, but shall be trolled.

24. thou shalt also have the benefit of having thy sin forgiven, and of
having thy heart kindled to true devotion and right obedience. In sum,
my word shall show thee the way to heaven and bring thee to eternal
life; for I thus command thee to serve me, that the benefit may be most
thine. Without this, if I wanted something from you, you would be guilty
of doing it; but now I command you such service that you will enjoy the
most. As we know, when we do no more than the Ten Commandments or the
Lord's Prayer for an hour before us, there is always a new fruit, that
one notices and learns something that one did not know before.

(25) And this fruit in particular is always there, that the devil
cannot abide with thee, and hurt thee. Therefore let no Christian think
himself so learned as to say that he knows the Lord's Prayer and the
Ten Commandments well beforehand; but if such a thought should occur to
you, cast it out again, and say, "I have prayed today, I will pray
again now; that you may always chase away the devil and sin from you,
and give our Lord Jesus Christ.

You must serve the Lord God. If you do not do this, you will cause our
Lord God to be displeased; but who would like to have the wrath of such
a great Lord?

(26) But there, alas, the greatest multitude goeth, heeding the word
less than nothing. If pestilence or war comes today or tomorrow, our
Lord God will not take care of you and your need, and will let you cry
and howl in vain, just as you let him cry now. As it is written in the
Proverbs of Solomon in 1 Cap. vv. 24-30: "Because I cry out, and ye
refuse, and I stretch forth my hand, and no man heareth; and ye forsake
all my counsel, and will not answer me: so will I laugh at your
calamity, and mock you, when it cometh, which ye fear, when it cometh
upon you, as a tempest, which ye fear; and your calamity as the weather,
when fear and trouble cometh upon you. Then they will call to me, but I
will not answer them; they will seek me early, but will not find me.
Therefore they hated the doctrine, and would not have the fear of the
Lord. They would not have my counsel, and blasphemed all my judgment"
2c. So horribly shall this sin be punished.

27. If you come one day with a bloody head, our Lord God will laugh in
his fist and say: O right, you would not have it any other way! I
preached to you with earnestness, but you did not want to hear me, so
now hear the devil. If thou wilt not hear him that saith, Come unto me,
all ye that labour, and I will give you rest; hear thou brother
Lansquenet, who curseth thee all St. Veltin's and torture, and
thrustteth a spear through thee. So it goes right. Why then do you
despise God's word, which you should hear and send yourself to as the
highest treasure? But you run about in your field, you are busy here and
there, so that you cannot wait for the sermon; do you think that God
should not be annoyed by this? He has given you six days without this,
in which you are to work and wait for your food; do not ask for more
than the seventh day, that you may do good and serve Him in honor and
for your good. Nevertheless he shall not be able to have it from thee.

934 **L. 3, 139-141. on the twentieth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2110-2113,2094.** 935

028 Therefore this earnest preaching of the Lord against the Jews, that
they despised this marriage, that is, the preaching of the holy gospel,
and mocked and murdered the servants, is well to be noted. For from this
we see that the king cannot stand such ingratitude and contempt, so he
sends his army, the Romans, and has these murderers killed and their
city set on fire. Who can blame our Lord God here for having done wrong?

029 If a mighty prince had a son, and sent him to some prisoners in a
tower to deliver them, and they led them, and would not only not receive
him gladly, but choked him, and mocked his father also: thinkest thou
that he would laugh at this? He would shoot the tower and the prisoners
one by one in a heap, and would be justified in doing so. So does our
Lord God. He sends his Son to deliver us from sin, death and the devil,
and to help us to eternal life. Therefore we should accept him with
great joy and all honor, hear his word and believe in him. So we turn
our backs on him, despise his word, advice and help, which he offers us
through it, and meanwhile go to our fields and to our work, where we are
more interested.

30. If lightning, thunder, pestilence, a Turk, a mercenary, or any
other plague should come at some time, and we then fearfully lament,
howl, and cry foul, and yet no salvation comes to us, we may take it for
good and bear the punishment; and then remember: We have only well
deserved it in that we have not only been ungrateful to our dear God,
that he has given us his blessed word purely and abundantly now in the
last and evil time, when faith and the knowledge of Christ have been
completely extinguished, but also most shamefully despised it. Let us
therefore count one against the other, and let us be content with the
fact that he remains outside with the infernal fire for so long, and
calls us to repentance through such temporal punishment that we become
more pious and stop denouncing him.

31 This is what the evangelist means when he says.

that the king will kill the murderers and set fire to their city; as a
warning to us that we should not be angry with the commoners and
peasants, nor should we follow their example. For the world is no
different; it does not want and does not like the word, its fields and
handling are more pleasing to it. But woe! For what judgment and
punishment will come afterwards, we see in the Jews.

(32) Therefore let us not follow their example, but hear the word
gladly and diligently, and especially hold the wedding charities in all
honor and esteem, for the sake of their Lord who sends them; so God will
be with us in all our needs, help and protect us, and finally give us
eternal life for the sake of His Son, our dear Bridegroom, the Lord
Christ.

33. *) This is the first part of the Jews, who are now gone. Now hear
further how the Gentiles are. They lay outside in the street, having no
law nor word of God, like the Jews; they were not walled up, but were
open, like a free place, so that the devil could run through it and back
again, as he pleased. This king also called them invite, without any
distinction, as they are found, man and woman, young and old, rich and
poor. As we still see today, God has ordained his baptism, his word, and
his Lord's Supper to be given to everyone who desires it.

34 Therefore this supper means nothing else, but that Christ is preached
to us all, and we are carried to holy baptism, that we should be guests,
eat and drink, that is, have forgiveness of sins, eternal life, and
victory against the devil and hell. So we Gentiles are all invited to
this supper.

35 When the tables were all full, for it was clear that the bad and the
good were invited together without distinction, the king went in and
looked at his guests and found some who were not dressed for the
wedding. For among the Christians it is so, that one finds mice
droppings under the pepper: that

*) Held in the house, 1533.

**936 pp. 141-143. on the twentieth sunday after trinity. W. xin,
2095-2093. 937**

Some are wicked, and yet have the name that they are called Christians,
because they are baptized, go to the sacrament, hear the sermon, and yet
bring no more of it than the name; for they hold it to be no truth.

(36) We must be accustomed to this. For we will never get there with
preaching, so that a whole town, village or house becomes devout; there
is no end, but, as it says here, good and evil come in. We must suffer
this, and grant them the name that they are called Christians. For even
if they are not pious, they are still invited guests. This will continue
until the last day, when a different verdict will be reached.

(37) Nevertheless, it has been decided that this king will not only
invite everyone to his son's wedding, but he will also see whether
those who are invited have adorned themselves in honor of the
bridegroom. If a sooty man, running from the hammer or from the forge,
in his long shirt, in a bathing hat, with his coal-black beard and face,
wanted to step among the wedding guests and walk with them in the
procession, whether he had already been invited to the wedding, no one
would gladly let him walk beside him; everyone, especially the
bridegroom, would think either that he was not in his right mind, or
that he was doing it as a special mockery. For one should come adorned
to the wedding. So, says the Lord, it will be the same here. If you are
already an invited guest, you are baptized, hear the sermon, go to the
sacrament, and yet have no wedding garment on; that is, you do not
believe, are not serious about it, and think to enjoy the Christian name
only there, like the pope and his crowd, so that you have the fullness
of belly and good praises of it: for God's sake you are not a
Christian, nor for the sake of your salvation, just do not think that
you will sneak through like that.

038 The king shall take notice of thee, and shall bring thee forth,
either at the last day, or at thy last end, and say, Findest thou here,
that thou hast the name, and art called a Christian, and yet believest
not that which a Christian ought to believe? It is your life

You have never been serious about how you could be freed from sins,
become more pious and blessed. All your thoughts have been on good,
honor, good days only: that is why you now come like a sooty guest.
Always away, you do not belong among those who have adorned themselves,
they want to catch cream (soot) from you.

(39) When these things shall be reproached either in the conscience,
or at the last day, to such loose Christians, then, saith the Lord, they
shall stifle, that is, they shall have no excuse. For with what will
they excuse themselves? God has done what he should. He has given you
his holy baptism; he has held up the gospel to you and had it brought to
your home and court; he has given you absolution and his Lord's Supper;
he has appointed his servants for you in the church, your father and
mother in the home, your master and wife, who are to tell you what you
should believe and how you should conduct your life. Therefore you will
not be able to say that you did not know, otherwise you would have
believed; but you will have to confess: Yes, I have been baptized, I
have been preached and told enough; but I have accepted nothing, I have
preferred the world. This means here that the unadorned, black guest is
stunned. For who would be able to answer the judge to whom we ourselves
must bear witness that he has given us his Son and promised all grace in
baptism and the holy gospel? That it is only up to us to hold out our
hands and take what he is so eager to give us.

Therefore, the terrible judgment on the unbelieving Christians will have
to follow: Their hands and feet are to be bound and they are to be cast
out into the outer darkness, that is, they must lie imprisoned with the
devil in hell and in the hellish fire forever. For their hands and feet
are bound so that they cannot free themselves by works. They must also
lie in darkness and be cut off from God's light, that is, from all
comfort, in eternal torment, fear and sadness, so that they will never
see a speck of light.

This is a terrible pity, if only we would take it to heart, eternally
so.

938 D- 3, 143-145. on the twenty-first Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2098.2128. 939

are trapped in hell and torment, since there is nothing but weeping and
gnashing of teeth: gnashing of teeth from the frost, and weeping from
the heat, as the ancient teachers interpreted it, although the Lord
indicates all torment that can be conceived with it. For heat and frost
are the two greatest plagues on earth. As if he wanted to say: You will
have to suffer more than one can say with words and grasp with thoughts.

This will be the punishment for not recognizing or accepting the time of
the visitation, that we are invited, have had sacrament, baptism,
gospel, absolution, and yet have not believed it, nor made ourselves
useful. Would the dear Lord therefore gladly teach us, and bring us to
recognize how great grace has befallen us in that we are invited to such
a blessed banquet, where we shall find salvation from sin, the devil,
death and eternal weeping. Whoever therefore will not accept these
things in thanksgiving, and spurns such grace, shall have eternal death
for it. For the two must be one: either to accept the gospel and be
believed and be saved; or not to believe and be eternally damned.

43) So that this gospel is the same as Paul's, when he says to the
Jews in Acts 18:6, "Let your blood be upon your head. 18, 6. to the
Jews who opposed him and blasphemed: "Let your blood be upon your head;
I will henceforth go pure to the Gentiles." For since the Jews would
not listen, God had them forsaken.

and sent his gospel to us Gentiles. Now that it has come to us, we
certainly have to be concerned about it, since it says here that God
wants to discard the unadorned wedding guests. So the dear Lord would
like to bring us with curls and frights to let the gospel be our highest
treasure, to hear it gladly and to believe it. By the promise and great
grace he entices, and by the great punishment he frightens. Wherever
hearts are so hardened that these two things will not help, let the
wicked devil help; he will do it.

(44) If our Lord God were to rain money and make us great lords here,
he would find people superfluous, who would run and earnestly persist in
trying to obtain something from him. But because he promises us eternal
and heavenly goods in his word, which we should hope for and expect with
patience, it has no standing before the world, which says, "What
heaven, heaven; if I had flour here, who knows what will become of it?

45 This, then, is the summary of today's sermon, 'that the Lord would
gladly provoke and terrify us, so that we would grasp the word with
earnestness and learn to believe, and thus hope for the joyful future,
when he will come again on the last day to deliver us from all distress
and to help us in body and soul. May the Almighty God, our merciful
Father, grant us this through Christ His Son and the Holy Spirit, Amen.

**On the twenty-first Sunday after Trinity.**

**John 4:47-54.**

There was a king whose son was sick in Capernaum. And when he heard that
JEsus was come out of Judea of Galilee, he went unto him, and besought
him that he would come down and heal his son: for he was sick unto
death. And JESUS said unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will
not believe. And the king said unto him, Lord, come down before my child
dieth. JEsus saith unto him, Go thy way, thy son liveth. And the man
believed the word that JEsus spake unto him, and went his way. And as he
went down, his servants met him, and told him, saying: Thy child liveth.
Then he inquired of them the hour in which it was better with him. And
they said unto him, Yesterday about the seventh hour the fever left him.
Then the father realized that it was about the hour when Jesus had said
to him, "Your son is alive. And he believed with all his house. Now
this is the other sign that Jesus did when he came out of Judea into
Galilee.

[940 L. **s, 145-148. On the twenty-first Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2128-2132.** 941]{.underline}

(1) In today's Gospel, there are two pieces that are particularly
comforting and easy to remember. The first is the miraculous work that
our dear Lord Christ does on the sick boy, that he makes him well, and
yet he does not come to him. He only says to the father, "Go, thy child
liveth." Immediately from the word the boy, who was some miles away and
knew nothing of such a word, is healed.

(2) This is a marvelous miracle, because we see how the word of our
dear Lord Christ is an almighty power. What it promises will surely come
to pass, that neither the devil nor the world shall hinder nor resist
it. For we must look upon this disease as other works, that the evil
enemy may afflict poor men. To drive out such works of the devil, we
need nothing more than the word of our dear Lord Christ, and the matter
is already helped. For the devil must desist against his will as soon as
this man's word sounds, as we see here.

(3) Therefore, the first purpose of such miracles is that we may learn
to recognize the Lord Christ, that he is not only a man, equal in all
things to other men, but also an eternal and almighty God, since he is
Lord over death and the devil, and thus a Lord who can help against them
with a word. Therefore, in our troubles against the devil and his works,
we should also learn to seek help from him, as this king does here.

(4) But especially we are to hold his word glorious and high, as an
almighty power. For he who has it has and can do all things. Again,
whoever does not have it, no power, wisdom or holiness can protect him
against sin, death and the devil. For what our dear Lord Christ does
here with the King's Son, that by his almighty word he saves him from
death and keeps him alive, he will do by his word with us all, if we
will but accept it, and deliver us not only from sickness and bodily
distress, but also from sin and eternal death.

(5) Therefore, we should follow the example of this king: in all our
concerns, seek counsel and help from Christ, who in

He can so easily help us in all kinds of distress and death that he only
speaks a word, and we are healed; he has a willingness to help us. For
because this royal man hurries and will not tarry long, the Lord hurries
still more, and will not let the royal son lie so long in the road until
he comes down with the father; but makes him absent soon, yea, at the
moment he says to the father, "Go thy way, thy son liveth." In the
same way, our dear Lord Christ will be willing to help us, of which we
should have no doubt, and will help us soon, if we are serious about it
and seek help from him in right trust. For this purpose he was sent by
his heavenly Father and came to earth, so that he might free us from the
tyranny of the devil and place us in God's eternal kingdom.

Therefore, whoever seeks and desires help against sin and death will
certainly find it here. As we see here in this "royal" one, since it
was only a matter of physical help; how much more is he inclined to
help, since the journey is greater and we are in greater need of help,
since it concerns eternal bliss?

(7) This is the first part, which is commonly spoken of when speaking
of such miracles of Christ. For this is why they were done, and why they
were prescribed for us, that we might know the power and will of our
dear Lord Christ, and that we might turn to him in our trouble.

(8) The other thing, however, of which this history is used, is that
here we have an exceedingly fine example, since we can actually and
certainly learn from it what faith is. Our opponents, the papists, do
not speak of faith in any other way than as a mere knowledge of what
Christ is and what he has done. But they cannot get around this
themselves; they must confess that the devil and the false Christians,
who are condemned, know this as actually and well as the Christians. On
the other hand, the Scriptures speak of faith in such a way that through
it we come to forgiveness of sins, righteousness and eternal life. For
thus says Paul, Rom. 3, 28: "We hold that a man is condemned by faith,
and not by

[942 **L 3, 148-iso. On the twenty-first Sunday after Trinity. W. xm.
2132-2135.** 943]{.underline}

of the works of the law." And the prophet Habakkuk speaks Cap. 2, 4:
"The righteous shall live by faith." And Christ says to Mary, who was
forgiven her sins, "Go, your faith has helped you." Therefore, neither
devils nor false Christians, who know and have history, will have such
faith, yes, as well as the true Christians. For the devil knows Christ
very well, and knows what he has done and suffered on earth. But this,
although a Christian must know, is not the true faith by which one comes
to forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

(9) But here it is said what is right faith, that is, nothing else,
but to believe what Christ speaks and promises, that it is true and
without all falsity. For these two belong together: when God promises
something, that we keep it with our hearts, and do not doubt that it is
true, even though we do not yet have it or see it. Now where the promise
is, and we accept it with our hearts, let it be certain that it is what
it says: this is called true living faith. As we see here. The king
comes to Christ and asks him to go with him and help his son. There was
a trust in the Lord Christ that he could and would help his son; but
such trust was still without the word, and was based only on the miracle
that the Lord had previously performed in Galilee at the wedding. This
royal man will undoubtedly have heard of it; therefore, he trusts in the
Lord Christ because he will also help him. This may be called faith, but
it is still a very weak faith. For the promise has not yet been made,
and such faith or trust is still based on the uncertain delusion whether
Christ will help or not. If he helps, the king considers him a great,
holy man; if he does not help, he does not think so highly of him.

(10) For this reason Christ is somewhat harsh with him, saying,
"Unless you see signs, you do not believe." As if to say, faith should
not be based on signs and wonders alone, but on the Word:

For signs and wonders may be false and untruthful, but he who trusts in
the word cannot be deceived, for God's promise is certain and cannot
lie. For although the Lord performed signs and wonders, so that he could
be seen and move people to faith, his final opinion was that people
should look more to his word than to the signs, which had to serve as a
testimony to the word. For he was not primarily concerned with helping
this and other sick people in the body; his most important ministry was
to point people to the word and to form it in their hearts so that they
would be saved by it.

11 Because this royal has not yet a word or certain promise from Christ,
he cannot believe with certainty. From the miraculous work at Cana, and
perhaps from the common cry of Christ as a new prophet, he trusts that
he will help his son and can help him. But such faith goes no further
than that such help follows. Therefore, he hurries and worries that if
the Lord would forgive him, his son would be cut short. That it is
therefore still far from true, and not yet true faith. For he thinks
that if Christ himself is not with the sick person, he will not be
helped; and he worries that if the Lord forgives and his son dies in the
meantime, it will be over and in vain. It was impossible for the king to
believe otherwise at that time, because, as I said, he did not have a
promise or a word, since he could certainly rely on it and hold on to
it, but as soon as Christ opened his mouth and said: "Go thy way, thy
Son liveth," there follows true, perfect faith, which is the proper way
of keeping Christ's promise; as we see in the royal: he believes such a
word of Christ, goes away with certain confidence in Christ's word, and
does not doubt, when he comes home, that he will find his Son fresh and
healthy.

(12) Learn therefore what it means to believe, that is, nothing else,
except that we do not doubt the word of Christ and the promise, but, as
the word promises, hold it to be certain and true, so that it will never
be lacking.

[944 **L. 3, iso-iss.** On the 'twenty-first Svnnday after Trinitatis.
**W. xm, 2135-2137.** 945]{.underline}

even though we do not yet see or feel it. For this is the peculiar way
of faith, that it deals with and believes that which is not yet present.
For what is present is not to be believed: it is felt and known. A rich
man, who has money and goods in abundance, whether he already believes
that he does not want to die of hunger for the year, that is not faith.
But he who has no provisions, but nevertheless keeps God's word that
God, as a father, will provide his food, provided he also keeps in the
fear of God and is a descendant of his profession, he has the right
faith. And it is impossible that such faith should be lacking; for it
stands on the word of God, which is almighty, and promises us that if we
seek first the kingdom of God and then stop working, the rest will all
fall to us.

(13) Thus we all know, one and all, that we are so poisoned by sin
that we find no righteousness at all in ourselves. Since the word
proclaims forgiveness of sins and righteousness to us through Christ,
such a word cannot be understood in any other way than through faith
alone. This is why a Christian has such a character: even though he is
nothing but sin, he is without sin, pure and righteous, according to
faith and the word. Faith brings him there; his works cannot bring him
there, as the preachers preach. For as far as our works are concerned,
even though they are the best, we are nothing but useless servants, as
the Lord himself says, Luke 17:10.

(14) As I have spoken of righteousness, so it is with life. We are so
drowned in death by sin that we are not for a moment sure of our life;
that we must say with truth (as the heathen do) that man has nothing
more certain before him when he is born than death. As we always learn
and experience, not only from other people's examples, but also from
ourselves, that it happens so soon that a person falls into illness or
other misfortune. Nevertheless, in such sorrow and misery, the word
shines before us, comforting us not only for this temporal life, but
also for eternal life.

Life. We who believe do not have it in our hands, we do not feel it or
grasp it; but it is promised in the Word, and we believe it. And it is
certain that we shall not lack such faith, for it is based on the Word
of God, which is eternal and almighty.

15 In sum, this kind of faith is just like the word, it looks forward to
the future, eternal, heavenly goods, which we do not yet have: thus
faith grasps future goods as if they were already there, and doubts
nothing about them. Cause, he sees that God's word is almighty, and God
is true, and not a liar. That is why faith has a sharp eye on the word.
If he sees that the word is there, he goes up freshly, and neither the
devil nor the world is frightened; for he knows what it is finally based
on and how it should go out, and even the devil should be sorry.

16 Again, when he sees that there is no word of God, he does not let any
appearance, threat, or power of the world move him to believe it to be
true, and rather suffers what is due to him. If we had followed this
kind of faith in the papacy, we would never have been led into idolatry
and error in such a horrible way. But we have left God's word out of
sight, and have fallen with faith on this and that work, as if it should
help to forgive sins; have thus not only lost the good, but also the
soul through false worship and idolatry.

(17) Therefore, it is a very necessary and useful doctrine to know
what it means to believe rightly, namely, to have God's word and
promise, and to cling to it firmly so that it will certainly come to
pass as the word tells us. For to believe something without God's word
is not faith, but a false delusion, since nothing will ever come of it.
Just as if you wanted to believe that you would still become Roman
emperor; even if you were to foresee this with the utmost certainty,
nothing would come of it. But since David, who was of low estate, had
God's word through the prophet Samuel that he should become king in
Israel, he had to do what Saul wanted.

946 **D. 3, 152-155. on the twenty-first Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2137-2140.** 947

18 It is the same here. Although the king had the thought that Christ
would help his son, such a thought could not be based on certainty. The
reason was that he lacked the word. But when the word came, which he
heard from Christ, "Go, thy son liveth," there was no more need; for
he would have proved the Lord Christ false; for the word could not lie
to him.

(19) So we also have God's word and promise, since our dear Lord
Christ comforts all the world in general, and says, John 8:51: "Whoever
keeps my word will not see death forever. Item, John says of him, "This
is the Lamb of God, which bareth the sin of the world." These are
common sayings, from which no man should conclude. For he saith not, If
he believe on me, or if any man believe on me; but he saith in general,
He that keepeth my word shall not see death for ever." Item, John does
not say that Christ was sent by God for a sacrifice to be offered for
this or that one; but for the whole world's sin. Therefore, since you
also are a sinner and in the world, accept it, and do not doubt that it
is for your sake. This is the reason why our faith, as far as
forgiveness of sins and eternal life are concerned, should be based on
it. And we will certainly not lack it any more than the royal one does
here.

020 For we are not to think that the king had any advantage over us,
that he could have believed all the more easily, because the Lord put
his person so properly in the word, and said to him, "Go thy way, thy
son liveth"; but it is more difficult for us to believe, because our
person is not so properly put in the word, but the word alone is spoken
in general. This is not the opinion. For our dear Lord Christ did not
leave it at such preaching in general; but just as he says here to the
king, "Go, your son lives"; so he says to each of us in particular, to
me and to you, "My son, your sins are forgiven you; you shall have
eternal life.

21 For tell me, with whom does God speak, and with whom does He deal,
when you are being

baptize? Is it not true that baptism is for you alone, and for no one
else? You enjoy your baptism, others do not enjoy it; but if they want
to enjoy baptism, they must also be baptized for themselves. But what
does God say to you and to anyone who is baptized in baptism? His
promise is this: "Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved. Item,
you are baptized into the death of Christ, that he died for you and with
his death made you free from sins and death. But how could God speak
more kindly to you and include your person in the Word in a more certain
and real way than in baptism, which is for no one but you alone and is
called and is your own baptism?

22 So, if you desire to be absolved of your sins, and come to the church
minister or to another Christian, thinking that you will find God's
word and comfort in him, is it not true, as you generally hear in the
sermon that Christ died for all sinners, so you also hear there in
particular that such a death and dying is meant for you and that you
should accept it? For the words go like this: "Dear brother, dear
sister, we are all sinners and sinners' wives, and therefore all must
be condemned; but the Son of God became man for our sake, died for our
sins, and rose again for our righteousness. Therefore do not despair:
Christ has paid for you, you shall go forth free; only take comfort in
his suffering and accept it.

(23) So also in the Lord's supper Christ's body is given to you
especially in the bread, and His blood in the wine, and it is said to
you especially, His body is given for you, and His blood is poured out
for you; that you may not doubt, but accept such a sacrifice as your
own: for the body and blood of Christ are put into your mouth, and are
given to you as your own, that you may eat and drink them for yourself
alone. God has nothing to do with anyone else; he speaks to no one else
but you, who come to this supper and eat and drink as he has commanded.

24 Seeing now what this means for Christians

**948 L. 3.15S-IS7.** On the twenty-first^ Sunday after Trinity. **W.
HII,-2140-2143. 949**

find, who go for such a long time, do not even desire absolution, nor go
to this gracious Lord's Supper. Those who have no desire for it, nor do
they believe that God has anything special to do with them, talks to
them, comforts them, and promises them forgiveness of sins and eternal
life: they are worth nothing better than that the wretched devil deals
with them and talks to them. So there is no lack of this, as if God did
not speak to us in particular; what is lacking is that we do not follow
this royal example, and do not accept what Christ promises us in
particular, nor do we consider it true and certain.

(25) The king also had reason not to believe if he had followed his
reason and allowed himself to be led away from the word. For who would
believe that this single word could be so powerful over so many miles
and accomplish such a great work? He could have said: "I know how I
have left my son, that he is in danger; if he is to be helped, dear
Lord, this will not do, which you are talking to me now: you must go
closer to him, touch him, talk to him, and there will be hope. But then
the royal man puts aside all thoughts and remains bad at the word, and
believes it as surely as if he saw his son already there before him,
fresh and healthy. For if his heart were not so set, he would not have
allowed himself to be rejected with this mere word. But he lets himself
be rejected, as John very finely says: "The man believed the word that
JEsus said to him, and went."

26 There you see what faith really is, if you want to define and paint
it correctly. Nothing else, but to hold as certain and true what Christ
promises you. Get used to it, and first learn what God promises you in
baptism, Christ in his Gospel and in the Lord's Supper. Adhere to such
promises with all your heart, and do not let other thoughts, which do
not remain outside, mislead you in such faith. We feel sin and death in
us, which can be seen and felt without interruption. If then you do not
want to keep the word, but let it go, and let ur

If you do not divide yourself as you find yourself, sin will lead you
into fear and despair, and death will wear you out with power.

27 But what does a Christian do? He confesses sin, and knows that he has
death before him. But then he throws himself around, keeps the word as
best he can, and says, "Christ died for me; therefore I am free from
sin, and cannot die; neither devil nor death is in me, for Christ has
paid for me what I owed. This then is called rightly believed; and it is
impossible that he who thus keeps the word should lack it or lie.

(28) Yea, thou sayest, I see none of them, much less have I what to
believe; I hear it only: who knoweth whether it be true? Answer: What
the word tells you, believe; then you will certainly not be deceived, it
will actually turn out that way in the end. Do as the king did here; he
also had to keep his word. He did not see that it had become better with
his son. But because he believed the word, the next day his servants
came and got the message that his son was fresh and healthy. When he
came home, he saw him before his eyes. He can no longer believe; it is
written in the work and before his eyes as he believed.

So it will be the same with us. We do not have and do not feel
forgiveness of sins, eternal life. If you have heard the sermon today,
sought absolution, and gone to the Lord's Table, you are still the same
as you were yesterday: you feel nothing different; you have the same
flesh and blood as before. Do not be offended by this, but hold fast to
the word that promises you forgiveness of sins and eternal life, and go
with this kingdom without any doubt: the hour will surely come. As you
believe forgiveness of sins and eternal life through Christ, so you will
find it in his time, in that life. Here we have it only in word and
faith, but there in deed and experience. May God, our dear Father in
heaven, grant us this for the sake of His Son Christ Jesus, through His
Holy Spirit, amen.

[950 L. 3, 157^-iss. On the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity. W. xm.
2132-2iss. 951]{.underline}

**On the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity.**

**Matth. 18, 21-35.**

Then Peter came to him and said, "Lord, how often must I forgive my
brother who sins against me? Is it enough seven times? Jesus said to
him, "I tell you, not seven times, but seventy times seven. Therefore
the kingdom of heaven is like a king who began to reckon with his
servants. And when he began to reckon, there came before him one that
owed him ten thousand pounds. Since he did not have the money to pay,
the master ordered him to sell his wife and children and everything he
had and to pay. Then the servant fell down and worshiped him, saying,
"Lord, have patience with me; I will pay you everything. Then the
master of the same servant was sorry and released him, and he also
forgave him the debt. Then the same servant went out and found one of
his fellow servants, who owed him a hundred pennies; and he attacked him
and choked him, saying, Pay me what you owe me. Then his fellow servant
fell down and begged him, saying, Have patience with me; I will pay you
all. But he would not, but went and cast him into prison, until he
should pay the debt. When his fellow servants saw this, they were very
sad and came and told their master everything that had happened. Then
his lord summoned him and said to him, "Servant of the wicked, I have
forgiven you all these debts because you asked me; should you not also
have mercy on your fellow servant, as I have had mercy on you? And his
lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, until he paid all
that he owed him. So shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if ye forgive
not your brother his trespasses from your heart.

What the summa of today's gospel is, hear your love soon in the
beginning. Peter asks the Lord how he should behave when his brother
sins against him, how often he should forgive him, if it is enough seven
times? Then the Lord answers him, "I say not seven times, but seventy
times seven." That is, forgiveness of sin should have no measure nor
goal among Christians; one should always forgive another, and be careful
that he does not take revenge. For this belongs to God alone, to whom
His majesty and power are to be left undisturbed. As the likeness shows
by length, and we shall hereafter draw together and show such causes one
after another.

(2) But here we must take special note of the little word which the
Lord says: Let the kingdom of heaven be like a king who would reckon
with his servants. For such a commandment of the forgiveness of sins is
not to be carried into the kingdom of the world, since offices and
persons are unequal, and therefore one always has power and command over
the other. There one should not look upon wickedness, nor let anyone do
what he desires;

but the evil should be punished and the people kept to discipline,
respectability and fairness.

(3) Therefore, it is not the opinion of a father to forgive his
children for everything and to watch their mischievousness. He should
punish and not forgive. So lords and wives with their servants, secular
authorities with their subjects, should not forgive what is done wrong,
but punish. For naughtiness is in the world without this: the more it is
overlooked, the worse and more wicked it becomes, so that in the end,
where the children of father and mother do not want to let themselves be
drawn, the executioner must draw them and ward off the wickedness.

(4) Therefore, this command does not belong to the kingdom of the
world, where there are unequal persons and offices, as reported before;
but to the kingdom of heaven, where we are all equal, and have only One
Lord over us, whom we shall all enjoy. Such a Kingdom of Heaven begins
here on earth, and is called by another name the Christian Church here
on earth, since God rules in it through His Word and His Spirit. In the
same church, unless you have a special office, where God calls you to
punish wrongdoing, it should be done so that one person always

**[952 L. 3, 159-161. on the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
216S-2168. 953]{.underline}**

forgive one another, and no one should take revenge, but show all mercy
and kindness to his neighbor where he needs it, even though he may well
deserve something else for us, and we, according to the world, would
have good cause to inflict all evil on him. But why our Lord Christ
would have such things, he finely shows with several causes, in the
likeness of the two servants and the king.

The first reason is that our dear Lord Christ wants his Christians to
remember what grace God has shown them, who also, if he had wanted,
would have had many and great causes to punish us and put us to all
misfortune. But since we have received mercy without merit, we should do
the same to our neighbor.

6 For this reason, this is to be remembered all the more diligently. For
the Lord herewith shows what is the right way for us to come to the
forgiveness of sins, and puts before us in the most real way who we are
and who God is, what we deserve against God and what God does for us.

(7) For he holds up to us the parable of the servant who owes ten
thousand pounds, in the same the Lord will teach us all what is our
opinion before God's judgment. The word talentum, which we translate as
pound, was used by the ancients to mean a certain sum of money,
approximately six hundred crowns. Therefore, ten thousand pounds make an
immeasurably large sum, in the six thousand times hundred thousand
crowns. To such a great sum of money the Lord equals Our sin, to show
that we can never put it away, or do enough for it. For sin is inherited
upon us, that we bring it with us from our mother's womb. The more we
grow and increase in age, the more the sins prove themselves, so that we
add our own sins to the sins we have inherited from others, and grow so
deeply in debt to God that we are just like this servant here.

008 And what is the judgment of this servant, because of his great
iniquity? This, that the Lord will sell him, his wife, his child and
everything. By this the

Lord indicate that we poor sinners not only cannot pay, but we must
suffer death for the sake of sin. As Paul says: "The wages of sin is
death"; and the Lord threatened Adam and Eve in paradise: "The day ye
eat of this tree ye shall surely die. This is what has happened to all
of us poor human beings, that for the sake of our sins, the law of God
has made such a harsh sentence against us and condemned us to death. For
where sin would not be, no man would die. Where shall we go now? The
guilt is before our eyes, we cannot deny it; so the Lord wants to be
paid, but we cannot pay, it is impossible for us.

(9) Now this is the excellent, noble, and comforting thing, whereunto
we ought to incline our ears, and open wide our hearts, if we may learn
this art also, that we may come out of great trespasses, and escape from
death. But this is done only by doing as the Lord says here, that this
servant has done. He sees both his great guilt, and then his inability
and the punishment. Therefore he falls down before the Lord, worships
him and says: "Have patience with me" 2c. This is what we call
crawling to the cross and desiring mercy.

(10) This is what the Lord wants us to learn, if we want to be freed
from guilt in any other way. For he that would not confess the trespass,
but would deny it (as the Pharisees do, who think themselves pious and
righteous), would only make his cause worse. But if we confess, we are
imprisoned; for we cannot ever pay. Therefore it is a dangerous,
horrible error that in the papacy people are directed to their own work
and satisfaction to put away sin with it. The only way is for you to
confess such guilt and sin, and fall down with the servant and beg for
mercy, saying like the tax collector Luc. 18:13: "Lord, have mercy on
me.

(11) Yes, you say, yet the servant here says that he wants to pay
everything. He says whatever he wants, so we must confess, if he is
serious, that it is not true, but quite impossible for him. Therefore

954 **D. 3, 161-IW. On the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2168-2170.** 955

Christ wanted to show how it is for our hearts in such a case, namely,
that we cannot grasp such grace, which is so plentiful and abundant. It
always seems to us that it is too much, that God will not be so gracious
as to let us off the hook for everything, that something still has to be
paid, that it is too much to let us off the hook and give us everything.
The Lord intended such thoughts of ours to indicate that the servant,
although he asks for mercy, nevertheless offers himself as if he wanted
to pay what he owes. Although this is true, he who desires forgiveness
of his sins with all his heart must least of all have the intention that
he will no longer be guilty, that is, that he will refrain from sins and
amend himself and become more pious. For to continue in sins, and not to
cease from them, and yet to ask forgiveness of sins, is to mock our Lord
God.

(12) Therefore, whoever turns to God's mercy and asks for mercy, how
will he find God? Most willingly and most graciously. For listen, what
does the Son of God, who is in the bosom of the Father, say? "It
grieved the master of the same servant," he says, "and he let him go,
and the debt also he remitted to him." This is the right and proper
color, since one can and should paint GOD and His heart in the most
proper way. But whoever gives him another color, paints him wrongly and
differently than he is in himself.

(13) For our hearts to think that God is a severe judge, since sinners
do not find mercy in Him, but must fear all unmercy, is altogether a
false thought; and there is nothing in it, although the law itself does
not preach otherwise about our Lord God. For the law speaks of sinners
who neither hope nor desire mercy. But sinners who confess their sins
are sorry for them and wish they had not angered God in this way, and
all their concern and care is that they have lived against God in this
way and have not obeyed his commandments, and for this reason they ask
for mercy: they shall find mercy, as it says here. Cause, God is a
gracious God.

God, and has a fatherly heart. Therefore our misfortune grieves him and
goes to his heart; and as the prophet says (Ezekiel 18:23), he does not
delight in the death of the sinner; but this is his delight, that the
sinner may repent and live. Therefore, if he finds in you such a heart
that desires mercy, and is displeased with sin and refrains from it, he
will gladly drop all guilt and show you mercy. As we see here in the
servant who confesses his guilt and asks for mercy.

14 But what the means is by which God will be gracious to us, the gospel
shows in other places, namely, that the Son of God, our dear Lord Christ
Jesus, took care of sinners, took their sin upon himself, and paid for
it with his death. Where there is such trust in the Lord Christ and his
death, God's heart is won away, so that he cannot be angry or punish.
For without this he has a compassionate heart, and he is grieved by our
sorrow and misery. For this reason, as soon as Adam and Eve fell into
sin and death, he offered himself to take away the devil's power
through the seed of the woman.

(15) This then is our doctrine, which, praise God, we hold rightly and
purely in our churches, that we have forgiveness of sins and eternal
righteousness and life through faith alone in Jesus Christ alone, that
is, through God's grace and mercy. As we see here in the case of the
servant who owes such a large sum, but by grace, without merit, without
any works, it is forgiven him: only because he adheres to grace and asks
for it.

(16) Therefore, it is an erroneous, false, even blasphemous doctrine
that the papists, when they preach forgiveness of sins, point out to
people who are in such debt that it is impossible for them to pay, that
they should and must pay for themselves with their own works. But that
we point people only and solely to God's grace through Christ, they
call heresy and error. But take this gospel before thee, and consider
which are nearer: we who preach of grace, or they who preach of their
own.

956 **L. 3, 163-165.** on the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity. **W.
xm, 2170-2173.** 957

preach works and repentance. In sum, this entire sermon is intended to
teach us that God wants to forgive us and freely accept us for free, and
to forgive all our sins. The Lord reminds us of this grace here, that we
should also do this, and use all grace and kindness toward one another,
and not reckon with our neighbor exactly; then we will be like
Christians who have received grace, and for this reason we will also
show grace toward everyone. This is the first reason the Lord gives, and
also teaches, which is the right way to salvation, that we may come to
grace and forgiveness of sins.

(17) The other reason is that the Lord wants us to take a good look at
the harm and injustice done to us by others, and to move it well; so we
will certainly find, if we put it on the gold scale, that the debt we
owe to our Lord God will be like ten thousand pounds against a hundred
pennies that our neighbor owes us. This will also move us, because God
has left us such a large sum, that we will not count so carefully on the
small amount, but will also turn in our owed money and let ourselves be
found willing.

18 The word denarius, which is sometimes translated as penny, sometimes
as groschen, is an old Roman coin that was worth half a place *) of a
guilder. Such a penny, a hundred against ten thousand pounds, as each
pound makes six hundred crowns, is a very small sum. So then the Lord
says: "If you want to magnify your loss, because you think you have a
reason to be angry, what is it? It is hardly a florin compared to
hundreds of thousands of florins that you owe to our Lord God. If God
closes his eyes against you, he does not want to count or see such a
great debt: how can you be such ruthless, hard people that you do not
want to slacken anything and count everything so exactly? Do not do it,
for God's sake. Put your sin on a scale, and your neighbor's as well,
and do not do it.

*) Place - quarter. D. Red.

more than your heavenly Father has done with your many and great sins,
you are true Christians.

(19) The third cause is this, that the Lord in the likeness calls us
all servants together. "The same servant," saith he, "went out, and
found one of his fellow servants owing him an hundred pence." Such a
thing should also move us to mercy and deter us from revenge. For we are
but fellow servants, and have all one Lord over us, who can and will
punish us for what every man wickedly does; to him we should leave his
power and authority, and not fall upon him. For he will not suffer thee
to take hold of his office, and to do that which is his alone to do. As
the Lord says in another place: "Vengeance is mine, I will repay. For
God's order is without this, that he wants to punish sin; and for this
work he has not only the evil enemy, who can attack body and goods and
damage them in many ways, if God decrees this for him; but he also has
on earth father and mother, lord and wife, and temporal authorities. All
of these have orders from God to punish evil.

020 Therefore, if thou be a child or a servant in the house, if wrong be
done thee by other children or servants, beware; let not wrath pass thee
over, that thou shouldest avenge thyself, and not forgive. Remember, it
is my fellow servant, I have no power over him; I will have him punished
who is lord over us both. If he will not do it and will not wait for his
office, there is another one above all of us who will not let it go
unpunished. So citizens, peasants, and all in all, each one of them
should stand up to the other, and beware of revenge. This is what the
Lord means by the word he says in the parable: "This servant found one
of his fellow servants.

(21) The fourth cause is that he who would not follow such teaching,
and would not consider God's great mercy toward him, nor his
neighbor's little trespasses, who is his fellow servant over whom he
has no power, and would go out of his head and yield nothing, but be
angry and punish him: what would he accomplish thereby? Nothing else,
but that such great

**958 L. 3,i6s-i68. On the twenty-second Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2173-2176. 959**

Unfairness and unmercifulness will not remain secret. Other Christians
will see it and be very saddened by it, and will come before the Lord
and tell him everything. This means in German: By such unmercifulness
the Holy Spirit is grieved in the Christians; it grieves them and they
sigh to God because of it. Let no one think that such sighing should be
in vain and in vain. For if the Lord would otherwise pretend not to see
and know, and would forgive and endure the punishment, he is moved by
such lamentations and groans of the other Christians that he must take
care of the matter and hasten to the punishment.

22 Therefore, just as the intercession of pious people is not in vain
nor in vain, neither is the common curse, the common complaint against
the wicked, in vain nor in vain. Therefore, the Lord wants to warn us
herewith that we should not despise such common curses, but be kind and
merciful to our fellow servants: so we will find Christians who will
thank God for such mercy, and desire that God should pay us and do the
same.

(23) Therefore these are wretched, unhappy people, who despise both
the common blessing and the curse, which both affect: the blessing the
pious, the curse the wicked. As one learns when an evil time comes. He
who then holds back the grain, as miserly men do, and waits until it is
worth more money, the people curse him, as Solomon says, Prov. 11:26;
but blessing comes upon him who sells it. The wicked despise both of
these things. But let it be seen whether such a curse is in vain, and
whether all misfortune does not befall them who bring it upon
themselves. For, as we see here, the Lord instructs us to beware of
this, and not to give cause for our fellow servants to be grieved, to
come before the Lord and say what they have seen. For then hear what
follows.

The Lord summons the servant before Him. This is the fifth cause: that
where you do not want to show mercy to your neighbor, but want to avenge
yourself and punish him, God will not be silent about it, but will make
you speak. This will happen on the last day.

happen. Then the terrible sentence will go, that you will be handed over
to the tormentors until you pay everything.

(25) What have you gained by your anger, you poor man? Since you would
otherwise have a merciful God and could have gotten rid of all your
guilt, if you had shown mercy to your neighbor and forgiven him for his
wrongdoing, God will not forgive you either, and will count against you
just as accurately as you count against your neighbor. That is a poor,
miserable bargain, since you lose a hundred thousand florins for the
sake of a penny, before you leave it behind. However, this equation is
far too small for this matter, since a man cannot come to the
forgiveness of sins and must remain in the wrath and disgrace of God for
eternity.

26 Therefore the Lord concludes, saying, "So shall my heavenly Father
do also unto you, if ye forgive not your brother his trespasses from
your heart. He calls us brethren one to another; there will never be any
enmity or unkindness. But now we are all so frail that we will never
live like this among ourselves; sometimes one will offend the other with
words, works, and other things.

What should it be like? Shall we bite and scratch one another like cats
and dogs? Oh no, but let us forgive from the heart and think, "What
have I wronged my brother for? If God is gracious to me and has given me
such a large sum of money freely, purely, for nothing, for the sake of
Jesus Christ His Son, what would I want to louse myself for a penny or
two? *) I will set off one against the other, forget and forgive, and
thank God that he has also forgiven me and accepted me for mercy, when
he would have had a thousand and a thousand times more cause to be angry
with me and to punish me than I have against my neighbor.

28This is the teaching that our dear Lord Christ has preached to his
dear Christians today, that we should break ourselves, not leave the
bridle to wrath, but rather bear our guilt against

*) to louse - to be felted. D. Red.

[960 **L. s, 168-na.** On the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. **W.
xm, 2176.2234.** 961]{.underline}

We should be glad that we have come to this and that both are cancelled
out.

(29) But there you see how we do not follow at all, and let the devil
ride us and drive us to anger, revenge and all misfortune, with our
great harm and damage. For it is decided: If you do not want to forgive,
God will not forgive you either; if you want to avenge, anger, punish,
God will also avenge, anger and punish. But it is an unequal anger and
punishment. For God's wrath and punishment is an eternal wrath and
punishment: you are imprisoned by a small wrath, which arises because of
a small sin, against him, because you have no right to it; but God alone
has the right to it, and is certain, if you only do not punish him and
come to him, he will punish the sin of your fellow servant far more
severely and cruelly than you can ever remember.

(30) That is why you see how one sin is always punished by another.
The devil drives such vengeful, angry, intolerable people so far into
wrath that they cannot nor will they pray the Lord's Prayer. For they
see a sting in it, which they cannot let pass over their tongue, that a
Christian should pray: Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who
trespass against us. Then they feel very well that if God does not want
to forgive them in any other way than forgiving others, then their sins
will probably be forgiven them unpardoned.

remain. They do not want to speak such a judgment against and about
themselves, but rather leave the Lord's Prayer unprayed. But do you not
think that the devil has honestly taken such people under his spurs, so
that they also lose their prayers for the sake of anger? But what does a
Christian have if he has lost prayer? He has nothing, indeed, he is in a
twofold disobedience to God!

So it also happens that such people abstain from the reverend supper of
the body and blood of Christ, and for the sake of a small, petty, unjust
anger against their neighbor deprive themselves of the highest comfort
against sin and conscience. Would it not be better, a thousand times and
a thousand times better, to forsake all wrath, to suffer and bear all
injustice, than to wilfully and wantonly deprive oneself of God's grace
and fall into His wrath?

32 Therefore, whoever finds his heart so hardened with anger and hatred,
let him take this gospel before him and reflect well, and ask God's
forgiveness for having so long kept his anger against his neighbor and
lived so unchristianly; and let him soon come to and forgive from his
heart, so that God's judgment and sentence may not overtake him, but
that he may also come to forgiveness of sins and eternal life through
Christ, our Redeemer and Savior of all. May this be granted to us all by
our gracious God and Father in Heaven, Amen.

**On the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Matth. 22, 15-22.**

Then the Pharisees went and held a council, as they caught him in his
speech; and they sent unto him their disciples, with Herodi's servants,
saying: Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God
aright, and askest after no man: for thou regardest not the reputation
of men. Therefore tell us, what do you think? Is it right to give
interest to Caesar, or not? When Jesus perceived their wickedness, he
said, "You hypocrites, why do you tempt me? Give me the interest coin.
And they offered him a penny. And he said unto them: What is the image
and the superscription? And they said unto him, The emperor. Then said
he unto them, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are God's. When they heard this, they were
astonished and left him and went away.

*) Held in the house, 1333.

[**962** L. 3, i7o-^72. on the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. W.
xiii, 2234-2238. **963**]{.underline}

The reason for today's gospel is that the Jews had such a promise in
the Law of Moses: if they kept God's commandment, they would be their
own kingdom, have a king from among their people, and not be subject to
any foreign king. They kept this promise and always hoped that there
would be no trouble for them. When the Romans came and became powerful,
even though they had to do a lot, the Jews were very upset and caused a
lot of misery and hardship in the country, hoping that they would get
rid of them. But they were beaten and so humiliated that they were not
allowed to oppose the Romans from then on.

(2) From this it is seen what is the wickedness of us all. The Jews
had kept this in mind, that they should have a kingdom of their own; but
that they should keep God's commandment, and do nothing contrary to his
will and word, they would not touch that, and yet they would have it.
The kingdom, they said, is ours, it is promised to us; therefore we will
have it. It is as if a wicked maid said to her wife, "You promised me
my wages, so give them to me and I will do whatever I want. No, that
does not apply, but it is said: If you want to have the wages from me,
then you must work and do what I tell you to do. It was the same with
the Jews: they were disobedient to God and stiff-necked, so that they
asked nothing of His commandments, and yet they wanted to be free.

003 Wherefore there was a great question among them, Whether they should
be under the power of the Roman emperor, who was a heathen, because they
had such a clear promise, that they should have their own king.
Therefore they went about catching the Lord in his speech, taking
Herod's servants with them, and asked him whether they owed the Emperor
the interest or not. Now he speaks yes or no, they think, he cannot
escape them. If the Lord says yes, they think he will stir up all the
people against him, and they will call him a blasphemer and a liar who
teaches against God and Moses. For there was a promise that they should
be a free people of their own, and not be a stranger.

or serve pagan masters. But if he says no to this, he has forfeited his
neck once again. They are only very sure of this, because the Romans did
not like this. They wanted to put him in this dilemma; if he said yes or
no, he would be caught and forfeit his life. This is how evil and
poisonous the enemies of our dear Lord Christ are.

4 But what happens, how do they fare? So that the Lord turns the spear,
that they may think to stab him, and smites them with their own sword.
Let me see the coin," he says. When they give him the coin at his
request, he asks, "Do you know what the image and superscription are?
This means to deal with the matter in a simple way. The Pharisees do not
think anything bad yet, but they say that it is the emperor's image and
superscription. But when the Lord had heard this from them, he was
content, and said, "Do you say that this is the image and
superscription of Caesar? Yes, we say so. Well then, if you have the
emperor's goods and coin, give him what is his. For the fact that they
had confessed that they needed his coin was already known as much as if
they had accepted the emperor as their lord. Therefore the Lord is right
to conclude from their own words that he will not take from Caesar what
is his.

5 This is the cause of today's Gospel, a real masterpiece, because the
Pharisees wanted to betray and sell the Lord Jesus, and yet such a plan
comes out against themselves afterwards. They wanted to catch him in his
words, and catch themselves. For he must neither say yes nor no to such
a question; they themselves remind him with their answer what he should
answer, and give him the sword in his hand, so that he should strangle
them, just as when one murders himself with his sword.

(6) From this history we should note two things. The first is that we
learn to recognize our naughtiness from the example of the Jews. For we
all, no one excepted, are of such a mind that we like to complain when
we feel what is hurting us; we also think that we are being wronged. And
it is true that it is sometimes wrong for us to reckon with people, that
we do not deserve it for them, that they deal so unfaithfully with us.

[964 **L. 3,i72-i7s. On the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity; W. xin,
2238-2240.** 965]{.underline}

We will think. There we go, unable to see anything but our right and our
adversaries' wrong; then we cry out and complain, just like the Jews
here about the Romans, that they ruled against God and right over them,
who were God's people. And indeed, as I said, the Romans had no right
to overreach the Jews and make them their subjects. For the Romans were
Gentiles who did not have God's word and the right worship, as the Jews
did. This hurt the Jews very much; they therefore thought that they had
grasped their rights sharply and had a good grasp of them. But they
lacked, just as we also lack in such a case. For though thy neighbor
wrong thee, thou shalt not reckon upon it; but go thither, thinking, How
if I have sinned so greatly before our Lord GOD, that I should long
since have deserved that he should take from me not only my right, but
also life and limb? This is the one thing we are to learn.

(7) Now it is no less, the Jews were very wicked that they should be
subject to a heathen emperor; they thought: We are God's people, the
Gentiles know nothing of God, and live in all idolatry and shame: how
then do we come to serve them, and they to be our lords? But those who
were godly and pious lifted up their hands to God and asked for mercy,
but they did not ask for anything in return, for they knew that they had
earned it with their sins. Cause, the teaching and preaching that went
public was no good (as we see in the Gospel); so the government was no
good either. Avarice, usury, fornication, pride, lust and other sins
went with heaps. What should our Lord God do about it? Should he protect
them, since they asked nothing of him and his word? Should he keep them
by their rights, since they did not lift a finger for his sake and to
serve him? Yes, he should not do that. For since they would not keep his
law, he had good reason not to keep their law either. God did not
promise them the kingdom of the flesh as if it were to remain forever;

But God had tied a shillelagh around the dog's neck and promised them
the kingdom if they were pious and obedient and kept His commandments.
They let such thoughts go, asked nothing of God's commandments, and
still wanted to have their rule unchallenged, God granting that they
were godly or godless. Like a servant who wants his wages, he deserves
them or not. Yes, they should be ordered to do so. Thus it is said: Do
what you ought, and you will be repaid what you deserve. If a peasant
does not want to be pious and obedient, nor does he want to pay his
interest, he will not be wronged if the lord of the manor takes away
both his property and his right and gives it to another who is pious and
does what he owes to his lordship.

(8) Therefore let us learn to temper our complaint and make a similar
reckoning, not only to see what right we have against others, but also
what wrong we have against God; and then, in all humility and patience,
lift up our hands to God and say, "It is true that I am wronged, I have
not deserved it for this person; but I must also look behind and above
myself to see how I am faring with God. There I find a long record that
proves me to be ten times worse, and I have sinned against God ten
times, yes, a thousand times more than my neighbor has sinned against
me. Therefore it behooves me to bend the crook, and say, O Lord,
forgive; I also will forgive.

(9) For it would be wrong for us to stand so stiffly on our right,
since we have done so much wrong against God. It is true that he who can
maintain his right by proper ways and means does not do wrong. For
judgment and justice are ordained by God Himself, to be sought and used.
But where we cannot establish justice, let every man beware lest he
complain much, or become impatient; but turn round, and say: I ought to
be right, and they that offend me wrong; but I must confess that I have
well deserved such wrong in the sight of God. Then we would not do as
the Jews did: they gave with their life and being a wicked

966 **L. 3, 175-177. on the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2240-2243.** 967

They thought that since God had lost His right with them, they wanted to
keep their right from the people. Just as if the wicked peasants wanted
to have protection from their authorities, and yet wanted to be free of
interest and give nothing to anyone. But God has finely rewarded such
courage by putting the sword into the hands of the authorities. If they
do not want to give it with good, they can be taken by the head and
forced.

(10) Such an opinion does not apply to the poor priests; they have no
power to force those who do not want to give them what they owe.
Therefore, such wicked citizens and peasants let themselves think that
they are well justified in giving them nothing at all, or even nothing
good, but the worst. But how does it work in the end? If the priest
cannot punish nor obtain his right, God sees into it, he sends
pestilence among people and cattle; he sends thieves or mercenaries, who
take what you have; he decrees that through thunderstorms wine, grain,
fruit, turnips, herbs in the field perish 2c. When this happens, the
saying goes: "Dear citizen, dear farmer, do not complain that injustice
has been done to you. You let yourself think that you are being wronged,
but before God it is very right for you. You have long since earned
this, indeed, much trouble for him. Therefore, do not complain that you
are wronged, but complain about your sins and unrepentant life, about
your avarice, pride, security, contempt for God's word and the like;
for such sins make your right out of all wrong.

(11) So the Lord also wants to remind the Jews here, because they lost
their kingdom and were conquered by the Romans, that they should not cry
about it, but think behind themselves about the score, and remember that
they did not give God what they owed him; therefore they should take it
for good. But the Jews would not do it; they wanted to have their
kingdom back by right. Then our Lord God says no to it; then the emperor
at Rome shall be good for me, and he shall force you, if you do not want
to give yourselves under the deserved punishment, that you must do it.
For the empire

The Jews were not promised anything else, except that they should be
devout; otherwise they would lose the kingdom and the law one with the
other.

We must do the same with the Turk today. It seems unjust to us, because
he is worse than a pagan, that he should have such a great victory
against us Christians. But let us not see who the Turk is, but who we
are against God; then it will be found that we are not wronged. Why do
the papists stand so stiffly over idolatry, and persecute the Word? Why
do we who have the gospel not amend ourselves, and yet do not live as
Christians should? This is the one thing we are to learn today.

The other is that a distinction should be made between the kingdom of
the world and the kingdom of our Lord Christ, and that our Lord God does
not condemn the worldly kingdom here, but confirms it with house, court,
food, marriage and all the statuses that an emperor must have. For
Christ to say, "Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's," is
as much as to say, "If thou be a citizen, a peasant, a nobleman, a
prince, a man, a woman, a manservant, a maidservant, keep the same, and
destroy not Caesar's kingdom. You servant, serve your master. You
child, follow your father and your mother. I will not break these
estates; for they are the emperor's estates, which he cannot do
without, and they do not hinder my kingdom, which is not a world empire.

14 This is so that whoever wants to be a Christian will not withdraw
from worldly obedience and want to be free, or change his profession and
undertake something new, as the monks did, who thought that if they
remained in worldly status and office, they could not be saved. No, says
Christ, such shall not be; I do not want to tear the empire apart with
my preaching. Therefore remain in your position and give what you have
to give to Caesar; God will not prevent you from doing so, for he has
his own special obedience.

(15) Therefore you should also give to God what is God's, that is,
believe in Jesus Christ, hear the holy gospel and accept it,

968 **L. 3, 177-1M. On the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2213-2210.** 969

and keep yourself in the fear of God and His commandments. Be merciful,
kind, patient. This you shall offer to God: in this he will be
satisfied. But as far as your body, property, status and profession are
concerned, let the emperor have a hand in it. Thus, God and the emperor
can remain close to each other, since the Jews would have liked to tear
it away from each other, indeed, neither God nor the emperor wanted to
give their own.

16 But here one should diligently note: Just as God does not want to
disrupt or tear apart the emperor's regiment (for nothing hinders you
in your faith and before God, you may have a worldly office and
profession as you wish; if you wish, you may well remain a Christian in
it): so the emperor should also leave our Lord God's regiment unbroken
and whole, and not hinder the people from giving God what they owe to
God. But what is the same is reported above, namely, we owe it to God to
believe in Christ, to hear His word gladly, and to live our lives
according to it, and not to do anything against it; we cannot do more to
God on earth.

17 The emperor or secular authorities shall not prevent the subjects
from such service. But if the secular authorities do so, the subjects
should not obey them, but rather suffer what they think they should
suffer. Therefore, it is a grave and great sin for worldly authorities
to keep their obedience in such a way that God cannot be obeyed. As when
they forbid the right doctrine and punish their subjects for it, when
they receive the sacrament completely, as Christ has ordered, they force
the people to the idolatrous nature, with masses, indulgences,
invocation of saints and other things. In such and other ways they step
out of their office and want to hinder God's obedience. For God demands
of us, above all things, that we hear His word and follow it. But where
the authorities want to prevent this, the subjects should know that they
do not owe them obedience. For it is written: "One should obey God more
than men.

And here the Lord does not only mean to give to Caesar that which is
Caesar's, but also to give to God that which is God's.

(18) If, for the sake of such obedience to God and His word, worldly
authorities should be angry with their subjects, sting them and kill
them, or even take their lives because of it, this must be allowed to
happen, and they must keep to the consolation: The emperor or temporal
authority is our lord - that is true; but not alone, but we have beside
him a lord who is greater, namely, our Lord GOD in heaven. Now if one of
these two lords must be angered, so that one must disobey either God or
the emperor, it is better to anger the emperor with disobedience than to
anger God. If you disobey God and want to please the emperor or the
worldly authorities, God is a Lord who can and will punish the
disobedience you show Him with hellish fire and eternal death. No man
should ever gladly take this misery upon himself, and a thousand times
rather anger the emperor, who, even if he is evil, nevertheless cannot
punish disobedience more severely than only with a temporal punishment.
But I do not call the emperor here this or that person, but in general
all authorities. For so Christ also calls them here, when he says:
"Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's."

19. After this, look also at the reward. If you are obedient to God and
obey His command, eternal reward, heaven and eternal life will follow
such obedience. On the other hand, for the unrighteous sinful obedience
that you render to your authorities against God's command, you will
only be rewarded for a time, and will have to repay him (as previously
reported) for eternity. The poor Christians should hold on to such
consolation, who now and then sit under such authorities, who do not let
them come to God's word, and who want to force and compel them to the
Pabst's idolatry and false worship. For God does not want to be joked
with. He wants you to give to Caesar what is his, but in such a way that
you also give to God what is God's. And this we do justly. For from the
emperor

**970 L. 3, i8o-i82. On the twenty-third Sunday after Trinity. W. xin,
2246-2243. 971**

and worldly authority we have nothing more than food, eating and
drinking, clothing, protection, peace, and what else belongs to this
transitory life. But from God we have body and life, then the hope of
eternal life. Should we then hand over such God, whom we shall enjoy for
eternity, for the sake of men, serve men and disobey Him? That is not
what God wants, let it be the same for us, as is His divine will.

(20) But the temporal authorities had better remember their office. If
Christ had said, "Give to Caesar all that he wills or that you have,"
he could justly demand such things, or take them from his own. But here
it is clearly said, "Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's." That is, he has what is named and determined, which is his
and in which he should be content. But if he wants to go further and
also take what is God's, then you should know that you do not owe it.
Therefore, even if you love the salvation of your souls, you must not
give it to him. For just as the emperor has no power to demand such
things, so it is forbidden and commanded by God Himself that the
subjects should not give them to the emperor.

(21) Therefore it is a terrible pity, which will undoubtedly bring all
misfortune to Germany, that worldly princes, and especially the bishops,
who (as they now consider themselves) are no more than worldly princes,
keep house so miserably with their poor people. For they are not
satisfied with obedience, that their subjects will sit down with them
with body and goods and serve them; but they also want their subjects to
believe and to do in matters of faith what pleases them and is publicly
against God and his word. Therefore they forbid them the right pure
doctrine, they do not want to let them go to the places for preaching,
where God's word is acted rightly. About this they forbid the books,
that one should not read it either. They appoint false, lying preachers,
who preach the old rubbish, from which one does not hear a word, since a
conscience could grasp a right consolation and improve itself from it.
And that is even worse,

In all their sermons, such criers do nothing but blaspheme the holy
gospel and revile it most horribly.

(22) If such people can bring about that the terrible idolatrous
sacrifice of the Mass remains, that saints are invoked and honored, that
pilgrimages are made, indulgences are purchased, and that through
confession, fasting, feasting, and other such works, forgiveness of sins
is hoped for, they think that they have done it very well. In
particular, however, they are very unwilling to use the reverend
sacrament, since the command of Christ and of the first church is so
clear and explicit that it should be taken in its entirety, and not only
in one form (as they call it).

(23) All this, and other such things, which princes and bishops now
practice with their subjects, they want to maintain by saying that one
should obey secular authorities. Just as if it were written here: Pray
to the emperor for everything, and to God for nothing. For to follow the
emperor in matters of God, and not the word of God, means to place the
emperor above God, to take everything from God and to give everything to
the emperor. But it shall not be. Not only does God want to grant the
emperor the obedience of his subjects, but he commands it most
diligently, and is so serious about it that there has never been any
rebellion or disobedience against temporal authorities; the subjects
have always been severely punished, as we have also seen with the
rebellious peasants.

But God also wants his obedience. He wants to make body and goods, house
and court subject to the emperor, so that only his heart remains and he
may rule in the heart through his word and spirit. But if he is not to
receive this, and the emperor wants to have power over the heart as well
as over the body and goods, and to rule over them, so that everyone
should believe and do what he wants in the affairs of God, and not what
God has taught and commanded in his word: then nothing good will finally
follow. For God wants His kingdom undisturbed and His service
unhindered. But he who submits to it will run headlong and run himself
off. As it has always happened with the greatest monarchs and kings
everywhere; as soon as they have everything and

[**972** AS, 182-184. on the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity. W.
XIII, 2248.2262. **973**]{.underline}

God did not want to leave anything, nevertheless God kept His own, and
they, the tyrants, lost everything and went to ruin.

(25) Thus we see how the Lord has embraced the emperor's power here
and delicately restrained him so that he may remain with his own and not
encroach upon God's kingdom and power. "To Caesar," he says, "give
what is Caesar's." As if he wanted to say: What belongs to God and is
not the emperor's, do not give it to him at all; otherwise you would
disobey me and obey the emperor too much; he may reward you for a while,
but I will punish my disobedience with eternal fire. Therefore let the
emperor remain with his own, or if he does not want to remain with his
own, beware that you do not give him what is mine. For these two
kingdoms are to remain distinct, not mingled together, so that what is
God's may remain, and what is the emperor's may remain for the
emperor.

(26) Even in temporal matters, as far as the body, money and goods are
concerned, a measure should be kept. For there shall always be a
difference between temporal authority and a tyrannical regime. A tyrant
takes from his subjects as long as he finds something. The Lord does not
want to grant this to the authorities here; but because he commands the
subjects: "Give to Caesar what is Caesar's", he also wants to give
the authorities or the emperor to understand that they should neither
demand nor take more than what is theirs. So make a difference between
that.

that is thine, and that which thou shalt give of thine own unto the
authorities. For the regiments are not instituted to make vain beggars,
and no man shall keep nothing. Therefore one gives to the authority lap,
interest or annuity, that the subjects may remain with their own, seek
their food, bring themselves and their own with honor and increase their
own.

27 If, however, there is an emergency that requires something to be done
to preserve the common peace against the enemies, then no one should
refuse, but should gladly go to the authorities with body and soul and
assist them as long as they can. But outside of such common distress,
the authorities should not rule tyrannically, should not impose too much
on the subjects, but should let them remain with the ordinary and
unpleasant burdens. Otherwise, they will take what is not theirs and
cause God's wrath against them, who uses rebellion, foreign enemies and
other ways to punish tyrants.

That is enough of this gospel. May God grant His grace to our
authorities and to us, so that we may give to God in both parts what we
owe to Him. So the other will be fine, that we will also give to the
emperor and he will take what is his. So we will spend our time here in
a fine, peaceful life pleasing to God, and through faith in Christ we
will be eternally saved. May our dear Lord God grant us this through
Christ our Lord and the Holy Spirit, amen.

**On the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity. *)**

**Marc. 5, 21-43.**

And when JEsus was come over again in a ship, much people gathered unto
him, and were by the sea. And, behold, there came one of the rulers of
the synagogue, named Jairus. And when he saw him, he fell down at his
feet, and besought him greatly, saying, My daughter is in her last days:
come, lay thine hand upon her, that she may be healed and live. And he
went with him; and there followed him many people, and they pressed him.
And there was a woman, which had the issue of blood.

*) Held in the house, 1533.

[974 D. 3. i84.i8s. On the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xiu,
2232-2265. 975]{.underline}

She had twelve years, and had suffered much from many physicians, and
had consumed all her goods, and it helped her nothing, but rather it
became worse with her. When she heard of Jesus, she came up behind the
people and touched his garment. For she said, If I but touch his
garment, I shall be healed. And immediately the fountain of her blood
dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her plague.
And Jesus immediately felt in himself the power that had gone out from
him, and turned to the people and said, "Who has touched my clothes?
And the disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging
thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me? And he looked round about for her
that had done this thing. But the woman was afraid and trembled (for she
knew what had happened to her), and came and fell down before him, and
told him the whole truth. And he said unto her, My daughter, thy faith
hath made thee whole: go in peace, and be whole of thy plague. While he
was still speaking in this way, some of the servants of the ruler of the
synagogue came and said: Thy daughter is dead; why troubleest thou the
Master further? But Jesus soon heard the words that were spoken, and
said unto the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not; believe only. And let no
man follow him, save Peter, and Jacob, and John the brother of Jacob.
And he came into the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and saw the
tumult, and them weeping and wailing very much. And he went in, and said
unto them: Why do ye tumult and weep? The child has not died, but is
asleep. And they laughed him to scorn. And he drove them all out, and
took with him the father of the child, and the mother, and they that
were with him, and went in where the child lay. And he took the child by
the hand, and said unto her, Talitha kumi, that is interpreted, maid, I
say unto thee, arise: and straightway the maid arose, and walked: and
she was twelve years old. And they were amazed beyond measure. And he
forbade them sternly, that no man should know it, and told them to give
her to eat.

In today's Gospel your love hears of two miracles, both great and
excellent. The first, of the sick woman who has such a firm faith in the
Lord Jesus that she hopes that if she would only touch his garment
secretly, without his knowledge, she would get well as soon as she
touched it. The other, from the head of the school, who also believes
that although his daughter has died, the Lord can give her life again.
In both miraculous works, then, faith is praised excellently, as an
example to us, because faith in Christ accomplishes such great things
that we allow ourselves to be stirred up by it, and also like to find
ourselves with this man, to whom no one has ever thought of anything
good that would not certainly have happened to him, as he believed.

The first story is about the poor woman who had a dangerous, serious
illness. Marcus says in particular that she had consumed all her
possessions among the physicians, for she had had this plague for twelve
whole years, and had grown worse with it from day to day; that it is a
wonder that she was able to endure it so long; and yet she is so easily
helped by the Lord: that she does no more than, as she has heard, that
some have been healed who only had his clothing.

When she had touched his garment, she thought she would get well that
way; therefore, she went to the Lord among the people, but she was not
allowed to ask him for it, but because of her great humility, she
thought she would steal it from him secretly and touched his garment.
Immediately, as she had believed, her cause was better, and the sickness
subsided, since she had previously had so much trouble with it, had
dared so much expense on it, and had tried all kinds of things, but in
vain and in vain, yes, even with her great harm. For, as Marcus says,
the longer it lasted, the worse it became with her.

3 Here it is especially to be noted that the Lord does not want to let
such help steal away so that no one should know about it, but asks who
touched him? The apostles thought this was a foolish question, that he
asked so exactly who had touched him, because the people were so crowded
around him. But the Lord knew that was hidden from them. For it was not
a bad touching with the hands; they touched him with the heart and firm
trust in his grace and omnipotence. Therefore a special power went out
from the Lord Jesus, which he felt. The Lord does not want to let such
touching remain secret; so the woman drives us to an example with her
questioning, so that

**9763 , 185-188. twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity....
W.xm.2265-2268. 977**

She must come out and let herself be seen, and publicly confess to
everyone everything that has happened to her, so that he may have cause
to praise such faith, and teach us all how it is such a dear service to
him, where we take comfort in his help and provide good things for him;
for this reason he praises the woman very highly, and addresses her
warmly: "Be of good cheer, my daughter, your faith has helped you. Then
the disciples themselves must confess that the Lord had not asked in
vain; it was not a bad touching, but something special, since the Lord
and all of us are concerned.

4 But it is a strange speech that the Lord makes here, if we want to
consider it. He confesses that a power has gone out from him. As the
woman stands there before the Lord and confesses the good deed he has
done her, the Lord does not let it be known that such power has gone out
from him, but attributes it to the faith of this woman, since it was not
she herself but the Lord who had helped her. The Lord does this to show
us how much he enjoys it when you turn to him for help. As if to say,
"Watch and learn to believe with confidence, whatever your need may be;
for I would much rather help you than you can desire it. I would much
rather deliver you from death than you have life. As he proves here with
the work, since it happens so easily, and he lets the power go from him
so gladly.

5 Therefore we should learn from such an example that we also believe
and do all that is good for Christ in all our needs and concerns. But
what happens? We hear about it in the sermons, we are told about it in
our homes, we see his miracles that he still does every day, but faith
does not follow. He who has his storehouse and cellar full believes,
though hardly, that he will have enough to eat and drink for a year. He
who is healthy believes that God can help him. But when we come into
poverty and sickness, our faith is gone. We do nothing more than lament
and cry out, and let ourselves believe that there is no help left
anywhere, whether we are

We must hear every day that God will be gracious to us through Christ
and gladly help us.

But how does this rhyme with this woman here, who has perhaps only heard
once or twice about the Lord Christ and his miracles, and yet she
attacks him with such strong faith that if the Lord Christ had been
seated above all the heavens, she would have torn the heavens apart and
brought him down with such faith that he would have had to help her.
For, as I said, he cannot refuse help when it is sought from him with
earnestness and right faith.

(7) Therefore, we are truly, let it be confessed to God, wretched
people, who have God's word so abundantly, and yet will not come to
faith. This is the fault of the devil and of our shameful old Adam.
Otherwise, if we earnestly desire to be justified and saved, and to have
what we need, we should also believe in Christ and hope for everything
through him. For as we have heard, faith cannot fail. That is why the
Lord praises it so much here, saying, "Your faith has helped you." The
same faith in Christ will also help us, and raise us from the dead to
life, overcome the devil, drive out sin, and make us blessed. Such
works, though Christ does them, are called the works of faith. For
without faith it cannot be done, as you know that Christ Himself, the
holy sacraments, and the Word of God or the sermon do not help or
benefit us apart from faith. Faith must do it, or it remains undone.
This is the first miracle.

The other miracle is about the dead maiden, who was as old as Lucas
says, when this woman had her illness. Now no one knew anything other
than that the maiden would certainly die; therefore everything was
already prepared, as one is wont to do with deceased people who are to
be cared for. The whistlers were in the house; for the Jews had no
bells, but just as we ring for the dead, so they had a funeral song
trumpeted outside the door. Thus

**978 3, 188-190. on the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2268-2271. 979**

the people had gathered for the funeral procession, so that there was a
great commotion and much going and coming in the house; as happens in
such places where someone distinguished has died.

(9) Then the father of the little girl, since all the world has no
more hope (for what can one humanly hope for when a man now dies), goes
away with a strange, strange thought, that he hopes that if he has
Christ, his daughter who has died may well come to life again. For his
words testify to this. He falls down before the Lord and says: "Lord,
my daughter has died; but come and lay your hand on her, and she will
live again." For although Marcus and Lucas say that he came to Jesus
while the daughter was still in the wings, yet they report that before
Christ came into the house the maiden died, and finely indicate that the
father nevertheless believed and kept such confidence in the Lord that
he would help her and raise her from death. Who has seen or heard more
strange people in his life? The woman, who despairs of all the world's
help, thinks that she will get well if she can only come so close to the
Lord that she touches a little corner of his skirt. And her thought does
not fail; as she believes, so it happens to her. The father here, who
had lost his daughter, thought that if the Lord would only lay his hand
on the dead girl, she would live again.

Yes, you would like to speak, if it were a bad sleep, not the bitter
death itself, one would like to do something with the hand. But no hand,
no shaking, no pushing, no yelling, nor anything else will help, all is
lost. So reason can and must think, and not otherwise. But the chief did
not have such thoughts; otherwise he would have stayed at home and not
followed the Lord Christ.

(11) But here we see once again how the Lord is so warmly pleased with
such faith, which reason considers to be pure foolishness. For even
though he had to deal with the necessary things and had a sharp
disputation with John's disciples, regardless of all of this, as soon
as he had this faith and

When he feels confident, he sets out after the chief, thinking that he
must do as this man believes. Therefore, when he enters the house and
sees that everything is prepared as for dead people, he fears that the
misery will strike the father in the face, and other people's examples
and unbelief will turn him away; he soon returns and comforts the father
with words, and tells the people to leave the house who had gathered for
the funeral. As if he wanted to say: You people, what are you doing
here? Do you think you want to go with the corpse? Oh no, go to other
places where someone has died, no one has died here; the maiden is only
sleeping.

(12) No, say the others, it is not asleep, it is dead; therefore we
are here, that we may bury it in the earth. You must not be wise to
think that we do not know the difference between a man sleeping and a
man dead. That is why the evangelist reports that they laughed at him
and thought him a fool who did not know what sleep or death was. But the
Lord rests on his opinion, and is further concerned only to prove by his
work whether he is true or not. There is no one who agrees with him and
believes it to be true, except the maiden's father. The Lord is
satisfied, and for his own sake, that is, for the sake of his faith, he
proves it with the work; otherwise, if the father had not had such
faith, the little girl would certainly have remained dead and would not
have slept. It is such an excellent thing about faith that one can
provide something good for oneself to the Lord Christ.

(13) Therefore the Lord comes and takes hold of the little girl and
shakes her a little with his hand, just as we do with a sleeping child
when we want to wake it up. For thus the father believed; and the Lord
will not do otherwise than the father believed. Soon the little girl
wakes up, no differently than if she had lain in a fine, gentle sleep.

14 We should diligently remember these words, that the Lord says here,
"The maiden is not dead, but sleepeth"; for they are comforting words,
since, where they may be purchased, we shall be able to buy them.

**[980 L. 3, iso-iss. On the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2271-2273. 981]{.underline}**

We should gladly do our utmost to keep, understand and believe them. For
whoever could look at a dead man as if he were lying on a bed and
sleeping; whoever could turn his face in this way and consider death a
sleep: he would like to boast that he could perform a special art that
no other man can do.

(15) But we know and see in ourselves and in other men, that the
higher a man's reason is, the less he believes, and the more he laughs.
As it is seen here, that they mock the Lord, and think, Should he bring
the dead to life? He will not be in his right mind to think that a dead
man sleeps and can be raised with one hand. So it goes; for God's
wisdom is so high that it considers reason to be nothing but
foolishness. For think thou, if a child had died unto thee, and I had
said unto thee, Well, he hath not died; seest thou not that he sleepeth,
and canst be awakened with one finger? then wouldst thou think that I
mocked thee in thy misery, and wouldst say unto me, I should leave thee
contented. These also have done the same to the Lord Christ.

(16) Therefore learn from today's gospel that death to the Lord
Christ is nothing but a sleep, as we see here that he awakens the dead
maiden with his hand, as from a sleep. The woman has her sickness, and
yet she does not have it, because she comes to Christ. And the sickness
is not a sickness to the Lord Christ. As the other example shows with
the woman who was very sick, but as soon as she comes to Christ and
touches his garment, the sickness must subside and go away.

(17) So the Lord shows himself in other troubles and afflictions also.
The blind who seek help from him receive their sight, sinners are
justified, and the lost are saved. He can deal with us in such a
wonderful way. What he says is not only nothing before our eyes, but the
very antithesis. Thus the damsel is dead in the sight of men, but in
mine eyes, saith Christ, she liveth and sleepeth. David is a poor
shepherd in his own eyes and in the eyes of all the world; but in the
eyes of

To me he is a king. All of you who believe in me are poor sinners before
you, but great saints before me, and like the angels of God. For it is
no more to me than to do a word, sin, death, and sickness must depart,
and righteousness, life, and health must be in their place. As I speak,
so must it be done, and not otherwise, though it seem possible or
impossible in the sight of the world. That is why our Lord God speaks
such a strange word here, which is a great lie before the world, when he
says of the little girl that she is not dead, but asleep. If he had only
said that she was asleep, people might have said that it was the sleep
of St. Michael, since one sleeps until the last day. But he says
roundly: It is not dead, but it lives! Before you and in your eyes she
is not alive, but before me she is alive. And that ye may see that it is
true, I will awake her with one finger, as ye awake your children from
sleep.

18 In sum, all this is to the effect that we should not look at our
distress according to reason, with carnal eyes, but with Christian eyes.
These are the eyes that, when they see death, sin, and hell, can surely
say, "I see no death, I feel no sin, I am not condemned; but through
Christ I see perfect holiness, life, and blessedness. So, when I am
poor, I feel no poverty, methinks I have all things enough; for I have
Christ, who is able to give me all the hours of my need, though I have
nothing.

(19) If anyone had such eyes, he would boast that he had the eyes of a
Christian; he would look at things far differently when the time is dear
or when death is near, as the world does. In the time of trouble,
everyone sees what he has in the cellar and on the floor; what he finds
there is what he wants to find. If he finds much, he is happy; if he
finds little, he is sad and wants to despair. So in death's throes, he
who can flee flees, thinking he will be safe in other places. But a
Christian who has a firm faith in Christ would think like this: "If I
have a thousand pestilences in my body, if it were possible, I would not
be afraid to die, because I would not be afraid to die.

[982 **D.3, 193-iss. On the twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2273-2277.** 983]{.underline}

I have Christ. If it is his will, the pestilence shall harm me no more
than a flea among the poor; it may eat and sting a little, but it cannot
take away my life. And it is certain that whoever could grasp such a
heart would remain safe and be in good spirits without fear. But because
we do not believe and do not have such spiritual eyes, but look at all
things with carnal eyes, we fear and tremble, and fall into foolish
thoughts, as if we could escape the wrath of God for ten or twenty
miles.

20 Now the Lord Christ testifies that even those who have died before
our eyes, who are buried and have long since rotted, are alive to God.
Therefore the Lord says in the Gospel, Matth. 22, 32: "It is written: I
am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but God is not the God of the
dead, but the God of the living." Therefore Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
must be alive and not dead, since they have lain in the earth for more
than three thousand years and have long since turned to ashes, so that
neither skin nor hair is left of them. But Christ strongly proves that
they are alive. Cause: God must live it all, but for us it is all dead.
For the world and reason cannot see other than death. But the eyes of
the Christians should see that they do not see and only hear in the
word; as here the father and Christ look at the dead maiden.

Twenty-one: As I have spoken of death, so it is with sin. I am to know
and confess that I am a sinner, and yet I am to believe and hope in true
holiness and righteousness. For there is the word of our Lord Christ in
baptism, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved"; item, in
the Lord's Supper, "Effet, this is my body, which is given for you;
drink, this is my blood, which is shed for you for the remission of
sins." I should believe this word to be true, and even though I see and
feel the contradiction in myself, I should not turn to it, but only look
at the word and listen to what it says to me. So when thou seest a
Christian dying, thine eyes behold a dead man; but close such cow's
eyes, and put away the

spiritual eyes that look on the word; then you will find that such a man
is not dead, but lives before God. For there is the word of Christ, "He
that believeth on me shall never see death."

(22) We are to learn from today's gospel that all calamities, however
great they may be in your sight, are less than nothing in the sight of
our Lord Christ. For if death be nothing in a Christian, blindness,
leprosy, pestilence, and other diseases shall be still less and less.
Therefore, if thou seest sin, sickness, poverty, or any other thing in
thee, be not dismayed; shut thine eyes of the flesh, and open thine eyes
of the spirit, and say, I am a Christian, and have a Lord, who with a
word is able to control all this evil: why then should I trouble myself
about it? For it is certain that just as easily as Christ helped this
maiden from the bodily death in which she lay, so easily will he help
us, if we will only believe and turn to him for help.

(23) Now we should also consider here that this maiden is not helped
by her faith (for he that is dead believeth not, neither heareth or
seeth); but her father believeth, and is such a stranger. faith so
powerful that it comes to life again. For as Christ says, all things are
possible to faith. So a mighty thing is it about faith. Let it be a
thing so great that if thou canst believe it, and if thou canst provide
thyself unto Christ, it shall be yea; and neither devil nor death shall
be so strong as to hinder it. As we see in the two miraculous works
here, they are held up to us for this reason, and faith is therefore so
highly praised by the Lord Christ Himself, that He incites us to see the
creature much differently before God than before us.

(24) Therefore, whether we appear to ourselves poor and dead, in sins,
sick with pestilence or other diseases, let us believe that in the sight
of God there is much else, and cheerfully say, "Though there be
poverty, pestilence, and death, yet, as a Christian, I know not of any
poverty, death, or pestilence; for in the sight of my Lord Christ there
is fullness of riches, health, and happiness.

[**984** L. s, 195-197. on the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity. W.
XIII, 2277-2279. **985**]{.underline}

holiness and life. But if I do not yet see it, if it is only for a word,
I will also see with my own eyes that it is true, and it will certainly
be so. God grant us, for the sake of Christ our Savior

and of His Son, by His Holy Spirit also such spiritual eyes, that we may
look upon all calamities other than the world, and retain such
consolation, and at last be saved, amen.

**On the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity.**

**Matth. 24, 15-28.**

When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, which was
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, that it shall stand in the holy place,
then let him that is in the land of Judah flee unto the mountains. And
he that is on the housetop, let him not go down to fetch anything out of
his house; and he that is in the field, let him not turn back to fetch
his garments. But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that
lie with suckling in those days. But pray that your flight be not in
winter, or on the sabbath day. For then there will be a great
tribulation, such as has not been since the beginning of the world, nor
ever shall be. And if these days were not shortened, no man would be
saved; but for the elect's sake the days are shortened. If then any man
shall say unto you, Behold, here is Christ, or there, believe it not.
For false Christs and false prophets shall arise, and shall shew great
signs and wonders, to deceive (where it is possible) even the elect.
Behold, I have told you before. Therefore, when they shall say unto you:
Behold, he is in the wilderness, go not out; behold, he is in the
chamber, believe it not. For as the lightning goeth forth from the going
forth, and shineth even unto the going down; so shall also the coming of
the Son of man be. But where there is carrion, there the eagles gather.

(1) In today's Gospel there are mainly two pieces. The first is a
warning for the devout Christians who are to experience the destruction
of Jerusalem, that they should know this beforehand and make themselves
scarce and flee from it. The other is a warning especially for our last
days, when we are in danger, because such terrible and horrible errors
will occur, that we should be prepared for them, hold to the right
doctrine, and beware of false prophets. Both warnings are necessary and
useful to us; therefore let us diligently take them before us.

(2) Even though the first one refers only to the time of the
destruction of Jerusalem, and is now almost five and a half hundred
years old, we can still learn a useful and comforting lesson from it:
that we should learn to love and value God's word, and that we should
be rightly prepared for it, since God has thus punished with great wrath
the contempt of the word against His own people. For as your love on the
tenth

Sunday after Trinity, it was a miserable trade beyond measure. For the
Romans came to the city at that time, when the Jews from all countries
went in crowds to Jerusalem for the Easter feast; that, as Josephus
writes, there were about thirty times a hundred thousand people there.

Now such a large crowd cannot remain healthy for long in such a narrow
place; therefore the three main plagues came together: the enemy around
the city with war and in the city the pestilence, item, a severe, cruel
theurge that some mothers strangled their children and cooked and ate
them like other meat. About all this there was a terrible disagreement
among the Jews in the city. And Josephus numbered that in the time of
the siege and conquest of the city ten times a hundred thousand men were
slain and died, and ninety and seven thousand were taken captives. And
the captive Jews were so worthless,

[986 **D. 3, 197-IM. On the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2279-2282.** 987]{.underline}

that thirty of them were sold for half a penny. Therefore it is not a
forgiven word that the Lord says here of such a siege and destruction
that there was no such great tribulation from the beginning of the
world, and that there will be none like it hereafter.

(4) Such misery should be held up to the common man yearly, so that we
may all consider it carefully at the same time, and look all the more
diligently at what this sin is that has caused such terrible misery, so
that we may learn to beware of it. For the calculation is easy to make:
if God did not spare His own people when they fell into sin, He will
certainly not spare ours either, if we will not abstain from such sin.

Now it is true that disobedience, murder, adultery, avarice, theft and
other such sins also move God, where one does not want to desist from
them, that he must punish. But there are still merciful punishments
against these. God does not take away everything, but leaves something.
And as we see in the histories, he usually leaves more than he takes.
But here he takes everything together. Therefore, this must be an
immeasurably greater sin than the other, since the punishment is so
great and terrible. What is the name of this sin? Christ calls it Luc.
19, 44. "This," he says of Jerusalem, "will happen to you because you
did not recognize the time of your visitation"; that is, when God sends
His word and the world does not want to accept it, but still persecutes
and wilfully continues in sins, this is Jerusalem's sin, where
destruction and desolation must follow. For how faithfully God meant it
with them, one can see: he sent his prophets, John, finally his only
begotten son himself and the apostles. All of these are primarily
concerned with showing people the right path to eternal life, and to
teach them how to lead their temporal life in such a way that they can
have a good conscience and God's grace and blessing.

(6) But what do Jerusalem and all the world do? She does not want to
know or hear about the salvation and teaching of our Lord Christ, and
not only strangles the apostles, but also the apostles themselves.

the Son of God Himself, and makes believe that they want to be saved
without Him and His teachings. It is impossible that God should laugh at
this and not be vehemently angry about it. For think, if you had many
thousands of florins, and saw a poor beggar, and thought to help him,
and sent your son to him, and told him to come to you, and that you
would help him out of all distress, and make a rich man of him; but he
being such a desperate wicked wretch, slew your son, who brought him
such good tidings, with a club to death: how do you think that such a
thing would please you, and what kind of heart you would have toward
him?

(7) Now this is the sin of the Jews, that they have deserved such
great wrath and abominable punishment. We should learn to beware of
this. For God does not like it, because he is so fatherly with us when
he sends us his word, that we should despise or persecute it. With the
kingdom of Israel it was the same, as Hosea says in Cap. 8, 3: "Israel
rejects what is good; therefore the enemy must persecute them. For he
who will not accept God's grace and word must remain in disgrace and
error. It is impossible for it to last long; it must fall to the ground.
For this very reason, all monarchies and kingdoms have always fallen,
and still do.

Therefore, let us be on guard against despising the word of God with
great diligence. The Jews strangled Christ and the apostles for the sake
of the gospel. Today the papists also strangle the poor Christians, and
intend to suppress the word by force. We do not do it so roughly on our
side yet, praise God! We would not like to be deprived of the Word; but
nevertheless we see how in other ways the Word, though not persecuted,
is despised among us. For God will have little pleasure in it, even if
you go to the sermon and yet hear in such a way that it goes in one ear
and out the other, and you do not improve in the least. For this very
reason God has you preach that you may establish your heart against sin
and death through the death of Christ, and a godly heart,

**[988 L. 3, 199-202. on the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2282-2284. 989]{.underline}**

You are to lead an unruly life. Because you are walking along, letting
avarice, fornication, anger, envy, pride and other sins grow from day to
day, just as if God were doing you a service, or if God had not
forbidden you to do so: God will certainly not accept such things
otherwise than for great contempt, and in His time will punish you far
more horribly than you can now remember.

(9) Therefore, we should never let such an image of wrath leave our
eyes and hearts, so that we may learn God's word with earnestness and
righteousness, and amend ourselves from it; for this is why it is
preached. But those who do not mend their ways, but either despise the
word or persecute it, may learn here what sorrow will come upon them.
For if God has not given His people such contempt and persecution, you
must not think that God will give it to you.

10. For we see not only the kingdom of Israel, Judah, and then the holy
city of Jerusalem lying in ashes before us because of such sin; But
before our eyes are all Asia, Syria, Egypt, Grecia, Macedonia and other
countries as far as Austria, where the Word of God has dwelt abundantly,
but now that the Turk has come in, everything has been laid waste, and
the people have lost not only body and goods, but also their souls;
because the Word of God has been lost everywhere, and no baptism, no
sacrament is left in the places. They have earned such misery by not
keeping the gospel faithfully, and by dropping the right doctrine and
despising it. Let us beware of this. For it is not far off that we will
also see such things in our papists, who so persecute God's word and so
stubbornly hold on to idolatry. Therefore, it is high time to amend and
repent. For once the wrath of God is incurred, it cannot be quenched in
such sin; as we see in the example of the Jews.

(11) Now not only should such terrible wrath deter us from this sin,
but we should also be enticed by this friendly warning that we should
earnestly keep God's word and diligently listen to it and improve
ourselves from it. For here it says both.

The Jews, who did not want the word, are punished in the most horrible
way. But those who accept Christ and believe in him enjoy the Lord
Christ and their faith also in that they are so faithfully warned
against such affliction and escape it. And that is even more, Daniel had
to show the mark and sign longer than five hundred years before for the
sake of such Christians, so that they would be warned soon enough and
saved sooner.

(12) It had been unequal hitherto. The blind, obstinate Jews exercised
all courage against the word, and were masters of it, sitting in the
regiment. On the other hand, the poor Christians had to suffer
everywhere, and were nowhere safe in life or limb. But it lasted only a
while. For when God's wrath came, the pious were saved, but the wicked
were made to suffer. Because the wicked did not want to take Christ for
their teacher, promised by Moses, Deut. 18, who was to proclaim and show
them the way to eternal life and blessedness, they did not have to
believe him either, since he preached of the wrath to come. But the
believing Christians trusted Christ with their souls and salvation.
Therefore they were also preserved bodily from the wrath. For as soon as
it came to pass that all kinds of wantonness got the upper hand, and
especially the right worship together with the pure doctrine had fallen,
which is the right and greatest abomination; and the Roman emperors set
their idols and flags in the temple in the places where the mercy seat
and the highest sanctuary of the Jews stood, then the devout Christians
could well know that it was time for them to get out of the dust and
flee to other countries. So now Christ wants to reward his own who
accept his word with faith and become more devout, that he wants to warn
them and protect them from the wrath of God.

(13) This, I say, should entice us to be all the more diligent in
keeping the word and to hear it with great earnestness. Unfortunately,
we have fallen into a dangerous time because of our sins and wickedness.
The Turk is on our backs and is an enemy we will never escape if we do
not change our ways.

[990 **L. 3, 202-204. on the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2284-2287.** 991]{.underline}

to the cause. Therefore, we have neither seals nor letters to ensure
that we will not suffer the same fate as the Hungarians and that our
wife and child will not be taken prisoner with us to Turkey. This is how
it is with death runs, with theurung and disunity among us even in
Germany. Such ruthlessness is bound to no one but the godless despisers
and persecutors of the Word; to them it will also be granted. But those
who love and esteem God's word, hear it earnestly, amend themselves
from it, and forsake all days of sin and the old Adam, do not follow the
evil example of the wicked world, but keep themselves in check, and
think: Behold, thou art a Christian, thou hearest how God is so hostile
to avarice and all unrighteousness; why wouldst thou, for the sake of a
debt, leave God's obedience and word behind? should you not sooner and
rather give ten guilders freely in vain for the sake of God, than with
one guilder unjustly gained weigh down your soul and anger God 2c. ? -
Such people, I say, who take the word seriously, and put their heart and
trust in God's goodness through Christ, and keep themselves from
sinning: they shall enjoy such piety; otherwise all others must suffer
evil because of their sins.

14 Therefore we see that Daniel and his companions, who were God-fearing
and did not wantonly commit sins among the Gentiles, even though they
were caught, nevertheless had a far more miserable prison than other
ungodly Jews. Yes, that is more, God exalted them among their enemies,
so that they became great lords and did much good among the Gentiles. So
remember that if you are devout and God-fearing, God will keep you also,
and you will enjoy it and be preserved, even if you are alone in the
midst of Turkey. This is what we should learn, and for this reason we
should gladly be pious and follow God's word.

(15) Now Christ adds a little word here, which we must not leave
undone. "Pray," saith he, "that your flight be not in the winter, nor
on the sabbath day." For in winter it is very evil to wander in snow
and thunderstorms; so the Jews had

a special command that they were not allowed to go on the Sabbath, if
they wanted to; as you can see that iter sabbathi, a Sabbath journey,
was a small way, barely a quarter of a mile. For this, Christ now says,
ask. He wants to indicate and teach us that we should not only hear
God's word gladly and diligently, but also pray; and that such prayer
will cause and drive God to consider us and give us happiness and
salvation for our sake.

(16) Therefore, in so much trouble and distress, especially in these
perilous times, we should not let a day go by; we should ask God for
protection and protection, so that he will be with us, protect us and
keep us in all distress. Just as Christ remembers the daily bread in the
Lord's Prayer. For food and drink are not enough to sustain life and
limb; we must also have peace, good and healthy weather, and the like.
Therefore this petition includes all kinds of bodily needs, that God may
protect us against the Turk, protect us from pestilence, give us good
years and healthy fruits. Since Christ has called us to ask for such
things, we should not doubt when we earnestly ask that God will
graciously hear us and give us what we need in body and soul.

(17) This is the first part: that we should hear God's word gladly,
improve ourselves from it, and not despise it or persecute it; since God
punishes the despisers and persecutors so horribly, but again so
graciously warns, protects and saves those who accept His word and are
devout.

(18) The other part, I have said, is also a warning concerning our
time and the last time. The Lord begins it by saying, "If these days
were not shortened, no man would be saved; but for the elect's sake
they will be shortened. These are very terrible words, which we should
form in our hearts and keep the word all the more diligently. For it is
not a matter, as with Jerusalem, of war and bloodshed; but of another,
greater and higher, which is called error, unrighteous doctrine, and
unrighteous worship, by which we not only perish for body and soul, but
also for the sake of the elect.

992 **8.3, 204-206. on the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2287-2289.** 993

life, but for the soul and salvation. As the Lord says: No man would be
blessed unless the days were shortened.

(19) But whether such blindness will still be present before the last
day comes cannot really be known. But when we look behind us, we find
such great blindness, and such abominable and, as Paul calls it,
powerful errors, that certainly (if God had not come in with the light
of his word) no man could have been saved, except the little innocent
children, who died after their baptism, before they came to reason and
their days. For what of Christ, of the forgiveness of sins, of
righteousness, of the consolation of the conscience, did one have in the
priesthood that one could have held on to? Again, how shameful errors
and blasphemous lies have been driven into the poor people under the
name of truth, in which they have put their trust and hope of salvation?
Therefore I think that this prophecy of our Lord Christ about future
errors has already been fulfilled for the most part. For although error
and darkness are still present, they cannot be greater than they already
were in the papacy, as we have seen, and their books still exist and
testify to this. Moreover, we can ever doubt nothing at all of the words
of Christ; for he gives the child a name, and says what errors there
will be. "False Christs and false prophets shall arise," he says,
"and shall shew great signs and wonders, that the elect also may be
deceived into error."

20 Now it is unnecessary to make a distinction here between false
Christians and false prophets. But because such prophecy corresponds so
exactly with the history, one can distinguish it without driving, and
point the false Christians to the Turk and his faith, but the false
prophets to the pope and his teachings. For these two regiments,
Pabst's and the Turk's, are without doubt the real anti-Christ, since
Daniel, Christ, Paul, John and other apostles have warned us against
them. For the faith of the Turks is nothing else, because they believe
the

They think that the true Christ, the Son of God, conceived by the Holy
Spirit and born of the Virgin Mary in the flesh, is not a Christian, and
they put the wretched Mahomet in his place. For thus they believe that
Christ was a prophet, who was of some value in his time, but that he was
not God. Therefore, what the Christians believe that they should have
through Christ, one must believe from Mahomet; he will make them
blessed, and is God's favorite prophet, above Moses, Abraham, Christ
and all others. Such blasphemous teachings and horrible lies have almost
torn away and deceived most and the largest part of the whole world; as
you can see, all of Egypt, Syria, Asia, Grecia, Macedonia, and many more
countries have such faith, live and die in it, that they do not want
Christ, and put their trust in the devil Mahomet.

The pope does not do this; he lets Christ remain the Son of God and the
true eternal God, he does not make another Christian. But he falsifies
the doctrine of Christ; for what we should believe in Christ and hope
and wait for by his merit alone, that, he teaches, we should hope and
wait for by the saints' merit, intercession, and our own work; just as,
for the sake of such trust, there was neither measure nor end to the
service of God in the papacy. For there the doctrine has been absolutely
as the Lord says here: "Behold, here is Christ; behold, there is
Christ. Behold, he is in the wilderness; behold, he is in the chamber."
For why have monks and nuns run to the monasteries? Why did the one
become a priest, the other a hermit? Why did they go on pilgrimages? Why
did they say mass, hear mass, offer mass? Because all the world was
convinced that one would find Christ, that is, God's grace, forgiveness
of sins, eternal life and blessedness.

22 Therefore Christ warns most of all against the Antichrist, who makes
no other Christ, nor denies Christ as the Turk does; and yet by false
doctrine of the true Christ points to the creature and his own work,
saying, Believe not, that is, be not pointed to any such thing; abide
with me, and hold to my doctrine, to my works.

994 **L. 3, 206-209. on the twenty-fifth Sunday after Trinity. W. XIII,
2289-2293.** 995

works and my merit alone, nothing shall harm you.

But what has happened? The Lord Christ and his faithful, diligent
warning, as we hear here, were not lacking. "Behold," says the Lord,
"I have told you before." It was all our fault that we did not heed
this warning and went blindly and believed as we were told, even though
the Lord specifically forbids this, saying, "Do not believe, even
though you will see miracles and signs. For the signs and wonders that
are right agree with the word of our Lord Christ, and do not turn away
from the word. But the devil also performs miraculous signs, as Christ
testifies here and warns against. And Paul calls them lying signs, so
that the lies are confirmed and the people are led away from the truth
and the word. So the Turks still boast today of many miracles of their
Mahomet, which he did and still does. I believe that some of them are
true miracles, but that not God but the devil does them to confirm their
error.

(24) Thus all the churches are full of miraculous signs in the papacy,
since the Holy One has done one thing and the other another. Although
they may have lied and said more than has been done, we cannot deny that
many miraculous signs have been performed. For Christ himself says here
that the false Christs and false prophets will perform great miracles
and signs, which are intended to deceive people and make them believe
such lies and falsehoods to be true. But God does not perform such
signs, but the devil does; we are not to believe him.

(25) Here you may consider what the right doctrine is based on, from
which one should not depart. Notice, then, that right doctrine does
nothing but point out and present Christ to you, so that through him you
may comfort your heart against sin and death. This is what happens when
we are taught to believe that Christ is the true, eternal, almighty God,
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, and that he came to us on earth by
the Holy Spirit.

and born of the Virgin Mary into this world. Finally, he died on the
cross, not for his sins, for he, as God, could not sin, but for our
sins, so that God might be satisfied by such death and our sins paid,
and so that through the resurrection of the Lord Christ from the dead we
might also come to eternal life. That therefore Christ has overcome sin
and death for our good, that sin and death should not harm us; and now
sits at the right hand of God, that he will protect us against the
devil, grace us with his spirit and hear us in all that we need in body
and soul and ask in his name. This is preached by Christa and rhymes
with the word everywhere; therefore, one must not worry about the
Counter-Christ and his lies.

(26) For it follows first of all that this teaching, when it strikes
the heart, drives people to praise God's grace and goodness, to love
God with all their hearts, and to think how they can live to please such
a gracious God. So they begin to do from the heart everything that they
know God has commanded, and seriously guard against everything that they
know God has forbidden. These are fine, pious and holy Christians who
have forgiveness of sins through faith, and keep themselves in fear and
obedience to God.

For this reason Christ so diligently exhorts us to abide in this
doctrine, and not to be persuaded otherwise. And he promises that he
will not be shut up in any other place, but will be and remain with us
everywhere with his word and grace. Therefore, although it is terrible
that such a great error, darkness and seduction should come upon the
world, it is still comforting that he says: "Where the carrion is,
there will the eagles be found," that is, my Christian church shall
remain with me. Even if the devil, the Turk and the pope become as evil
and powerful as they are, they shall not harm my Christians who thus
keep my word. May our gracious God in heaven, through His Holy Spirit,
grant this to us all for the sake of Christ, our dear Lord and His Son,
amen.

**996** L.3, 2v9.2i". On the twenty-sixth Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2316.2317. **997**

**On the twenty-sixth Sunday after Trinity.**

**John 6:1-15.**

After this, Jesus sailed across the sea from the city of Tiberias in
Galilee. And great multitudes followed him, because they saw the
miracles which he did on them that were sick. And JEsus went up into a
mountain, and sat there with his disciples. Now the feast of the Jews,
Easter, was at hand. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and behold, a great
multitude come unto him, and saith unto Philip, Where shall we buy
bread, that these may eat? (This he said to tempt him, for he knew well
what he would do). Philip answered him, Two hundred pennies worth of
bread is not enough for them, that every one of them may take a little.
One of his disciples, Andrew, Peter's brother Simonis, said to him,
"There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish; but what
is this among so many? And Jesus said, Make the people lie down. And
there was much grass in the place. And about five thousand men encamped
there. And JEsus took the loaves, and gave thanks, and gave to the
disciples; and the disciples to them that were encamped; and to them
also of the fishes, as much as he would. And when they were full, he
said unto his disciples, Gather the fragments that remain, that nothing
perish. So they gathered, and filled twelve baskets with fragments, of
the five barley loaves that remained for those who had been fed. When
the people saw the sign that Jesus had done, they said: This is indeed
the prophet who is to come into the world. When Jesus therefore
perceived that they would come and take him, that they might make him
king, he departed again into the mountain by himself.

**You will find the interpretation on Sunday Lätare at midfast. [See
above Col. 276 ff.]**

To the Christian reader.*)

This following Gospel with its interpretation may be read and preached
at an appropriate time during the year. Here in our churches, on the
Sundays before Advent, if one, two, or three (which is quite rare) are
longer than the 24th Sunday after Trinity, we use to read and preach the
Gospels and Epistles of the other future of our dear Lord Jesus Christ
on the Last Day, as they are written in the Church Postil.

And is well thought of and ordered that one

*) Addition of the edition *c*. D. Red.

preach at this or another time of the year about the last day, which is
now, if God wills, at the door, so that some hearts will be improved by
it. For most of the people, and the greatest of them, are pretending and
pretending as if the last day will never come and they will live here
forever; for this reason, they are becoming secure and nefarious, taking
care only of how they can get great honor and wealth here and live in
security, joy and pleasure. But it will come to an evil end; they will
not believe this (although Christ has faithfully warned them of this,
Luke 21) until they rise up in the abyss of hell.

**998** L. 3, 210,211. on the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W.
XIII, 2316-2320. **999**

**On the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity.**

**Matth. 5, 1-12.**

And when he saw the people, he went up into a mountain, and sat down;
and his disciples came unto him. And he opened his mouth, and taught
them, saying, Blessed are they which are poor in spirit: for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be
comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they
shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they will be called children of God. Blessed are those
who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you, when they lie against you,
for my sake. Be glad and of good cheer, for you will be well rewarded in
heaven. For so they persecuted the prophets that were before you.

This gospel was preached in the papacy on All Saints' Day, and was not
ill-intentioned, if only it had been understood correctly and applied to
the living saints, that is, to the true Christians here on earth.

2 For the sum of it is this, that our dear Lord Christ here tells us
what he has for disciples, how they should fare in the world, and what
they should hope for. "Such teaching is not for the dead saints, of
whom we have nothing here on earth to enjoy; but for all of us who are
still alive here on earth, and have the blessed hope of eternal life
still before us; that we may learn how to keep ourselves, and what we
should hope for and comfort ourselves. For we must pay special attention
to the little word that the evangelist reports: His disciples sat down
with the Lord Jesus, and he talked with them. As Lucas especially
reports: "The Lord Jesus lifted up his eyes upon his disciples, and
said, Blessed are ye poor" 2c. Therefore, whoever hears this gospel,
let him learn here, if he wants to be a disciple of Christ, how it must
be with him, how he must keep himself and how he must comfort himself.
Now Matthew summarizes in eight different qualities that will be found
in all Christians, if they want to be true Christians or disciples of
Christ

**The first property is:**

**Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.**

(3) First of all, we must not be mistaken that Lucas merely says:
"Blessed are you poor"; but Matthew adds: "you who are poor in
spirit"; for it is the same opinion; and it is the same that Christ
says Matthew 11:5: "The poor have the gospel preached to them"; and
Paul 1 Corinthians 1:27.The poor have the gospel preached to them"; and
Paul 1 Cor. 1, 27: "What is foolish in the sight of the world, God hath
put to shame; and what is weak in the sight of the world, and despised,
God hath put to shame that which is strong. And that which is base in
the sight of the world, and that which is despised, God hath chosen, and
that which is nothing, to destroy that which is something, that no flesh
should glory in his sight." As Christ also says in the parable of the
kingdom of heaven, that those who have plots of land and oxen, and send
themselves to the care of the house, will not come to the banquet. But
the poor, the crippled, the lame, and the blind, who are found in the
streets and lanes of the city, come. They are those who are lying on the
roads and fences, because they are required to attend this supper.

(4) For the gospel is such a preaching that rich, worldly, mighty men
think they have cause not to receive it, because they have had enough
before. And because the gospel brings with it the cross and all kinds of
hardships, they do not think of putting their own at risk for the sake
of such preaching. On the other hand, the poor wretch, who has no other
consolation on earth, the wretched wretch,

**1000 L. 3, 211-214. on the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W.
XIII, 2320-2323. 100-1**

abandoned, despised, troubled and weary, will be glad to hear in the
Gospel that they have a gracious God in heaven, even if they have
nothing or even little on earth. These are the poor, as Lucas speaks of
them.

5 Now we learn that even among the poor there are many unholy bad boys,
who are in a bad way because they are naughty, do not respect God's
word, lead a frivolous, angry life, and because of this can never get on
a green branch. On the other hand, you can find rich people who are good
Christians, who like to hear God's word, who lead a godly life, and who
do a lot of good for poor people. Therefore the Lord does not leave it
at that, that he says: "Blessed are you poor", but adds: "Blessed are
those who are poor in spirit" or "spiritually poor"; "for such is
surely", as Christ says here with round words, "the kingdom of
heaven".

(6) But what is this spiritual poverty? We can learn it very well from
the opposite and from the example of the world: it lives in such a way
that everyone must think it is very rich in spirit. For there is the
greatest security, as if they should not worry about anyone, even though
they live in all kinds of sin and shame. As can be seen from the
Pharisees in the Gospel, John and Christ are at loggerheads with them
for no other reason than that they let themselves think that they were
pious, that they had a gracious God, to whom they sat in the lap 2c.
Such people are rich in spirit, that is, they make themselves believe
that they have everything enough and do not need grace. Therefore they
are in good spirits, they do not let anything go to their hearts, they
do not live any differently than if they had seals and letters, they
would be satisfied with God in all things, and God would be satisfied
with them. For this reason they let themselves think that they are happy
people. But in truth, they are absolutely wretched people who will never
enter the Kingdom of Heaven if they do not convert.

7 But these, says the Lord, belong in heaven who are spiritually poor,
that is, who are not secure, who have God before their eyes, who do not
live in the wind as the betters do, but take heed to all their doings
and to all their actions.

Let it be, let it be fine against the word, and see how the nature is so
corrupted by sin that it will nowhere follow with right obedience.
Before we look around, we are in anger, hatred, envy, impatience, and
all kinds of spiritual misery. When the punishment comes, as it does not
remain outside, then it arises first of all that one laments, fears and
worries, and would like to have a merciful God, and to be free of both
sins and punishment. Such a heart that has neither day nor night rest
for the sake of its sins and the future judgment of God is called a poor
spirit, or a spiritually poor heart; there is not much joy and laughter
in it. That is why the betting judges it to be a wicked, unholy thing.
Again, it considers it a blessed thing where there is no such fear and
anguish, since mens soluta curis (a carefree spirit) is.

008 But Christ saith, My disciples shall be such men as have foolish,
weak, and anxious hearts. They see what they ought to do, but it will
not come to pass, and every day, yea, almost every hour and moment, a
new evil is found, that now the devil is here, now there he falleth
them. This, says the Lord, does no harm; let the bet be safe and go on
as if no water had ever made it turbid. But you, my Christians, if you
go along thinking as if you were the greatest sinners, good for you, for
you are on the right path to heaven. For he who knows his sin desires
mercy; he who fears death and hell rejoices in life and heaven.
Therefore you are blessed people, but those who live so securely are
unblessed. So to be spiritually poor is nothing else than to have a
broken and troubled heart and spirit because of sins and inherent
weakness. God wants to dwell there, as Isaiah chapter 66 says, that is,
He wants to comfort with His grace, not to make people despondent in
such distresses, but to let the Lord Christ shine into such hearts
through His holy gospel, so that they may have comfort and joy and
inherit the kingdom of heaven.

(9) Now this is the first characteristic of Christians, or true
disciples of Christ, that they are spiritually poor, that is, they live
in God's

**1002 3.214-216. On the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W.xm,
2323-2326. 1003**

fear, are not sure, would like to be pious; and yet see that the devil
and the flesh are always in their way: this makes them stupid,
frightened and fainthearted. Do not be afraid of this, says Christ. You
may think yourselves wretched people, who have to carry such sorrow and
grief in your hearts day and night; but believe me: blessed are you,
yours is the kingdom of heaven; while others must go down to hell to the
devil, who live in all security, like cattle, and would not even think
about how they would stand with God, and could give an account of their
life, deeds and omissions on the last day. Therefore, it is not a bad
sign if you stand in the fear of God, recognize your sin, would like to
be pious, worry about your sin and disobedience, yes, you are blessed.
Therefore, beware that you would think otherwise, for it says here that
the disciples of Christ are such people who are poor in spirit, that is,
who have anxious, sorrowful hearts because of their sins. Whereas all
the world, though drowned in the midst of sins, passes through freely
and securely, caring for nothing: therefore they are wretched people.
This is the first comfort and the first characteristic of Christ's
disciples.

**The other feature is:**

**Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.**

10. to bear sorrow does not mean, as we commonly use, to dress in
black, where a dear friend, wife, child 2c. has passed away with death;
but it means to be sorrowful, to weep, to be miserable, and to have
misfortune because of a particular accident that happens to the body, to
the property, to the wife, child, servants, and others. For this is how
Lucas explains it: "Blessed are you who weep here, for you will laugh.

(11) Now this is another characteristic of Christians, that they not
only have a frightened, stupid heart, but also wet eyes, because they
encounter all kinds of accidents. For since both the devil and the world
are fiercely hostile to the Christians, it is not possible that such
enmity could pass off without all harm. There the devil shoots with
pestilence and other diseases; there with fire,

with waters, with hail, because mischief follows from the food; there he
arouses evil people, who do such damage also to the body and property.
In sum, no one can tell what evil the devil and evil men do to
Christians. Now they are human beings, having flesh and blood; therefore
it is not possible that they should laugh at this. They are tormented,
forced and driven so long that their eyes go out. For be it harm to body
or goods, it hurts, the flesh does not leave its kind.

(12) Then the world again judges Christians to be wretched people,
that they must suffer and be tortured. Again, the world considers them
blessed people, who have no offense at all, who are strong and have a
healthy body, who are well fed, who find abundance everywhere, and have
all the pleasure of wife, child and servants, as it says in the 144th
Psalm. So the world likes it, so it also wants to have it; and honestly
strives for it, where it would go differently, that it could create
advice for itself.

13 But what does Christ say? First of all, it is decided that the true
disciples of Christ will not be people who always laugh; there will be
so much misfortune that their eyes will glaze over, that is decided.
Therefore, whoever wants to be a Christian may willingly enter into such
a journey. But whoever wants to have good days, always laugh and be
happy and not cry, let him stop being a Christian in time, because
Christians are supposed to cry.

14 But beware with all diligence, that thou thinkest Christians wretched
because they mourn: but hear what Christ thinketh of them, saying,
Blessed are they that mourn and weep. How may this come? For where there
is evil, where there is weeping and mourning, there can never be
blessedness. Blessedness means joy; but where there is weeping, there is
nothing but sorrow. This is true, says Christ, but only for a time. For
it shall be so with my Christians: if they weep here, and are sorrowful
and sad, it shall not remain so long; they shall be comforted again.
Therefore, it is not right to look at the present. Whoever wants to
judge rightly about Christians and unbelievers, must look to the future:

**1004 3.2i6-2is. On the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W.xm,
2320-2328. 1005**

The world has joy, but it is not only a short, bad joy that can soon
vanish, but such joy is followed by eternal sorrow. What will you now
judge of the world? Will you consider it blessed for the sake of its
laughter and short dance? No, truly. Again, the Christians bear sorrow,
they weep, they are in misery: but look to the future, it is said,
"Blessed are they; for they shall be comforted." As we see in the
Lazaro and rich man. The rich man was considered by all the world to be
a blessed man, for he had everything his heart desired. But how long did
it last? Since he died, such laughter and joy was followed by eternal
weeping and sorrow. Lazarus, on the other hand, took evil here, as
Abraham says, it was very bad for him; but he was comforted afterwards
for eternity.

(15) So we should judge not by what is present, but by what is to
come; then the cross and suffering would become small to us. Nor would
we consider ourselves wretched people because we have to suffer much
tribulation and misfortune here; but, as Christ says here, we would
consider ourselves blessed people, yes, we would give thanks that he so
fatherly visits us and gives us cause, through temporal misfortune, to
think of the future and eternal consolation. Others, on the other hand,
who have enough here and no offense, forget such eternal consolation and
are truly wretched people, with all the honors and goods they have. This
is the other characteristic of Christ's disciples, that they not only
suffer and weep because of sin, God's wrath and judgment; but they also
have wet eyes because of all kinds of bodily accidents and adversities.
By these two characteristics, Christians are easily recognized.

**Now follows the third :**

**Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.**

The Lord has summed it up very well and precisely, how it is with real
Christians, how it is with them, and how they should comfort themselves.
The world does the same: when it is in a bad way, it can't help it, its
eyes glaze over and it feels bad. But through

search your heart, and see what thoughts you find there. There you will
find such weeping, which is nothing but malice or weeping in anger;
which comes not because the hurt hurts so much, but because she cannot
avenge herself nor cool her temper as she would like. Such an angry,
vengeful heart, says Christ here, you will not find among my disciples.
They weep, like the pious little children, only because their harm hurts
them. But on the other hand, they have a gentle heart, they do not
intend to take revenge, they command God and let it go that way; because
God has decreed it, they will gladly suffer it until he provides counsel
and help.

(17) But what follows where such a heart is? This, that they will
possess the earth; that is, because they place all vengeance in God's
hands, God will protect them and guard them, and will place His blessing
on them in such a way that the pride and arrogance of the wicked will
not harm them. As can be seen in examples. Joseph's brothers were very
angry with him, and all their attempts were to oppress him so that he
would not get over himself. What did the pious child do? He could not
and would not take revenge, so he ordered God to do so and patiently
suffered what God had told him to suffer. God looked upon him and
exalted him, so that he became lord over all his brothers, and God gave
him a rich and great inheritance. This would not have happened if he had
not suffered such opposition from his brothers. So the people of Israel
in Egypt were greatly afflicted and oppressed by the tyrant Pharaoh, who
intended to subdue them so that they would no longer be above him. But
Pharaoh and Egypt had to go down; the poor oppressed people, whom God
commanded to take vengeance, had to come forth, and the Gentiles to
strike out for the land and possess the earth.

18 The Lord also comforts us here: "You, my disciples, must be
oppressed in the world, but beware that you do not become disobedient,
but keep a gentle heart and bring vengeance home to me. In this way,
your enemies who want to oppress you will perish, but you will remain my
heirs and lords in the land.

[1006 **8.3, 219-221. on the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W.xm,
2328-2331.** 1007]{.underline}

We should hold on to such comfort and not be so afraid of the tyrants
who want to take life and limb, goods and everything. They should leave
it alone, if we only look to God, who can save and protect us. But they
must go down, for they are wicked people.

20 Here learn and consider what a miserable, harmful thing it is for a
vengeful heart. Otherwise, when you patiently entrust your cause to God,
God would save and protect you and make your cause the best: through
such vengefulness, you stand in your own light, and willingly deprive
yourself of the treasure you could have from God.

(21) Therefore the judgment is reversed here: Those who have great
power and authority, and can defend themselves and protect themselves,
the world considers to be blessed. But they are wretched. If they have
something, let them have it; they will not possess the earth. On the
other hand, those who have a gentle heart, suffer in patience what God
sends them, and wait for God's vengeance, until He looks in and forbids
the wicked: they are the ones (the tyrants do what they want about them)
who shall nevertheless inherit the earth; as we have heard from Joseph
and the poor Jews in Egypt.

22 We see the same example in David. He was chased away from the land by
his biological son. David saw well the punishment he had earned;
therefore he suffered it patiently and waited for God's help. The help
did not fail to come, so that David returned to the land; but the
rebellious Absalom fell to the ground with his people. This is the third
characteristic of Christ's disciples, that they are not vengeful, but
wait in patience, with a gentle heart, for God's help in suffering.

**The fourth property is:**

**Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled.**

(23) Here also Lucas leaves it badly, as above, that he says,
"Blessed are ye that hunger here: for ye shall be filled." And is easy
to understand; for it has just the opinion, as Mary sings in the
Magnificat, "The hungry he filleth with goods, and the rich he leaveth
empty." It concludes

But the gloss that Matthew adds to this is a fine one. For it is evident
that there are many poor people who have barely enough dry bread; God
leaves them in poverty so that they deserve it, and they themselves give
cause for it, ask nothing about the sermon, are industrious in their
work, and lead an annoying life. In this way they waste God's blessing,
so that He cannot help them, even though He would like to; but must
always continue with the punishment longer and harder, so that poverty,
sickness and other misfortunes increase. Of such poor the Lord does not
say that they are blessed or that they shall be filled. They are poor
and wretched people, and must remain poor and wretched here and there,
if they do not improve and become more pious.

(24) But these poor are blessed, whom God does not want to suffer
hunger and thirst all the time, who are God-fearing and would like
everything to be right and good everywhere; it grieves them that things
are so bad in the world and that so little improvement follows among the
people. For this is what we experience in the world every day: whoever
is pious and keeps himself well and Christian, very seldom enjoys his
good fortune in the world and must always have more disadvantages. On
the other hand, what is fast and directed to all kinds of
mischievousness, that comes to money, to honor, to good, then luck
strikes with heaps.

(25) The Lord looks at this kind of trouble and warns his Christians
against it. As if he wanted to say: Do not let yourselves be seduced by
the examples of the world; continue in piety, be godly, and do not let
yourselves be hindered that others come forward, become rich and mighty,
but you must always follow behind and remain poor beggars. Believe me,
you are blessed people, but those are wretched people, and both have
this before you: those with all their money and goods, because they are
not God-fearing, must have all misfortune and go out alone; but you
shall find my blessing abundantly in its time, also here on earth, and
afterwards have all fullness in eternity.

(26) So this little piece is for pious Christians, who are generally
poor and miserable in the world, and have scarcely their daily bread.
They should not let this happen to them.

**1008 L. 3, 221-224. on the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W.
XIII. 2331-2334. 1009**

But stop with piety and the fear of God, and hope that God will not
remain on the outside with His blessing.

**The fifth characteristic of Christ's disciples:**

**Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.**

27 The piece is easy, and especially Luca explained it in the 6th
chapter to Christ according to the length, what kind of mercy is the
mercy of the Christians, which does not only go against friends and such
people, whose we can enjoy, but also against the enemies, since we can
expect nothing from them. For God is merciful in this way, that he gives
to friends and enemies, good and evil, his sunshine, rain and everything
they need. Although this may be unpleasant, for the old Adam cannot soon
forget his loss and is therefore unwilling to prove all the good he has
done to those who have caused him all the misfortune, we should
nevertheless look to the great comfort that is given here and not follow
the old Adam.

The Lord comforted us before: If we have a gentle heart, and offer all
vengeance to him, he will give us abundant blessings and gracious
protection. Here he leads us higher, not only wanting us to forgive, but
also to do good to those who have shown us evil, if they need it and we
are able. And the promise is attached to it: "Just as we are merciful
and accept the needs of poor people, even if they are our worst enemies,
and gladly help them, so God will also accept our needs, gladly forgive
and forget everything, and grant us all grace and mercy.

(29) Say, therefore, whether these are not blessed people to whom God
will be merciful; with whom God will not be angry, but will show them
all mercy. Well then, whoever desires this, let him become a Christian,
that is, let him believe in Christ and then be merciful to his neighbor;
then God will also be merciful to him. But wretched and wretched people
are those who do not respect such comfort and pursue their anger: that
they could help poor, miserable people, but they do not want to.

**Now comes the sixth property:**

**Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.**

(30) A "pure heart" means in the most simple way such a heart that
looks only at God's word and will, and does not (like the world) hang
on money, goods, honor, power and splendor. For these are unclean
hearts, as Luke 8 says, since God's word cannot bear fruit; just as a
field is unclean when it is full of stones, thistles and thorns and
other weeds. But where men are so disposed that they possess money,
goods and other things as if they did not have them, and let themselves
be most concerned about the word and kingdom of God, these are right,
good and pure hearts, since the fruit grows from day to day, the longer
the more, so that they learn to recognize God, take comfort in His grace
and rejoice in His help.

(31) These are also blessed people, as Christ boasts in John 17:3:
"This is life eternal, that they know thee, that thou only art true
God, and whom thou hast sent, Jesus Christ. On the other hand, the
others, with all the good they have, are wretched people, because they
either do not have the word, or do not take it to heart and do not let
it be their highest comfort and treasure. For they never come to see or
know God. Therefore, when death approaches and Christians then have all
comfort, joy and hope in God, they must fear God more than the devil.
Then an unhappy, miserable death must follow. Therefore, we should
diligently adhere to the word, let it alone dwell and shine in our
hearts, then we would see God rightly, and be certain that He is a
gracious, kind God; and although no one is innocent before Him, that He
nevertheless forgives our sin and for Christ's sake wants to make us
eternally blessed.

If anyone wants to interpret a pure heart, as Matthew 15 says, as having
no evil thoughts, no murder, no adultery, no fornication, no theft, no
false testimony, and no blasphemy inside, this is also interpreted
correctly. But such a heart is only judged by the Holy Spirit through
the Word. Therefore,

**[1010 DS. 224-226. on the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. xm,
2334-2336. 1011]{.underline}**

When I say: A pure heart, which always looks to the word and the will of
God, with the same I include all such virtues. For from such a single
source they must come; otherwise, where the word and faith are not first
in the heart, the heart remains impure and impure works also follow.

**The seventh property:**

**Blessed are the peacemakers, for they are called children of God.**

33) To be "peaceable" means to help and advise for peace and
atonement, to prevent anger, discord, ill will and other things in all
places. This is also a special Christian virtue, which is gloriously
praised here. But it is not thought that this alone should be called
peaceable, when two quarrel, stab and beat each other, that one should
run in, take peace and tear them from each other.

(34) This virtue can and should be practiced in all classes and among
all people, to prevent anger and help atone for it. In the home, one
sees that husband and wife do not always move in with each other at the
same time; but what is the devil to do? For him it is a desired game,
where he can make married couples quarrel. For there he has a thousand
and one thousand ways to instigate all kinds of misfortune. That is why
he agitates and incites, so that no one should keep a secret from the
other, so that it goes according to the will and desire of the devil.
But what does Christ say? You husband, you wife, if you are my disciple,
know that my disciples are peaceable people, they have no desire to
quarrel, to scold, to curse; and even if they are sometimes overtaken by
anger, so that they go out with an evil word, they soon come to their
senses, are sorry, and think how the matter can be brought back to good
ways and to unity. So do thou also: give no cause that ill will should
break in; seek cause that unity may become new and whole again; then do
thou like a Christian, and art a blessed man, for thou art a child of
God. Man, for you are a child of God.

(35) The devil's way is that he likes to cause dissension, for he is
a murderer and an enemy of life. Such kind follow

His children, who like to scold and quarrel, and who like to cause
dissension. But such people do not belong in God's kingdom. Therefore,
if you want to be my disciples and true children of God, think
peaceably, calm down anger and quarrels where you can; do not reproach
again, do not curse again, think that a good word finds a good place; so
happiness and salvation shall be with you; whereas all misfortune is
with those who give cause for discord. As can be seen in the
disobedient, peevish servants, who can do nothing but bite and scratch
one another like dogs and cats, neither wanting to listen to a word the
other has to say. Everyone wants to scold again, curse again, beat
again. This is a sign that they are not God's children, but the
devil's, because they follow his ways and thus take pleasure in strife
and discord.

(36) If this virtue is so highly needed in the household, how much
more is it needed in the regiment and in the high estates, that one
should not provoke to anger, but, wherever possible, instruct great
lords to gentleness and peace! For where there is violence and great
power, the devil takes special pains to see whether he can stir up
discord. Therefore it would be necessary that this text should be
written in all princes' council chambers and law offices: "Blessed are
the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God. So that
in great matters such people would remember, and not do the devil a
court service, and help to discord, where one should advise and help to
peace.

(37) As the papists of this day do honestly, who without ceasing
provoke and drive kings and princes, let them put to the sword and
scourge our churches; that it may be clearly seen that they are the
children of devils, who follow their father the devil, and would rather
counsel strife, bloodshed, and murder than peace and unity. These are
wicked people, and they will find their reward in their time, let no one
doubt.

**The eighth property:**

**Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are you when men persecute you
for my sake.**

**
[1012 D. 3, 226-228. on the twenty-seventh Sunday after Trinity. W. XHI,
233S-233S. 1013]{.underline}**

**And they shall revile and persecute you, and shall speak all manner of
evil against you, when they lie against you. Be glad and of good cheer,
for you will be well rewarded in heaven; for so they persecuted the
prophets who were before you.**

This is the last characteristic by which Christians are recognized.
Christians can be recognized that they are harmless and unpleasant
people in their life and conduct. But the world does not like their
teachings and therefore persecutes them. This also seems to be a poor
bargain, that the Christians should not enjoy their doctrine before the
world in any other way, than that therefore all misfortune is put upon
them, they are chased away, theirs is taken away, and finally they are
strangled over it. But be not deceived, saith Christ; blessed are ye.
For first of all you suffer, and yet for the world you do not deserve
it. Therefore you suffer for my sake. Be satisfied, and I will reward
you well and pay you abundantly in heaven. For what is on earth would be
far too little for that. The dear prophets who were before you also
suffered in this way, and you consider them to be blessed people. So you
also must come to the place where they are. Woe to you, you mean well
with the world, you would like to help it to become eternally blessed,
but for this it persecutes and blasphemes you; you must let yourselves
be scolded as the worst of boys. It does not hurt, they lie to you.
Therefore be of good cheer, the kingdom of heaven is yours, you cannot
lose it. But look where such persecutors and blasphemers will finally
remain. For if the kingdom of heaven is yours, you who are persecuted,
there will be no lack of hellfire for those who persecute you for my
name's sake.

39 Thus we see how our dear Lord Christ paints his Christians, that they
are first of all people who are not secure, like the world; they have a
stupid heart, are afraid of God's wrath and judgment, and would like to
be pious. After that, their bodies and food are in such a state that
there is not much laughter. And yet, even though the world holds them in
contempt, they keep a kind and gentle heart and are not moved to anger
and impatience. They are pious and live without all aversions. But at
the same time they must suffer hunger and thirst. They are merciful, and
take everyone's need to heart, and help where they can. They are
peaceable and prevent anger and strife where they can. Nevertheless, the
world will not tolerate them, but persecutes them for the word's sake.
All this seems to be a miserable and wretched being; but see how Christ
comforts: the kingdom of heaven is for such people, God wants to comfort
them, protect and preserve them, provide enough for them with His
blessing, be gracious and reveal Himself to them; they shall be called
children of God, all things shall be richly rewarded for them in heaven
2c.: - so one will find, as the Lord certainly says, that Christians are
to be held for what they will, that they are blessed people.

40 For this reason we should all consider these things carefully,
practice good works, and not be afraid of the cross and the ingratitude
of the world, so that we may know that we are also disciples of our dear
Lord Christ, and through him have the hope of eternal life. May our dear
Father in heaven, through his Holy Spirit, grant this to us all for the
sake of Christ Jesus, his Son, our Savior, amen.

**End of the house mail through the year, on Sundays.**

To God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Spirit, the one
true God, be praise and glory forever, for these and all His benefits,
Amen.

**Evangelion explanation**

to the

most noble feast and apostle days

**through the whole year.**

**Festtheil der Hauspostille.**

We have kept the order with the festivals in this postilla, as it is
customary according to Brandenburg and Nuremberg order, since also the
apostles' festivals are not included without cause, and besides the
same some special histories, which are to be presented to the people
every year in the churches.

although the feasts are not kept, or the days are celebrated; as there
are. St. Paul's conversion, the story of Magdalene the sinner, St.
John's beheading 2c.*)

*) Addition in editions a and d, in edition a at the end, in b at the
beginning of the sermons.

**St. Andrew's Day.**

**John 1:35-42.**

The next day John stood again, and two of his disciples. And when he saw
JEsu walking, he said, Behold, this is the Lamb of God. And two of his
disciples heard him speak, and followed JEsu. And JEsus turned, and saw
them following, and said unto them: What seek ye? And they said unto
him, Rabbi, where art thou lodging? He said to them: Come and see. And
they came and saw it, and abode with him the same day: and it was about
the tenth hour. One of the two who heard of John and followed Jesus was
Andrew, Simonis Peter's brother. The same found his brother Simon
first, and said unto him, We have found the Messiah (which is
interpreted, the Anointed). And brought him to JEsu. And when JEsus saw
him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called
Cephas (which is interpreted, a rock).

1 Today's gospel, as you have heard, teaches us how Andrew came to the
knowledge of Christ and was called to the apostleship. This story is
written by all three evangelists, Matthew in chapter 4, Lucas in chapter
5 and John in chapter 1, although they seem to speak about it
differently. Matthew says that Peter and Andrew fished with each other
when they were called. Lucas reports nothing about Andrew, and says only
about Peter, how he fished, and how he recognized Christ during the
fishing trip and was very shocked, and that Jacob and John were there.
John, however, says how Andrew was a disciple of John the Baptist, and
was at that time with

He confessed to John that he had seen Christ, pointed to him, and called
him the little lamb of God. Because of this, he was moved by such
preaching that he left John, followed Christ, and asked him where he
could find an inn, so that he could come to him, hear him preach, and be
with him. So he stayed with Christ all day, and on the next day he first
came to his brother Simon Peter, brought him to Christ, and stayed with
him.

(2) But there is no disparity in such history. For from John it is
certain that Andrew came to Christ sooner,

**1022 L. 3, 230-232. Am St. Anbreastag. W. XIII, 2342-2345. 1023**

because Peter. So it is certain from Luke that Christ accepted Peter as
an apostle after the fishing trip. And it is to be believed that Andrew
was also present. Since Simon and Andrew are brothers, can be made in
the same way, and both come to Christ, Matthew groups them together. For
he does not want to show all the circumstances of how the two came to
such a profession, as Lucas and John do: Lucas with Petro, Johanne and
Jacobo, and John with Andrea. Let this be enough from the Historia, so
that no one is offended by it, as if the evangelists were in
disagreement.

(3) First of all, we should look at the example of St. Andrew. He is a
fisherman and undoubtedly has a wife and child, just like his brother
Peter, who is described in the Gospel as having a wife-in-law.
Therefore, the care of the house, how he should feed his wife and child,
was on his neck. But he did not take such a hard time; when John the
Baptist appeared, preached repentance and baptized for the forgiveness
of sins, this fisherman Andrew also joined him, heard the sermon and was
baptized. Let us take note of this example, I say, and see how he
enjoyed it.

(4) If Andrew had done as those who care for food do, and hardly take
time to eat and sleep (let alone go to church and preach, for they
cannot wait), he might have had a better supply and more good things in
the house; but he would never have come to know Christ, and thus have
become an excellent man in God's kingdom. But he trusts God for food,
and is satisfied with a little; and this is his highest and greatest
concern, that he may come to the kingdom of God; this he seeks first.
When others pursue their fishing and do not think of the sermon, he
finds himself with Johanne, listens to him exhorting to repentance and
comforting about the future Christ; he enjoys such diligence and
godliness that he not only sees Christ, shown to him by Johanne, but
Christ accepts him, keeps him with Himself, and commands him the

preaching office, that he should henceforth be a fisher of men, as
Matthew and Lucas say.

(5) Therefore, we should follow this example and diligently keep
God's word, being more concerned with it than with food and other
things. For we can also enjoy it more and better. Money and goods are
not brought higher than to serve the belly, because it is healthy and
can accept the food. But where there is sickness, or a man must die,
money and goods are of no more use to us than the broken pieces and
stones in the street. But God's word is an eternal treasure, through
which we come to grace and eternal life, and are delivered from sin,
death and hell.

(6) Therefore it is a terrible blindness in people that they regard
the word so little, and let themselves be more concerned with their
handling, however bad it may be, than with such a great treasure.
Therefore, just as St. Andrew is very proud of his godly diligence in
keeping his word so faithfully, those who are not so diligent are highly
rewarded for their carelessness and have to be wicked people here and
there. For here money and goods, care and daily concerns leave them
neither day nor night in peace; and when death comes, they find that
money and goods do them no good, and yet have nothing else to comfort
them.

(7) Therefore it would be highly necessary for us to observe this
example. It is a small and laborious food with a fisherman, especially
as they were among the Jews, who did not eat all kinds of fish, and
without that kept themselves very low in food; that the dear Andrew will
have had nothing else. But regardless of this, he is not only called a
fisherman; he is also called a disciple of John, that is, his preaching
child, his listener. And he is not found alone in his house, making or
mending nets, he is not alone in the water, fishing: he is with John,
listening to his sermon in such a way that as soon as he hears the word:
"Behold, this is the Lamb of God", he quickly follows Jesus. And as
JEsus asks him and his companions what they are looking for, he calls
him Rabbi, Master, the

1024 **L. 3, 232-234. On St. Andrew's Day. W. XIII, 2345-2348.** 1025

He desires to hear him and to be his disciple, and therefore asks where
he can find him for lodging. Let us do the same.

8) The voice of St. John the Baptist is also heard today, testifying
that the son of the Virgin Mary, the Lord Jesus, is the little lamb of
God; that is, God, the eternal Father, sent His Son Jesus Christ to
earth to be a sacrifice, and by His death to atone for all the sins of
the world. With such a voice, one can also see the holy finger of St.
John, that he alone points to such a little lamb of God, and not like
the pope with the devil's finger to monasticism, own works and saintly
merit. Therefore it is up to him that we do not let ourselves be
hindered in our nourishment and handling; but with dear Andrew follow
such a voice and holy finger, and accept Christ as Master, diligently
hear and believe his word; then it shall happen to us as we believe. If
we believe through Christ, the lamb of God, forgiveness of sins, God's
favor and grace, and eternal life, sin shall not hurt us; God will love
us and be merciful to us, and neither death nor hell shall hold us. This
is the first piece of today's history.

(9) The other part is about the ministry of preaching, what it is, and
what manner our dear Lord Christ has kept it, for it is especially
important to have certain instruction about it. Among the Jews, when the
law was still in force, it was thought that not everyone was fit for
church service. For high priests and church ministers had to be of the
tribe of Levi; otherwise no one was allowed to be subject to the
priesthood and church service. As there are many examples in Scripture
that God punished those who sacrificed, burned incense, attacked the
sacred vessels, and yet were not of the tribe and did not have the
office. Therefore, God ordered it thus: just as the church people were
special people, so they also had to have special adornment and clothing;
they also had to have special ceremonies.

remonia when they were commanded to bathe them, anoint them with special
oil, and do other things. As you will find in the 29th chapter of the
other book of Moses. Such things had to be kept strictly, and not to be
treated lightly, nor to be regarded as a carnival. For there stood
God's expressed command, who had thus commanded it, and no one was
allowed to change it.

(10) The pope also followed this example with his consecrators, and in
the New Testament made a special feast with the priests, that they
should be blessed, anointed with oil, given ropes, keys, books, and
other things into their hands; he also consecrated chalices and other
vessels, and ordered special garments to be worn in church, as it seemed
harmless to him that the Jews had worn priests' and Levites' garments.
Therefore, such garments still have the name and are called Levite
skirts. Over such things, the pope stands very stiffly and does not like
to let a layman touch a chalice.

(11) But if thou askest why he hath thus wrought, he answereth thee,
If the priesthood of the Old Testament was so honestly and gloriously
held, it is only right that the priesthood of the New Testament should
be no less honestly and gloriously held. For there the priests and
Levites dealt with cows and sheep; in the New Testament they deal with
the body and blood of Christ 2c. This is the Pabst's faith and holiness
all together: it is not, like those, in the law, on God's command and
word; but on man's discretion.

(12) One may think much of it, who does not know better: but a
Christian thinks much less than nothing of all that is made without
God's word and will; yes, he still thinks it an error and harmful
devil's poison, where one wants to praise it for a divine service, as
the pope is wont to do with such monkey play. For the Christian church,
just as it knows and believes of only one sacrifice, by which the sins
of the world are taken away and paid for, so it also knows and believes
that there is only one priest, the Son of the eternal God, born of Mary,
Christ Jesus. Such

**1026 L. 3, 234-237. On St. Andrew's Day. W. XIII, 2348-2350. 1027**

Faith shows God's word. For the name "priest" (in Greek hiereus, who
is called a priest because of his office, that he sacrifices) is not
assigned to any man in the New Testament, but to the one, right priest,
JEsu Christo. But the ministers of the church have other names and are
called apostles, evangelists, bishops, presbyteri, shepherds 2c. Such
names they have not for sacrifice, but for preaching and other services
that must be maintained in the church.

Therefore, the name "sacrifice" and "priest" does not belong to the
pope and his priests, but to the only Son of God. But he who, like the
pope, makes other sacrifices and priests, is an antichrist, and does not
belong in God's church, which only knows and believes in one sacrifice
and priest, as reported.

14 Although there is only one priest, Christ, the church has other
ministers, as Paul calls them, Eph. 4:11: "apostles, prophets,
evangelists, pastors, teachers", and in his epistles he calls them
bishops, which we find in the

Germans keep and call priests. But it is called old, honest people, who
have public testimony of their good life and conduct. For such office
does not belong to young, inexperienced, fickle and unstable people;
there should be age and bravery.

(15) Now let us see what manner Christ held, and afterward the
apostles and the first church, when they ordained ministers; and we
shall be able to judge aright what reason the pope has for his
ordination, whether he follows Christ and his apostles. First of all,
the testimony of the twelve apostles is before us, and it is impossible
for any papist to deny it. Matthew is sitting at the customs, waiting
for his money: Jesus says to him, "Arise, follow me. With this word he
makes him an apostle, for he does nothing more than send him out to
preach the kingdom of God. So Peter, John, and James fished all night
and caught nothing, sitting and mending their nets: there is none of
them to think of becoming a preacher. But when Christ comes and

He says to them, "Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men." Then
they become preachers from fishermen, and especially great preachers,
who preach not with words but also with excellent miraculous signs. This
way Christ led on earth, when the preaching ministry was still enclosed
and went only among the Jews. But when the apostles were to go among the
Gentiles, the Holy Spirit made them into true preachers, so that they
could speak with all kinds of tongues and spread the name of Christ
among Jews and Gentiles.

16 The apostles also did this. Since Judas was to be substituted for the
betrayer, they did nothing more than appoint Barnabam and Matthiam, and
asked God to indicate to them which one would be most suitable for this
office. Since they saw God's will in their lot, they left it at that,
and did not anoint, smear, or circumcise Matthiam, as the pope does with
his priests, even though they had both been in the preaching ministry
before, for the Lord had had seventy-two other disciples besides the
twelve apostles.

It is clear from St. Paul's Scripture that he first teaches Timothy and
Titum, before they elect anyone to the preaching or church office, that
they should look at life and doctrine, that the doctrine be pure and
wholesome, the life unruly, and the person fit to teach. If they found
this to be the case with someone of whatever status and character, they
appointed him as a church servant, and did no more than call the elders
(that is, other church servants) together and lay hands on him; these
were all the ceremonies.

18 Now such laying on of hands was not only a public sign of the
commanded preaching ministry, but it was prayed that God through His
Holy Spirit would enlighten, rule and guide such a chosen person for the
welfare of the Christian church. Such prayer has not been in vain. For
through such laying on of hands and prayer, the Holy Spirit has at times
visibly come upon the ordained ministers of the church, as, Acts 19. 19.
and Paul reports it twice from Timothy, how he had been led by such
prayer.

**1028 L. 3, 237-239. On St. Andrew's Day. W. XIII, 2359-2353. 1029**

1 Tim. 4:14: "Do not neglect the gift given you through prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the elders"; and 2 Tim. 1:6: "Awaken the
gift of God that is in you through the laying on of my hands."

19 From such a custom, when there was no lack of doctrine and life, such
fit persons were called to the church ministry, and afterwards, through
some bishops and parish priests who were the closest, they were publicly
commanded to the ministry in the church with the laying on of hands.
Thus one reads of Saint Ambrosio. He was a regent in secular office in
Milan; and what is more, he had not yet been baptized, although he was a
Christian and liked to hear God's word: but regardless of all this,
because he was of honorable conduct and had a good understanding of
Christian doctrine, he was elected bishop against his thanks and was
baptized. It was the same with Augustino at Hippone in Africa. There one
hears nowhere of the Bescheeren. There one hears nowhere of the bribery,
smearing and other gimmicks that the pope plays with his bishops and
priests. But it goes quite well. For because the pope makes such
priests, such as have not been in the church before, who are to
sacrifice Christ for other people's sins and crucify him anew, he must
also use a special way that has not been in the church before.

20 Christians should know that a church servant, bishop, pastor,
chaplain, or whatever one wants to call it, does not require more than
that he first be of an unruly character and have a good understanding of
Christian doctrine and be able to express it clearly. Where such is the
case, there is no need for more than that such persons be appointed by
the authorities and that they be publicly commanded to preach and other
church services. For this one may need the laying on of hands and pray
at the same time. And there is no doubt that such prayer, although the
Holy Spirit no longer comes visibly, will not go without fruit, but will
accomplish that for which it is done, according to Christ's promise:
"Where two or three have prayed in my name, I will send them away.

are gathered, what they ask the Father, he will give them."

(21) So shall Christians consecrate their ministers, following the
apostles' and the first church's example; and shall ask nothing of the
pope's monkey business. He anoints his ministers, and Christ does not
call him. He anoints them, but Christ does not call them. He orders them
to sacrifice Christ and through this sacrifice to obtain forgiveness of
sins for themselves and others; this does not call him Christ either,
and is completely contrary to Scripture. Finally, so that there is
nothing good about the pope's priests, he forbids them to marry, that
they must vow chastity, since all the world knows how they keep it. But
who would want such ecclesiastics? Especially because the bishops, with
the exception of hardly two or three, accept all the priests they
consecrate with the thought that they should hold to the old idolatry,
defend public error and not preach God's word. Therefore we have good
reason, because they do not want to give us righteous church servants
according to their office, that we do not ask for their monkey and
priest game, and arrange and choose church servants for ourselves, as
Christ, the apostles and the old righteous church chose and arranged
them. This is a special service to God, but the devil is annoyed by it:
there is nothing to it.

But what is the purpose of such church ministry? Christ shows this
finely in Matthew 4 and Luke 5, when he says, "Follow me, and I will
make you fishers of men." Mark these words well. He does not say that
they should sacrifice him, but that they should catch men from the sea
and the devil's kingdom into God's kingdom and eternal life.

(23) With what then is this done? He who wants to catch fish must have
yarn or nets. But with what do you catch people? There also belongs a
net (as the Lord speaks of, Matthew 13), the holy gospel. For we men are
like fishes in a vast sea, where one eats another, and there is much
strife and unrest. But especially in such a sea is the great Leviathan,
the devil, who has his rant, and plagues the poor fish very well. Sol-

**1030 L. 3, 239-241. On St. Andrew's Day. W. xm, 23S3-2336. 1031**

Our dear Lord Christ wants to control this misery through the apostles,
and gives them the yarn in their hands, his dear gospel, in which
repentance and forgiveness of sins are preached in the name of Christ,
so that whoever believes and is baptized shall be blessed. The poor
sinners hear this word and accept it with joy, and are thus caught out
of the vast sea of the devil into our Lord God's container, and believe
through Christ for the forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

(24) For not only the word, but also the holy sacraments, which Christ
commanded and left to his church as a treasure, serve for such faith.
For as the word points us to Christ, that he died for us, and by his
death paid for our sins, and so saved us from eternal death and the
tyranny of the devil: so hear thou in baptism, that the death of Christ
is for thee, and that thou shalt comfort thyself, and receive him, and
hope for salvation. In the Lord's Supper you also hear that the body of
Christ (which you receive in the bread, according to the words of
Christ) is given for you, and his blood (which you drink in the wine,
according to the words of Jesus Christ) is poured out for the
forgiveness of your sins. Thus we are caught out of the devil's kingdom
by the Word and the Holy Sacraments, so that we may be under God's
grace and keep the hope of eternal life through Christ.

(25) Therefore the devil is exceedingly hostile to such a net; if he
can, he tears a hole through it, so that the fish come out again in
heaps, that is, he falsifies the doctrine, sends mobs and heretics who
do not keep the word right; this does not go off without harm, as we
see. Or if he cannot break the doctrine, he sets about the fishermen,
whether he can hinder them in such work, let them go and make them
workless, or lead them away to some other action. As we see in the case
of the papacy, he has done both things, the wicked enemy, in that the
pope and his preachers do not think about how to catch people from the
devil through right doctrine to eternal life; but all their fishing is
done so that they can catch land and people, money and goods, honor and
power.

to bring about. And since they should catch people with the word, they
have other nets, that is, monasticism, own works, indulgences, keeping
mass, fasting 2c.

For this reason, the pope and all his preachers can be called loose
fishermen with the truth, who send themselves to such work, which the
Lord has commanded Andrew and Peter here, as if someone wanted to fish
with a bowl basket: he would not catch much, yes, everyone should laugh
at such foolish presumption. But the pope does not want it to be
laughter, but still wants to persuade all the world that he is a right
fisherman and handles the craft properly. But here it is: Whoever wants
to be a real fisherman must have a net, that alone is the preaching of
the holy gospel. The pope does not want to suffer such a net, persecutes
and blasphemes it as if it were useless for catching fish, and comes
rolling along with an old bowl basket, with his own holiness, with
monasticism, vows and other things; he wants everyone to fish with him
and be caught with him.

(27) Therefore, we should thank God from the bottom of our hearts that
He has given us righteous fishermen who have the right kind of yarn in
their hands, as Christ says of Luke the last, that repentance and
forgiveness of sins should be preached in His name. With such yarn we
are caught from the devil's kingdom and sins, and placed in God's
kingdom, which is a kingdom of grace and life. And furthermore, it is
only up to us that we remain in such yarn and do not hop out again, as
one can see that it is unfortunately all too common. For God offers us
all His grace, He lets us all come to blessed baptism, lets His word be
preached to us, and does not want to exclude anyone. But what do we do?
We let ourselves love the world more than God's kingdom. He is addicted
to avarice, and all his thoughts and actions are no more than how to
gain money and goods; he lets himself love fornication, indulges and
drinks, and does what he desires; so from then on with other sins also.
So they wilfully jump out of this yarn of grace into the devil's
kingdom and damnation. As Paul says in 1 Cor. 6, 10: "Let yourselves

**[1032 L. 3. 241.242. On St. Thomas Day. W. XIII, 2356-2359.
1033]{.underline}**

deceive not; neither the covetous, nor the drunken, nor the blasphemers,
nor the robbers shall inherit the kingdom of GOD."

(28) Therefore, let every man have good respect for himself, and see
that if God has caught him to His kingdom through the gospel, he remains
within it, and does not fall out again through wilful sins. But if a
case has happened, do not lie still,

but to pick himself up again through repentance and right trust in
God's goodness and swim again to this net. For whoever remains in this
net will be blessed; whoever does not remain in it will be condemned.
May God, the Father of all graces, who has allowed us to come to such
blessed fishing, graciously keep us in such grace until the end, through
His Holy Spirit, for Christ's sake, amen.

**St. Thomas Day.**

**John 20:24-31.**

But Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called a twin, was not with them
when Jesus came. Then said the other disciples unto him, We have seen
the Lord. And he said unto them: Unless I see in his hands the marks of
the nails, and put my finger into the marks of the nails, and put my
hand into his side, I will not believe it. And for eight days his
disciples were there, and Thomas with them. When Jesus came, and the
doors were shut, he entered into the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.
Then saith he unto Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands;
and reach hither thy hand, and put it into my side; and be not
faithless, but believing. Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord,
and my God. saith JEsus unto him, Because thou hast seen me, Thomas,
thou hast believed. Blessed are they that see not, and yet believe. Also
many other signs did JEsus before his disciples, which are not written
in this book. But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his
name.

This history happened on the eighth day after Easter, and is a true
Johannine history, who has a special regard for all the preaching and
miracles of the Lord Christ, which belong to the doctrine of faith.
Therefore, although the other evangelists report nothing about it, John
did not want to leave it behind as a special example: first of a great
deep unbelief in the disciple Thomas; then of a glorious confession of
Christ, that the unbelieving Thomas not only believes that Christ has
risen from the dead, but praises him as the right and true God. Both of
these pieces serve to teach us and comfort us, whether we have been
unbelievers or are still weak in faith, that Christ does not throw us
away because of this, but takes care of us in the most gracious way and
brings us to the right and true God.

Faith (if we want differently ourselves) want to help.

(2) Now someone might wonder, first of all, why the apostles wrote
their own sin and disgrace in this way, and that the church then
arranged it in such a way that such histories were placed and preached
on the apostles' days, which were written in small honor of them. For
the apostle Thomas has a bad reputation, that he was so stubborn and
hard in unbelief; so that on St. Jacob's Day one reads how he and his
brother wanted to be the most distinguished, and on St. Bartholomew's
Day that the disciples themselves quarreled among themselves and each
wanted to be the best; item, that Matthew was a tax collector and a
public sinner. It seems that it would be better to remain silent than to
write and preach about it.

1034 **L. 3, 242-245. On St. Thomas's Day. W. XIII, 2359-2361.** 1035

(3) But it has a far different opinion. For we are not concerned, as
in the papacy, that the saints be highly honored and praised; from this
we will have little benefit nor comfort: but that we may learn from them
how God is gracious and merciful, and will bear with sinners; and we may
see from such examples that in what we are by nature there is little
difference between us and the dear apostles, since they as well as we
were sinners, and often erred, and enjoyed only that Christ is gracious
and merciful. That whether we find such or greater weakness and
infirmities in ourselves, we may not therefore despair nor despair; but
take comfort in their example, and hope that Christ will also bear with
us, not punishing all things in us that are to be punished, but
overlooking and helping us to come out of sins and become more godly.

(4) For this reason, the dear Thomas is cried out in all the pulpits
today, how he was in a terrible unbelief and no one was able to lift him
out of it. He was there and confessed with Peter when he said, Matth.
16, 16.He has not only seen the great miraculous works of Christ, but
has himself performed great miraculous signs at his command and in his
name. He has often heard Christ preach how he is the truth and the life,
how he will give up his life and take it again, and how he will rise
from the dead on the third day. Therefore (which is the most serious
thing) first the women, then Peter, and after Peter the two from Emmaus
came and said that they had seen Christ, that he had risen from the
dead: the one who neither believed nor wanted to believe it was Thomas.
And it did not help that the other ten apostles, who had been with one
another at night on Easter Day and had seen the Lord, all bore witness
together to the women, to Peter, and to two from Emmaus, saying that
Christ had risen, that they had talked with him, that his wounds were in
their hands, and that they had seen him again.

seen in the body. All together it was in vain: Thomas could not and
would not believe it. This may be a strong unbelief, which is just as
bad for an apostle, as that Peter even denies him and says that he never
saw him.

005 What thinkest thou then that Christ should begin and do with such a
disciple? Is it not true that your opinion is that if Christ were to
leave him in such unbelief and let him perish, it would not do injustice
to the stubborn head, since he considers all the others to be fools, who
gladly let themselves be persuaded, and believed that this was basically
a lie and a fair fable? For these were actually Thomas' thoughts: Let
it be thought of JEsu, my Master, as it may, that he has done such great
miracles; but now it is over with him, just as with other men; what once
comes down to the earth, that will not come again: therefore my
companions are vain great fools, that they let themselves be thus
persuaded by women, and their eyes be deceived by ghosts. Let no man
persuade me, except I see in his hands the marks of his nails, and put
my fingers into the marks of his nails, and put my hand into his side:
then will I believe it, and not otherwise.

(6) This may be unbelief, and a hard head that thinks Christ must make
it for him as he wills, or he will not believe. Just as if so much
depended on what he believed or did not believe. Then, I say, consider
what thou thinkest that Christ should begin with him, and what is the
cheap reward of such unbelief? For here are many sins. The first and
greatest, that he does not believe in Christ more than in other prophets
who were bad men. The second, that he despises his fellow disciples as
fools and considers himself the only wise man. The third, that he thinks
Christ must do as he pleases, or that he does not want to see him
believe.

What does Christ do to the poor unbelieving man? Does he also leave him
in such unbelief? No; that would be contrary to his manner and office;
for he compares himself to a shepherd, who is a shepherd to the
unbelieving man.

**1036 L. 3, 245-247.** St. Thomas's Day. **W. xm, 2361-2364. 1037**

He follows the sheep until he finds it. He does the same here. Although
Thomas does not want to believe the other apostles, Christ is not
interested; he is satisfied with the fact that he hears so much about
Thomas that he wants to believe when he sees and grasps him. Therefore
he does not delay long, comes to them through closed doors, and lets
himself be seen and grasped. And the greatest of all, he also lets
himself be heard with extremely friendly words and says: "Peace be with
you. Include in such a word also the poor great sinner Thomas, that he
may have a merry heart, and not think that he is there to punish and
rebuke him on account of his unbelief. No, dear Thomas, peace be with
you too, do not be afraid, I am not angry with you or with any man. Thou
hast said that thou wilt not believe until thou seest my nail marks, and
puttest thine fingers therein: now therefore, dear Thoma, put forth thy
fingers, and take hold of my hands, and put forth thy hand, and lay it
in my side; only that thou be no longer faithless, but believing.

(8) Let us diligently consider both these things: first, the great
unbelief that Thomas has in him, and second, the great and excellent
kindness that Christ has toward unbelieving Thomas. There we will have
to confess that our dear Lord Christ does not have an angry heart
against sinners. He has a compassionate heart that the devil holds them
so captive. Therefore try and do everything together that is possible
for him, so that he may bring them out of the devil's snares and sin
and convert them.

(9) Therefore this is a very comforting example, from which we may
learn how kind a heart our dear Lord Christ has toward sinners. For if
he does this to Thomas, who is so deep in unbelief, what do you think he
will do to sinners who recognize their sins, would gladly be rid of them
and free, and desire mercy? He will not tarry long, nor long endure the
afflicted poor hearts; but, as is seen from time to time in the Gospel,
even so

Soon we can reach for help and mercy, as soon as we can ask for it.

(10) We should be diligent and mindful of this. For it is not natural
in our hearts that God should be merciful to sinners. Thus the devil,
when he sees that consciences are struggling with their sins, always
wants to lead them and persuade them that they should not show any mercy
to God. Therefore, when sin has really set into the heart, one does not
want to be comforted, but is afraid of God and flees. But if God's
heart would be like this towards sinners, then Christ would be different
towards Thomas. He sees well that his heart is ill-satisfied, fearful
and timid because of unbelief and other sin. This is the nature of sin,
it cannot be otherwise. But Christ, our dear Lord, is there to ward off
sin and to comfort our hearts with God's grace. That is why he speaks
this word and says: "Peace be with you"; so that everyone may learn
that he is there where our hearts cannot be satisfied because of sin,
that he wants to satisfy them so that they will not be afraid of God,
but will know that God is merciful and has given and forgiven sin
through Christ.

For this reason Christ became man, for this reason he died on the cross
and rose again on the third day, so that our hearts, the devil and the
whole world of sin might cry out against us and over us, that we are at
war, that God does not want us to be at war, that he might say to us:
No, not so, but peace with you, that he may say to us, "No, dear man,
not so, but peace with you, God is not angry; therefore do not fear, for
I have paid for your sin, I have strangled death; so comfort yourself
that I have brought it about, and there will be an end to strife and
peace.

(12) So this history serves us primarily to learn how Christ will not
cast us away for our sins, but will gladly accept us in grace, bringing
us out of unbelief and sins to the forgiveness of sins and
righteousness. This is his ministry, which he carried out on earth, as
this and other histories testify, and still carries out today through
his word.

1038 **L. 3, 247-249. On St. Thomas' Day. W. XIII. 2364-2367.** 1039

For that holy baptism is not denied to anyone who desires it, the gospel
of the forgiveness of sins is preached publicly, and the precious
treasure, the body and blood of Christ, is offered up for our sins and
shared with us as often as we desire it: this is an indication that
there is no strife between God and us, and that for this reason we
should be of good cheer and joy, and take comfort in His grace, and not
be afraid because of sins. This is the first thing we are to learn from
this history.

The other is from the confession of Thomas. For the evangelist Thomas
emphasizes unbelief so well: this is not because we follow such
unbelief, but because we should recognize the kind and gentle heart of
our dear Lord Christ toward sinners, and also take comfort in such
grace. For there will be no lack of sins among us. Therefore, fear and
terror will not remain outside. It is impossible to have any comfort
except this, which we see here in the Lord Christ. After that we must
follow the example of Thomas, when he sees and hears Christ, that he
immediately comes over another heart and says: "My Lord and my God!
Follow, therefore, the heartfelt admonition which the Lord gave him,
saying to him, "Be not faithless, but believing."

(14) For this is necessary, that as Thomas here casts off unbelief and
believes, so also we should confess our sin, forsake it, and amend our
lives. For Christ does not want to be gracious to us and forgive sin so
that we should continue in sin and not amend, for then we would again
fall from grace into the wrath of God: but for this reason he is
gracious to us and helps us out of the devil's kingdom through the
forgiveness of sins, so that we may remain in the grace and kingdom of
God and become blessed. Such a change shall follow with us, as here with
Thoma. Before, no one could persuade him that Christ had risen from the
dead; he thought no more of him than of any other man. But now his heart
and mind are quite different. He believes

not only that Christ is risen from the dead, but he worships Him and
calls Him his Lord God.

(15) Then he learned in a moment, which seemed impossible to him
before, that he should believe. For then he will no doubt have thought
behind him and taken before him the promise of the ancient fathers, when
God promised the seed of the woman, which should crush the serpent's
head, and deliver all the families of the world from the curse and bless
them; and from this he will have decided: Here I see, which I never saw
nor believed before. This man dies, and rises again from the dead, that
he is a true natural man, and yet in another and eternal life; there can
be no other opinion, he must be master of the devil and of death,
otherwise they would have held him, and not have let him come to life
again. That he died on the cross in all dishonor, that is the bite of
the old serpent, which cannot let it go, because it cannot catch him by
the head, so it stabs him in the heel; on the other hand, this man steps
on her head and takes all power from her. Such a thing would be
impossible if this woman seed were no more than a woman seed. He is the
Son of God, therefore such power and authority comes to him; and from
now on it will be in him: whoever wants to be safe against the devil,
sin, and death, let him stay here with this man; there he will find help
and comfort against the devil, sin, and death.

(16) Thus Thomas soon became from an unbelieving, unlearned, coarse
disciple a very excellent theologian and doctor, who really and well
knows the Lord Christ in his person, and afterward also in his office.
How then the answer of the Lord is clear, that he says: "Because you
have seen me, you believe. What does he believe? Not only that Jesus,
the Son of Mary, has risen from the dead and lives again, but also that
he is God, and such a God who wants to help against death and sin all
who believe in him, and therefore should be worshipped with the true,
eternal God. Such faith makes Thomam blessed and us as well, as the Lord
said.

[1040 **L. 3, 249-251. On St. Thomas's Day. W. XIII, 2367-2369.**
1041]{.underline}

says: "Blessed are those who do not see and yet believe", which Thomas
believes.

(17) Mark this saying diligently and carefully, not only for the sake
of our adversaries, the papists, who call it heresy, when it is preached
that one may be saved by faith alone; but also for your own sake, that
you may know how you may attain to salvation. For the thought is inborn
in all of us, that he who would be saved must not be a sinner, but must
have kept the Ten Commandments. And it is true that God did not give the
Ten Commandments to be broken, but to be lived by and kept; for which
reason every man is obliged to perform such obedience. But whoever does
not want to obey, God's wrath comes upon him, as St. Paul says to the
Colossians in Chapter 3, v. 6. But this is not the way to salvation.
Cause: no one could be saved, for there is no one who keeps the Ten
Commandments.

(18) Therefore we should first recognize such disobedience and
impossibility, and confess that we are poor sinners, and beware of
wilful sins. Then, with St. Thomas, we should not be unbelieving, but
believing; that is, we should take comfort in the fact that Christ, the
Son of God, paid for our sin with his death, overcame death, and rose
from the dead on the third day, and will also raise us to life on the
last day. Such faith, Christ says here, is true blessedness. For thus
his words are, "Blessed are they that see not, and yet believe." Here
he says nothing of the Ten Commandments: not as if you should not do
them, but if you do them as much as you can, you will not be saved. But
by faith thou shalt be saved.

19 Therefore, if anyone wants to know what to believe, let him hear here
what Thomas believes, namely, that Jesus is the Son of God, and is a

Lord of life, who will help us from sin and death to life and
righteousness. Such confidence and hope is the right faith, so that one
does not only know it, but also accepts it and is comforted against
death and sin. Where there is such faith or confidence, there is
blessedness, and sins shall not hinder us. For through faith they are
forgiven. Again, if there is no such faith and assurance, even though
all good works (if possible) are there, one cannot be saved by it. It is
by faith alone that we may attain life and salvation. As John very
finely concludes at the end of this history, saying:

**These signs have come to pass so that you may believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God, and that through faith you may have life in
His name.**

(20) This is a bright and clear saying, that we cannot come to life by
works and our own piety. It must be by faith that we may know Jesus, the
Son of Mary, to be the Christ and Son of God, sent by God His Father to
pay for our sins, to conquer death for our good, and to make those who
believe in Him eternally blessed. John says that the signs which Jesus
did in the presence of his disciples serve for such faith, and he says
that they were written out for this reason, that one should believe. For
this reason Christ performed such signs, that he might reveal himself
and be seen to be not only the Son of the Virgin Mary and a man, but
also true God, and that everyone might seek help from him against the
devil, sin and death. Thus John concludes the story in a fine way, after
his own manner, so that we may learn to believe from it, so that we may
be saved. May our dear Father in heaven grant us this through Christ His
Son and the Holy Spirit, amen.

[**1042 2.3, 281.252.** On the holy day of Christ. **W. XIII, 2368-2372.
1043**]{.underline}

**On Christmas Day.**

**Isa. 9, 1-7.**

For there shall be another trouble that shall trouble them, as in the
former time, when it was easy in the land of Zebulun, and in the land of
Naphtali, and afterward it was harder by the way of the sea, on this
side Jordan, in Galilee of the Gentiles. The. The people that walk in
darkness behold a great light, and upon them that dwell in the land of
darkness it shineth brightly. Thou makest the Gentiles much, but thou
makest not much joy. But before thee shall they rejoice, as one
rejoiceth in harvest; as one rejoiceth when he divideth the spoil. For
thou hast broken the yoke of their burden, and the rod of their
shoulder, and the staff of their driver, as in the days of Midian. For
all warfare with fierceness and bloody garments shall be burned up, and
consumed with fire. For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given,
whose dominion is upon his shoulder; and he is called Wonderful,
Counsellor, Power, Hero, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace; that his
dominion may be great, and that there be no end of peace, upon the
throne of David, and upon his kingdom; that he may establish and
strengthen with judgment and righteousness from henceforth even for
ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will do this.

(1) This prophecy refers primarily to today's feast; therefore it is
useful and good that one not only learns the history from the evangelist
Luca, but also diligently examines what God preached through the dear
prophets about such a birth so long ago. For the prophets also indicate
the history, as Isaiah does here, when he says: "A child is born to us,
a son is given to us"; and above in the 7th Cap. (v. 14): "Behold, a
virgin is with child, and shall bring forth a son" 2c. But after that
they proceed with special diligence to show what God's counsel and will
was, and what he wanted to accomplish with us humans through such a
birth. This is the right core of such a trade, by which consciences can
protect themselves against sin and death, against God's wrath and the
devil.

(2) The light that the prophet says shines in the dark land over those
who dwell in darkness is nothing else but the great grace and mercy
preached through the gospel, that God takes care of poor sinners and
condemned wretches, and sends His Son to them, so that He, through His
incarnation and sacrifice, may rid them of death, sin, and all the
devil's kingdom.

(3) Such light and gracious preaching, saith the prophet, shineth and
shineth in the

dark land, over those who dwell in darkness, that is, among the
Gentiles, who know nothing of God's word and the right consolation
against sin and condemnation, and for this reason are like a man who
either has his eyes gouged out or is in darkness: he cannot put a foot
in front of him, he must fear he will bump and hurt himself. So we have
been heathens here on earth.

4 The Jews had an excellent advantage over us, because they had God's
word: not only the law, so that they knew what they should do, but also
God's promise of the seed of the woman, so that they could comfort
themselves against sin and the evil conscience. This was not the case
with the Gentiles: they were in sin, and yet did not know how to get
out. And if this was still the highest misery, when they thought they
wanted to serve God best, they sinned most abominably. This is the
darkness and the blind people, who (as Zacharias, St. John's father,
also says) sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; But through this
light of the holy gospel they come to the knowledge of God, that they
know that God is gracious and merciful, and will forgive and grant all
sins for the sake of Christ His Son; and that he cannot be served in any
other way, but that everyone accepts with faith such grace as has been
purchased for us through Christ, and then

[1044 **D. 3, 252-258. Am heiligen Christtage. W. xm, 2372-2375.**
1045]{.underline}

> The light of the Lord is the light that brings this light to the
> Gentiles. Such knowledge and art brings this light among the Gentiles.
>
> 5 Therefore the prophet says, "You make many things for the Gentiles.
> For no one wanted to be condemned; everyone wants to have a gracious
> God. Therefore the Gentiles accepted such preaching with multitudes,
> as history shows. This hurt the Jews. They would not believe what the
> Gentiles believed, and they angered Christ and His kingdom. This is
> what the prophet means when he says: "You do not add much to the joy.
> For when he came among the Jews as his own, as John says, his own did
> not want to accept him.
>
> 006 But what the Gentiles and the Jews have received, there, saith the
> prophet, there followed also a joy, as it is in a rich autumn or
> harvest; there every man is glad, every man sings and rejoiceth, and
> doth not trouble men with toil or labour; they are merry and glad for
> it. Item, a joy followed, as it is among an army after a glorious
> victory, when the enemies are slain. There is no one idle, everyone
> promotes and gambols, that he may bring away a good spoil. In the same
> way, says the prophet, when the good gospel is preached among the
> Gentiles, everyone will rush, and no one will want to be the last; for
> it is not a mere empty preaching, it brings a very good prey, as
> follows:
>
> **For thou hast broken the yoke of their burden, and the rod of their
> shoulders, and the staff of their driver, as in the days of Midian.**

These are dark, unintelligible words; but this is the right opinion and
the true understanding of it, as Genesis 2 (3:15) says: that the serpent
the devil's head should be crushed, and his tyranny and power torn in
pieces; that the Gentiles should have forgiveness of sins and eternal
life, and resist the enemy the devil, who until this hour has been their
tyrant, tormenting and afflicting them as he pleased. This is now the
joyful harvest, the rich autumn, and the fitting harvest.

The prey to which we come through the gospel.

8 But how shall such things be done? Or how will we come to it? Must it
come about through our strength or ability? Oh no! We are too weak; our
enemies, sin, death and the devil, are superior to us, we will not win
against them. That is why this battle should be like the one when Gideon
defeated the Midianites in the seventh chapter of the book of Judges. He
had a great multitude of people with him, but the LORD said, "There are
too many people with you for me to give Midian into their hands. Israel
would boast against me, and say, My hand hath done me in." Mark these
words well. For here it will also be found that God alone wants the
glory of this victory, and we should or can do nothing about it; as the
mad papists always cry out: Whoever wants to go to heaven must help it
with his own works.

(9) Therefore the LORD commanded Gideon to proclaim: Let him that is
foolish and despondent to battle depart without harm, and make himself
at home. At this proclamation twenty-two thousand men departed and only
ten thousand remained. But the LORD said, "There are still too many of
them," and told Gideon to lead all the people to the water and tell
them to drink, paying attention to those who drew the water with their
hands and licked it out with their tongues like dogs; he was to take
them with him and no one else. But there were only three hundred of
them. This was very unequal to the Midianites and Amalekites, who had
settled in the land like locusts, so that, as the text says, they and
their camelems could not be numbered. When Giedeon had taken these three
hundred men, he divided them into three groups and gave each of them a
trumpet in his right hand and an empty jar with a burning light in his
left hand, commanding them to do as he did. When they were about to
attack the enemy, none of them drew a sword, but at the same time they
blew the trumpets and smashed the jars, holding the burning lights in
their hands.

**1046 L. 3, 255-257. Am heiligen Christtage. W. XIII, 2375-2378. 1047**

cried out, "Here is the Lord's sword and Gideon's." Because Gideon
and his people did this, the LORD caused the enemies to go astray and
strike and choke each other and flee with their homes. Gideoni's sword
and hand did nothing for such a battle, but it was all the work and
power of the Lord alone.

(10) The prophet is saying that this victory will be the same: men
will not overcome sin, death and the devil with their good works and
devotion; they are far too weak, the Lord alone must do it. He also
alone shall have the praise and glory of it, that we are delivered from
sins and eternal death, and we are not.

011 But as Gideon, after the enemies were smitten and put to flight,
exhorted them in mount Ephraim to pursue after the enemies, and to lose
their way by Jordan, that they might not pass over; and the tribes of
Naphtali, Asher, and Manasseh slew the enemies: so shall it be with us
Christians. Because Christ, our dear Lord, has slain the devil, sin and
death and put them to flight, we are to pursue such enemies, that is, we
are to kill sin, resist the devil and, with the help of the Holy Spirit,
give ourselves over to obedience to God. This means then to hurry after
the defeated Midianites and to plunder them at the Jordan, where the
blessed baptism for the forgiveness of sins has begun; to which we also
came, and thereby found our enemies in flight and defeated.

(12) But that Gideon and his company (who are an image of the
Christian church) have trumpets and lights in their hands, because the
enemies choke themselves among themselves: this signifies the preaching
of the holy gospel and the faith that we have in jars that are broken.
As Paul also says, "We bear such a precious treasure," the knowledge
of the clarity of God, "in earthly vessels, that the abundant power may
be of God, and not of us." There is no doubt that Paul was looking at
this very history, since the prophet reports about it.

13 This is now the excellent, peaceful

Victory of the Lord, where all joy comes from, that henceforth we men
have peace, because through such victory, as the prophet further speaks,
all wars and bloody garments have been burned with fire and consumed.
The prophet goes on to point out such a deal, and reports the person
through whom such a victory has been acquired, and says:

**A child is given to us, a son is born to us.**

(14) This is a somewhat wonderful and strange thing to say. For what
should a child do in battle, and especially against such great and
formidable enemies? But the prophet wants to teach us that we should
regard this child much differently than other children. Otherwise he
would not praise this child and this son, if he were a child and son
like other children and sons.

(15) But when he says, "To us it is given, to us it is born," he is
referring to the promise that the Jews had of Christ. We Gentiles did
not have such a promise, nor did we know anything about it. Therefore
the prophet says, "It has been given to us Jews, but they, the Jews,
should not enjoy it alone; as it says above, this child also belongs to
the Gentiles, who need him just as much as they do, because they both
sit in darkness and the shadow of death.

(16) This is first of all a testimony that Christ the Lord is a true,
natural man, born of a woman like another child or son, but there is a
difference in his conception. For, as it says in the 7th chapter above,
his mother is a virgin, and, as the New Testament teaches, such a virgin
is pregnant by the Holy Spirit without male seed. Therefore, in such a
child there is not the sinful nature that is in us humans. Otherwise, it
is a man of all things, like us. But not only is he a man; as follows:

**His dominion is on his disciple.**

7 First of all, learn that this child has a dominion, that is, he is a
king or prince who has his own kingdom here on earth. But in this he is
a different king, as all worldly kings are, since it is connected with

1048 **L. 3, 257-289. Am heiligen Christtage. W. XIII, 2378-2380.** 1049

worldly kings have the order from God that their rule must sustain them.
For land and people must nourish a prince and give him from their work
and food, so that he can maintain himself. Thus God has decreed that the
temporal authorities on earth must exercise discipline, honesty and
integrity, punish evil and create peace and tranquility for their
subjects. But this king does not let himself be carried by his rule, but
he gives his back and carries his rule. As Christ says: "The Son of Man
did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life for the
redemption of many," Matth. 20, 28. And Luc. 15, 4. 5. he compares
himself to a shepherd who follows the lost sheep until he finds them,
and when he has found them, he takes them on his shoulders and carries
them. In this way, St. John also preaches about him, calling him the
little lamb of God that bears the sin of the world. For we are such
people: because he takes us up, he also takes up sin; because he carries
us, he also carries sin.

(18) Now think what strength this child has behind him. If he were no
more than a man, he would not be able to carry the burden of sins of a
single man. For sin, and death that follows, is too heavy and utterly
inescapable for us men. But now Isaiah says clearly: This child does not
carry only one man, but his whole dominion, that is, as John says, he
carries the sin of the whole world. This means that this child is
eternal God; otherwise he would have to leave this burden behind. As we
have learned, no man has ever been free from sin, nor has he ever been
able to protect himself against death.

19 This is very comforting, if only we could form it in our hearts and
believe it firmly. For we cannot deny that we are sinners; we must also
despair and despair because of it. But what comforts us? Nothing else,
but that God has given us this blessed child and has allowed this Son to
be born to us, who has not given his dominion, that is, to us poor
people.

We must not let ourselves go astray, but seek and bring us to God's
grace, and lead us to God's kingdom, to eternal life. We should comfort
ourselves with this support, and thank God for such grace, and ask Him
to keep us in such faith forever. As he will gladly do, as will soon
follow. For this child was not born for the sake of a little, short
help, for twenty or thirty years; it is to bring an eternal help, as it
is eternal. Now follows further:

**He is called Wonderful, Counsel, Power, Hero, Everlasting Father,
Prince of Peace.**

20 The prophet gives such names to the Lord JEsu, so that he may present
his ministry and help (which he wants to give us) to us all the more,
and so that we may be provoked to faith. "Wonderful" is the name of
this child. For what more can we do, indeed, what more can the angels
themselves do, than to marvel: first, at this great work of God becoming
man; and second, at the great immeasurable grace and love of God toward
us men, that He thus helps us from the devil, sin, death and damnation?
We will not be able to grasp it with our reason, nor will we be able to
fathom it with our heart. It is too high. We may be astonished; we will
not get any higher in this life. Now this child is not only wonderful
because of his person, as reported now, but also because of all his
works, which he does with us humans.

(21) Among these marvelous works, the first is that he is called
"Counselor," who shall and will help us, not in matters pertaining to
the body and the temporal, but in eternal matters, against sin, against
death, against the wrath of God, and against all calamities. But how
does he counsel? Very miraculously, as we heard above about the battle
of Gideoni. He does nothing more than give his word, which is the
trumpet, and tells us to hold fast to it, to believe and confess; this
is the light that shines for us through the darkness of sin, the wrath
of God, and death. For thus saith Christ, I am the way, the truth, and
the life;

1050 **L. 8, 259-261. Am heiligen Christtage. W. XIII, 2380-2383.** 1051

"Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world"; "He that believeth on
me shall never see death"; "This is life eternal, that they may know
thee, who alone art the true God, and whom thou hast sent, Jesus
Christ"; "Go ye, preach repentance and remission of sins in my name";
"Go ye, teach, and baptize all nations: he that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved" 2c.; and who can tell all such sayings? This
then is the counsel which Christ gives, that we may be delivered from
sins and death, if we accept his word and the holy sacraments with right
faith.

22 The pope and his preachers also take the name and want to counsel
against sin and death. But they do not point people to Christ alone, but
to their own works, to the saints' merit and intercession, to the
sacrifice of the mass, and the like. But it is such counselors who
hinder the poor people from this right counsel. It is Christ alone who
can give right counsel. As John says: "No one has ever seen God; the
only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared it
to us.

Now Christ is not only called counsel, but also "power," for we men
can also mean one another faithfully and counsel well, but such counsel
does not always proceed and work out. Such care is not needed here with
this Counselor, the infant Jesus; for he has the power and the ability
with him, so that whoever follows his counsel must succeed, and the
devil and the gates of hell shall not be able to do anything against it.
The devil and the gates of hell shall not be able to oppose it. But how
he counsels and how we find counsel with him is reported above: that he
gives us his word. This, as Paul calls it, is a divine power, by which
all who believe in it are saved.

(24) Where this child gets such strength from, the third name
indicates that he is also called "hero," that is, a strong man who has
proven his strength by action. Because no hero is called, he has proved
it before with the fist, that he is manly, bold and strong. With this
name, the Holy Spirit looks at the word that was said to Adam in
paradise, how the seed of the woman is the

Serpent should crush the head. For this was the work of our Lord Christ
soon after Adam's fall, that he lay down against the devil for ever,
protected his faithful, and repulsed the enemy; until at last he also
overcame and slew him in the flesh and in his body, since the evil enemy
tried himself to the utmost and according to his best ability on the Son
of God, but accomplished nothing. For since he had already strangled him
on the cross, Christ rose again from the dead on the third day and, as
the eternal God and true man, reigns over the devil and everything. The
prophet sees such a victory, which the Son of God received against the
devil for and for, that he calls him a hero. Just as the Lord, Luke
11:21, 22, preaches about himself and his victory over the devil, when
he says: "When a strong man keeps his palace, his own remains in peace;
but when a stronger man comes upon him and overcomes him, he takes away
his armor, on which he relied, and divides the spoil."

(25) Therefore he calls this child a hero, because he has beaten the
evil enemy so often and so thickly, and has kept the field against him.
And in such distress we should seek help nowhere else but from this
hero. For although Adam, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and David were
excellent great saints, there was not one of them who could have taken
on such an enemy on his own and won something from him; just as we can
see that death has finally destroyed and subdued them all. What do the
wicked people, the papists, show themselves, that in such a fight
against the devil they point people to their own works and to the dead
saints? Why do they not point them here, to this child, who alone is the
right counsel, whom they cannot overthrow? because he has always been
victorious against the devil, even when the devil strangled him; whereas
no such great and highly-graced saint has ever come to earth whom this
enemy has not often felled and overpowered. But where they existed and
were

*) What does 2c. D. Red.

1052 **2.3, 261-263.** On the holy day of Christ. **W. xm, 2383-2386.**
1053

In such a case, they alone enjoyed the help of this infant.

(26) But listen further, you do not yet know this child, for there are
two other special names behind it, which you must also learn. It is
called Pater aeternitatis, "Eternal Father. How does it come to this
name, since otherwise his name is called: Eternal Son of the Eternal
Father? But just as you must interpret the other names as referring only
to this Son of God's office and work, which he performs for us, so you
must do the same here. He is eternally born of God, the eternal Father;
therefore no other name is due to Him in relation to the Father, except
that He is called Son; but He wants to be called and known as our
eternal Father. This is his right name towards us, which comforts us in
the highest temptation we can have.

(27) For this is the special trial and sorrow of Christians, that they
may see how easy it is for the devil to overthrow us. As the examples of
great saints are before our eyes, who fell so miserably into error and
trouble, and died in it, who before were such fine people. Therefore,
Christians are increasingly afraid and think: "Who knows what
misfortune lies ahead of you? Who knows whether you will always remain
steadfast and not let the word out of your eyes and heart, so that you
will be condemned for eternity? Against such thoughts this name
comforts, that the child Jesus will not take care of us for one, two,
ten, twenty years; but what was promised to us in baptism, when God
adopted us as children, through Christ, that shall remain firm and
certain for eternity. This child wants to be our father forever, that
is, to protect, save and give us what we need forever. That there should
be no lack of him at all, if only we remain pious children, and do not
run away from such a father of grace, like the disobedient children, who
do not want to tolerate their parents' punishment, and rather run away
to a foreign country, because they have to suffer one day more
misfortune, than with father and mother a whole year. Such wicked,
disobedient children are justified. Therefore we should beware of

and not run from this Father who wants to carry us and keep us for
eternity.

(28) Who then could believe these things assuredly, and keep them in
his heart: what thinkest thou that such men should care or be troubled
in the wide world? For let misfortune come, as it will, so says such a
believing heart: Let it go, it is not eternal; but on the other hand I
have an eternal Father, who will protect me against sin, the devil and
death for eternity. This shall comfort me more than temporal misfortune
can frighten me. So a heart is satisfied over such things.

29 Therefore this child is called with honor by the sixth name, "Prince
of Peace," that is, such a lord, who is in his kingdom, must have a
peaceful heart, even in the midst of adversity. For what would grieve
him? Sin cannot condemn him; for he knows Christ has borne it. The devil
cannot frighten him, for he knows that Christ has smitten him. Nor can
death hold him, for he knows, because he has an eternal Father in the
Lord Christ, that another and eternal life shall follow the short
physical death. This can be a child that we should rejoice in from the
bottom of our hearts that the gracious God has granted and given it to
us. Therefore, the prophet interprets all these names himself, why he
named this child in this way, and says:

**That his dominion may be great, and that there be no end of peace,
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom; that he may establish
and strengthen it with judgment and righteousness from henceforth even
for ever.**

(30) These six names testify what kind of ministry the child will have
on earth and what he will accomplish with us. Therefore, he says, his
dominion will be great: not only that many people will find their way to
such a child and desire his grace, but also that it will be an eternal
kingdom, where peace and all good things will never fail. Such things
are brought about here on earth by the Word and by faith; but in the
life to come we shall feel them, and have them in our hands, as the Word
now tells us, and as we believe. As the pro-

**1054 L. 3, 263-265. Am heiligen Christtage. W. XIII, 2386-2389. 1055**

The prophet finely indicates this by saying, "The child will establish
his kingdom with judgment and strengthen it with righteousness. For both
of these things must take place here on earth and be established by word
and faith; as Christ says in the last verse of Luke 46, 47: Christ must
suffer and rise from the dead on the third day, and preach repentance
and forgiveness of sins in his name among all nations.

For the word "judgment" means nothing else than the preaching of
repentance, that through the gospel the Holy Spirit punishes the world
for sin, because it does not believe in the Son of God; therefore
threatens eternal death to all who remain in such unbelief. Such
preaching makes stupid, frightened hearts that recognize their sin and
fear God's wrath; that is the right judgment. Then it follows that one
does not continue in sin, but repents and mourns over it, and thinks how
one may henceforth become more pious. Through this the Lord Christ
establishes his kingdom. For through preaching the way is prepared for
him, so that hearts may rejoice, hunger and thirst after righteousness,
and accept with all their heart the joyful message of this child.

32 Where therefore this judgment is, it shall be followed, because the
kingdom of Christ is begun, that it may henceforth be strengthened with
righteousness. For to recognize sin and to be sorry for it, that will
not make it; first of all the first throw is done and, as they say, the
first stone is laid. But that is what makes it and completes the
construction that has been started, that righteousness is done for us,
which is, as Paul himself puts it, Romans 4, forgiveness of sins. For
here on earth we will otherwise come to no righteousness. Although the
Christians begin and practice in the

right obedience to God, it is still a weak and impure obedience, since a
great deal of disobedience and sin is involved. But that we have
forgiveness of sins through Christ, that is how we are preserved.

(33) Now where there is such righteousness as believing in the
forgiveness of sins through Christ, let it follow, as we have heard
above in the history of Gideon, that we should hasten after the beaten
and conquered enemies, and plunder them and strangle them completely.
That is, we are to keep ourselves in holy living, not letting sin and
the devil drive and lead us, as the world lets itself be driven and led;
but know that both sin and the devil have been slain on the head by
Christ and put to flight, yes (as John 16 says) that the devil has
already been judged. Therefore we are to oppose such an enemy with
strong courage, not yielding to him nor following him; in this way God
will dwell with us with His Spirit, and help us to defeat the enemy
completely. So that these two parts, judgment and righteousness, should
always run together. Faith should not doubt the forgiveness of sins; and
yet judgment or repentance should always go along with it, so that we
keep ourselves in the fear of God, practice God's commandments, and
kill sin from day to day, and hasten after it; as Gideon's people
hastened after the enemies who were slain by the Lord, and slew them
completely at the Jordan.

(34) So this kingdom of the child is prepared by judgment, and
strengthened by righteousness, "from henceforth even unto ages of ages.
For for the sake of this temporal life it was not begun; we are
therefore to pass from the temporal to the eternal. May this be granted
to us all by our dear Lord Jesus, the wonderful Child, our Counsel,
Strength, Hero, Eternal Father and Prince of Peace, Amen.

[**1056 8.3. 265.266.** On the day of Stephani. **W. XIII, 2456-2460.
1057**]{.underline}

**On the day of Stephani.**

**Apost. 6. and 7, 1. 2. 44-59.**

In the days when the disciples were many, a murmur arose among the
Greeks against the Eberians, because their widows were overlooked in the
daily giving of hands. Then the twelve called together the multitude of
the disciples, and said: It is not fit that we should omit the word of
God, and serve at meat. Therefore, brethren, look among you for seven
men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we may
appoint for this need. But we will continue in prayer, and in the
ministry of the word. And the speech pleased all the multitude, and they
chose Stephanum, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and
Philippum, and Prochorum, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenam, and
Nicolaum, the fellow-Jew of Antioch. These they set before the apostles,
and prayed, and laid their hands upon them. And the word of God
increased, and the number of the disciples became very great in
Jerusalem. Many priests also became obedient to the faith. Stephen, full
of faith and power, performed miracles and great signs among the people.
Then arose certain of the school called the Libertines, and the Cyrenes,
and the Alexanderes, and those that were of Cilicia and Asia, and
consulted with Stephen. And they could not withstand the wisdom and the
spirit from which he spoke. Then they judged some men who said: We have
heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God. And
they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came
near, and took him, and brought him before the council, and set up false
witnesses, saying: This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words
against this holy place, and against the law. For we have heard him say,
Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and change the customs which
Moses gave us. And they looked upon him, all they that sat in the
council, and saw his face as the face of an angel. Then said the high
priest, Is it so? And he said, Brethren and fathers, hear me. Our
fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, as he had
commanded them, when he spake unto Moses, that he should make it after
the pattern which he had seen: which our fathers also received, and
brought it with Joshua into the land which the heathen possessed, whom
God cast out from before the face of our fathers unto the days of David.
He found favor with God and asked that he might find a tabernacle for
the God of Jacob. Solomon built him a house. But the Most High dwelleth
not in temples made with hands, as the prophet saith, The heavens are my
throne, and the earth my footstool: what house will ye build me, saith
the LORD, or what is the place of my rest? Has not my hand made all
these things? Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye
always resist the Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye. What
prophet did not your fathers persecute and kill, who before proclaimed
the future of this righteous one, whom you have now become traitors and
murderers? You received the law through the business of angels, and did
not keep it. When they heard this, their hearts were sore, and they
gnashed their teeth at him. But when he was full of the Holy Spirit, he
looked up to heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the
right hand of God, and said, Behold, I see heaven open, and the Son of
man standing at the right hand of God. And they cried with a loud voice,
and stopped their ears, and rushed in upon him with one accord, and
thrust him out of the city, and stoned him. And the witnesses laid aside
their garments at the feet of a young man whose name was Saul. And they
stoned Stephen, who cried out, saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, saying, Lord, keep not
this sin from them. And when he had heard the

said, he passed away.

This is a very good history, otherwise the evangelist would not have
made so many words of it. But its main purpose is that we should see and
learn in it, first of all, how the Christians or the church

The second is what is their consolation and hope in such persecution,
and wherewith they may be saved from the Lord Christ, their faith and
confession,

**1058 L. 3, 266-268. On the day of Stephani. W. XIII. 2460-2463. 1059**

They have to suffer because of it. Whoever learns this from history can
then really and thoroughly know what the kingdom of our Lord Christ is.
So that this teaching may be the more clearly understood, let us divide
it into three parts, as the evangelist divides the history, and speak
first of the ministry and life of Stephen, then of his persecution, what
he was charged with, and how he answered for it; and finally of his
departure or death.

(2) Of the ministry and life of Stephen, the evangelist indicates two
things: the first, that he was a minister of alms; the second, that he
was full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and did wonders and great
signs among the people, and provoked the Jews against him, so that they
assailed him and brought false witness against him. For when the gospel
was first preached in Jerusalem, and the number of the faithful
increased day by day, Lucas says in the fourth chapter, v. 32, that all
the faithful were of one heart and one soul, and that none of their
goods were said to be theirs, but had all things in common. But those
who had fields and houses sold them and laid the money from the sold
goods at the apostles' feet; they then gave each one what he needed.
When the crowd became too large and too many in number, this disorder
occurred so that some were forgotten in the spending, and the apostles
became so busy with almsgiving that they could not wait to preach.
Therefore, because preaching was more important, they waited for it, and
appointed seven godly, righteous men to undertake this ministry, and to
provide food and drink for the congregation. Among them, Stephen was the
most distinguished, who allowed himself to be used for such service, so
that the ministry of preaching would be promoted the more and the
Christians would be served the more nobly.

The Anabaptists have set such an example very high, and do not want to
consider those Christians who keep something of their own and do not
have everything in common. But first of all, the Scriptures themselves
prove that from this

No one should make an example, nor force people to do so. For at that
time, when such a thing was going on, Peter the apostle said to Anania:
"You might well have kept your field while you had it, and since it was
sold, it was in your power. It is clearly testified that no one was
forced to sell and throw in such things. But whoever did it for himself,
unbidden and in the opinion that he wanted to give it to poor people in
the present time of persecution, which they had to wait for every day,
no one has opposed him. For it is a good work, and may well have been so
in those days, when the disciples were few, and had all received the
Holy Ghost, that no man might fear any unfaithfulness. Now it is all
mixed up, and most of them are so clever that they would rather get
their food from other people than work themselves and create something
honest with their hands. Such a community would cause all kinds of
misfortune among such unruly, naughty people, whom no one can get to
work and stop from begging.

(4) And this is the cause that such an order had to fall also at
Jerusalem, because the multitude had become too great. For if they had
wanted to maintain it, the household could not have existed. Cause,
where there is a wife and children, there must not be a community, but a
property with the goods; otherwise all kinds of trouble would take
place. That is why the apostles did not establish such a community
anywhere else. For at Corinth there were also Christians, but there,
when they came together, it was seen that each one had his own table and
food. Paul does not punish them for this, but he reproves them for not
eating at home and putting the poor to shame. And what need is there of
special exhortation against the rich, that they should gladly give and
help, if such fellowship were certainly commanded and arranged?

5 Therefore it is a great error on the part of the Anabaptists to make
such fellowship necessary and to command that everyone must keep it.
After all, the gospel is not a

**1060 L. 3, 268-270. On the day of Stephani. W. XIII, 2463-2465. 1061**

Such a doctrine that changed something in the regiment or household. It
leaves both states, and teaches how we may come to forgiveness of sins
and eternal life, and does not want to disrupt either household or
regiment by such teaching. But now it is obvious that the disruption of
such estates would have to follow, where one wanted to make everything
common. The Christians, however, have a different community; they should
be allowed to remain in it and no more should be imposed on them. John
preaches from Luke 3:11: "He that hath two coats, let him give to him
that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise"; and
Christ: "Give to every one that asketh thee. For to this a Christian is
bound, that he should help where he can; but that Paul's rule may
remain, 2 Cor. 8:13, that not others have rest, nor we affliction, but
our abundance should minister to another's need; that is, where there
is real need, and not sloth, or industrious stewardship, and thou canst
help without harm in such need, thou art bound to help. For some would
gladly give, but have not; some could well feed themselves, but either
do not want to work, or let too much rise. You should not help such
people; you only make them worse and get them used to begging.

Therefore, it is not necessary to make such an example of the first
church and to force the Christians to such a community. Let it remain
that one Christian should help another where he can without harm. For
our Lord God does not want you to help a beggar and make beggars of
yourself and your children. It is said, as Paul says: Non ut aliis
remissio sit, vobis autem molestia, ("Not that others have rest, but
you have tribulation.").

(7) In this case, this history is useful and good, so that one may
consider the examples of the apostles and learn from them what kind of
men are to be used for such a ministry, since St. Stephen allowed
himself to be used. For thus the apostles say: "Look among you for
seven men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom. To "have
a good report" means that one has honestly and unambiguously

The first thing I want to say is that I think that the people of the
world have not been shamefully stingy, as the world is now wont to do,
or have been abundant with money and goods. For such people are not at
all fit to handle other people's money and to preside over others.
Avarice seduces them, so that they gather to themselves what they can
with little appearance. But if they are accustomed to splendor and a
good life and have other people's property in their administration,
they will see how it is done. Therefore, it is necessary to pay
attention first to the rumor of how such people have behaved before in
their own actions.

After that, the Holy Spirit also belongs to it. For otherwise, where one
does not know how to keep and rule according to God's word, money could
make peelers, even if they had been pious and honorable before. For
"having the Holy Spirit" is nothing else than being a Christian,
loving God's word, hearing it gladly, living according to it, and
keeping a good conscience. All these things are the work and fruit of
the Holy Spirit, after which others grow, as Galatians 5 says.

(9) Now both these things may be, that a man may have a good report
and the Holy Ghost, and yet be unfit for such an office; wherefore they
say, Such men also shall be wise, having skill and practice. As you can
see, one is more skilled in housekeeping than the other; he knows how to
manage his business with advantage, so that he buys at the right time
and with advice, which another does at the wrong time and with harm.
Therefore, if such an office is to have practiced heads, it must be done
otherwise with benefit and justice. Lazy, disgruntled, careless, clumsy
people are not suitable for it; they should be let go in one year, since
another, who is wise, could last two or three years.

(10) Now when the apostles have such men, who are upright, godly, and
skilled in such administration, the church comes and sets them before
the apostles; and they, the apostles, pray, and lay hands on them. Now
this is also a very necessary piece. For we learn that human wisdom and
skill cannot do it; it must be God's blessing.

1062 **L. 3, 270-272. On the day of Stephani. W. XIII, 2465-2468.** 1063

be present and give prosperity. We must seek this through prayer;
otherwise it may happen that the most skillful act most unskillfully and
cause the greatest harm.

(11) That the dear apostles apply so much diligence to this office,
pray so earnestly and lay their hands on those elected, all this is an
indication that this administration of the common church goods or alms
is not a bad administration. Otherwise, what need is there of such
diligence and earnestness with such people? It is true that the ministry
of preaching is far higher and more; for through it God does not help
the body with food and drink to this temporal life, but He helps the
soul against sin and eternal death. But after the ministry of preaching,
there is no higher ministry in the church than this administration, that
the church property be handled rightly and honestly, so that the poor
Christians, who cannot create and obtain their own food, may be helped
so that they do not suffer hardship.

That is why the devil is so hostile to such a ministry, and tries all
the estates so hard that they deal very unfaithfully with the church
property and common alms. Great lords keep house with the church goods,
that it would be better; as unfortunately is only too much in the day,
that one should be much more diligent and willing to maintain and
protect church servants and schools, than one does. For our forefathers
gave abundantly for this purpose, and thought to maintain the church
service in this way: but they lacked this, that they knew nothing of the
right church service; as we now know, and yet do not want to let happen
to this what is given and ordered by others, but want to keep it
ourselves and use it for our own benefit. So citizens and peasants, what
they should give to their parish lords, one sees how it is done so
unfaithfully; everyone would rather still take. Therefore, as the
prophet Malachi threatens, God's anger is so obvious that everyone, the
great lords as well as citizens and peasants, become beggars with such
goods. That would still be to suffer, if it were not for the lamentation
that schools and churches would fall away and the poor people would be
missed out.

This is the fate of the wretched devil, who can see where it will end
up. For this reason it would be necessary that in large principalities
and cities, yes, even in every village, there were many Stephani who
took on such service with seriousness and handled the church goods
rightly; who did not look at their own use and avarice, but at those to
whom such goods belong by right, as there are: First, those who must
serve the church in the word and cannot wait for such service because of
their own doing; and then the poor Christians who cannot provide their
food because of sickness or other need; and third, fine, skilful young
boys who are fit for study and yet have no other help. So the lack of
this is that we do not have people who belong to such administration,
honest, God-fearing and skillful people; otherwise things should be
different.

14 Now this is the first of the lives of St. Stephen, who gave himself
to the service of the church, and provided for the Christians that they
might eat and drink, and keep up the more diligently in word and prayer.
Because of this ministry, he would have remained unchallenged by the
Jews; but Lucas further reports of him that he was full of faith and
power, and that he performed miracles and great signs among the people.

15 Now it is certain that God caused such signs to happen, as Marci says
at the end, to confirm the word with it. Thus the works and signs of St.
Stephen show that he did not keep his faith secret and silent, but
confessed it freely and preached about the Lord Christ Jesus. This is
the reason why the Jews cannot stand him, but take him by force, seize
him and drag him before the authorities.

(16) This is an example for us to learn: if we confess our faith and
honor Christ publicly before men with our confession, the devil will not
fail to stir up some who will trouble you and bring all kinds of
misfortune upon your neck. Therefore, you may prepare and send yourself
on such a journey; it will not be otherwise. For we

1064 **2.3, 272-274. On the day of Stephani. W. XIII, 2468-2471.** 1065

Christians should not enjoy our faith and confession in order to become
great lords and rich with it; but life and limb, and what we have, we
must put in danger, and take great pains that the world will not leave
us unchallenged. As can be seen here in Stephano, it grieves him that
the Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians and others blaspheme Christ and
do not want to be the Son of God; for this reason, he settles with them
and disputes against them. He thinks that he is a Christian and must
save Christ's honor. And he does this in such a way that they cannot
resist his wisdom and the spirit from which he speaks.

017 But how is he over it? They, the Jews, judged some men who said: We
have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God.
And moved the people, and the elders, and the scribes, which came and
took him, and brought him before the council. This is what St. Stephen
got from the fact that he did not like it when people spoke evil of
Christ and thought that it was not his place to do otherwise, that he
had to save the honor of his Lord. Today, praise God, it is the same for
us with the Pope and his followers; we may thank God for this, for it is
not an evil sign.

18 Now the text reports with particularity that they have set up false
witnesses. For this is what happens everywhere: Christians cannot be
attacked with the truth, therefore they must be attacked with lies. They
blamed St. Stephen for speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God.
But he will by no means have confessed this to them. For what he thought
of Moses and believed of God, his answer testifies sufficiently. That is
why he brings such a charge against his adversaries, accusing them that
they and their fathers followed Moses as little as they followed God.
That one can finely sense from history that the Jews dealt with Stephen
as the papists deal with us today.

19 When we preach: Christ has not instituted the reverend Sacrament, His
testament, to be annulled, transferred, imprisoned, or destroyed (as the
papists are wont to do).

but to eat and drink it, and to proclaim the death of the Lord, that is,
to take comfort in his suffering and payment for our sin: We think
nothing of the Sacrament and dishonor it. When we preach: For sin only
the one sacrifice of our dear Lord Christ serves; with works the least
sin cannot be put away; they cry out: We forbid good works, and give
every man cause to do whatsoever he lusteth after. For if by good works
one cannot earn heaven, by evil works one cannot earn hell 2c. There all
the papists are found as false witnesses, who publicly proclaim such
things of us, but without truth.

(20) It was the same with St. Stephen. He preached the doctrine of the
forgiveness of sins, as we preach it, praising God, and said: With the
law it was lost that one wanted to go to heaven with it; God had not
given it for that reason; whoever desires to go to heaven must have
something higher and more than Moses and all holy works. They
interpreted this sermon as if he blasphemed Moses. Thus he bore witness
to Christ that he was the Son of God and performed miraculous signs in
his name; they called this blasphemy. They especially did not like that
he kept so little of the temple and the old service, and threatened that
if they did not leave Moses and accept Christ, then the temple, the
service, the government and everything would fail. They took this not
only as blasphemous words, but also as a rebellious sermon, and attacked
him fiercely for it.

(21) Therefore, we should not complain about the unjust accusation of
this day. The devil can do nothing else but lie, and pervert what is
right and well said, and interpret it in the worst way. The papists have
such an art from him; therefore they blaspheme the holy gospel and speak
the worst of the righteous preachers. One must be accustomed to this,
and wait until God comes and knows whether they are true or lying.
However, we must be content that we have the testimony of our conscience
with dear Stephen.

1066 **L. 3.274-277. On the day of Stephani. W. XIII, 2471-2473.** 1067

that we do not like to blaspheme God or to teach and seduce people
unjustly.

22) This conscience will be comforted by the fact that history reports
that Stephen looks up to heaven and sees the glory of God, and Jesus,
His Son, at the right hand of God. He, the holy Stephen, was also a man
who had flesh and blood, and if it had been without the Holy Spirit, he
would have allowed himself to be moved so that the chief priests,
Pharisees and all the people stood there and considered his teaching of
Christ to be heresy and condemned it. For such a challenge cannot be
overcome without the Holy Spirit. But just as the Jews were most
vehemently opposed to it, and Stephen was now to suffer death for this
confession and teaching, he saw Christ standing at the right hand of
God, whom the chief priests, Pharisees and all the people thought was
sitting in hell.

Stephen saw this sight with his own eyes. We do not see it bodily, but
in the Word we see it too, praise God. Therefore we hold to such
teaching, and let the papists rave, shout, lie, catch, strangle, as they
will; that shall be of little concern to us. As Christ promises: His
Spirit shall be with us, comforting and strengthening us, so that we may
have all joy and comfort in Him, and at the same time bring our cause to
light in such a way that one must feel that it is not we, but the Spirit
of God who speaks, Marci on the 13th verse. As we hear about Stephano
here, that he does such an excellent responsibility on the false
accusation of the Jews, and proves that the temple in Jerusalem is not
God's house, that he should be bound to it and that it should not be
destroyed because of the sin of the Jews. For there he proves how God
was among his people, and yet had no such house; for it was Solomon the
son of David who first built it. Item, when such a house already stood
and was held in its dignities, at the time of Ezechiä,. then God said by
the mouth Jesaiä: "The sky is my chair, and the earth my footstool;
what will you then build me for a house?"

24. but because the Jews were so stubborn on their

If they persist in their opinion, and want to be bad, God is bound to
this house: if Stephen honestly scolds them about it, they are called
stiff-necked people, who have uncircumcised hearts and ears, who resist
the Holy Spirit, and become traitors and murderers of the holy prophets,
who have never kept God's commandment. Stephen would not have spoken
such things for a long time if the Holy Spirit had not been in him. For
we learn that he who is in such distress as Stephen thinks that he
speaks what people like to hear and makes them friends again. Thus
Stephen speaks to his adversaries in such a way that it goes through
their hearts and they clench their teeth. This is done by the Holy
Spirit in Stephen, who drives him to forget his life and limb, and to
see only that he saves the glory of his Lord Christ and shows sinners
their sin.

But how does Christ let the holy man enjoy such honest service? This is
the third and last part of this sermon, and it can be seen as if St.
Stephen was rewarded, as it is said that the executioner rewards his
servant. For so it is written in the history:

**They shouted loudly and stopped their ears, and unanimously rushed in
to him, pushed him out of the city, and stoned him.**

26 Well, dear Stephane, there you lie. So the world is worthy of all
servants and faithful servants of our dear Lord Jesus Christ. In the
eyes of the world it has a bad reputation. For if he had been a
murderer, a thief, an adulterer, it would have been impossible to go
along with him worse, and yet everyone would have had more compassion
for him. But because he confessed Christ and wanted to bring others to
such faith, he died in disgrace and vice. For everyone considers him a
deceiver and a blasphemer who wanted to destroy Moses' law, worship and
all discipline and respectability. This is the true death of the saints.
Before the world a blasphemous, shameful death; but before God a noble
death, as the Psalm testifies. For first of all, our Head and Lord,
Christ Jesus, the Son of God, is the Son of God.

**1068 . D. 3, 277-279. Am Tage Stephani. W. XIII, 2473-2476. 1069**

himself, thus in all dishonor, like a seducer and rebel, died on the
cross between two murderers.

27 Secondly, let us learn here from Stephano, and hear from him himself,
who suffered such an ignominious death, what he thought of it. For thus
Lucas speaks:

**He cried out and said: Lord JEsu, receive my spirit!**

028 Where is the good man thinking? He lies there on his knees; the
witnesses who confessed against him, and were therefore the first to
throw stones at him, sent themselves to trade and took off their coats;
now that it was time to cover him with stones, the pious man forgets his
body and life and does not say a word about it, as if he wanted to say:
The body is not worth anything better, it belongs under the earth, sin
and sinfulness are enough in it; therefore nothing is in it, even if it
perishes shamefully. In that case, however, it has only become honest
and delicious in that it dies for the sake of the Lord Christ; therefore
I do not want to worry about it any further. But this I pray, O Lord
Jesus Christ, receive my spirit. So Stephen is sure that if the spirit
is helped by Christ, who alone can help him, then the body will not be
in trouble, and will also have to die.

29 Thus, it is perfectly clear that Stephen believes that he will have
eternal life after this life. For for what else should he command his
spirit to Christ? And he believes even more, namely, that if his spirit
is to be helped, neither Moses, nor the law, nor other people with their
works, nor he with his works will be able to do it; only Christ, the Son
of God, must do it. Therefore, have faith and ask him to do it. This
means to know Christ rightly and to believe rightly, and it must be
followed by a strong, easy, good courage, even though it is in the
greatest straits and greatest need.

30 We should learn this art with all diligence and repeat such words to
St. Stephen. For although the Son of God, our dear Lord Christ, stands
by his Christians in all roads, protects them, and gives them

If he wants to help us against the evil enemy and the wicked world, who
at the same time want to damage body and life and the soul, then this is
his special office and work, that in the last hour, when this life here
wants to be over and we have to worry about sin, the devil and death, he
wants to sit with us and prove his help and power to us. For why did he
die? Is it not because of sins? Why did he command us to be baptized? Is
it not true that we should become children of God and be freed from sins
and death through the death of Christ? For this very reason he commanded
the church the keys to forgive sin and to retain sin. Item, he has
instituted the holy, reverend supper for this reason. All such things do
not apply to this temporal life, for there the Christians must have the
disadvantage and the wicked the advantage, that they may have it as they
wish. Christians suffer this gladly, for they know that all the comfort
and treasure they have will only be taken and possessed in the life to
come.

(31) Stephanum forgets that he lets his enemies do with him as they
wish; he does not complain about it at all. That alone he asks Christ to
receive his spirit; he is satisfied with that. For he knows well that if
Christ takes care of the spirit, which was created for salvation, the
body will not remain behind. We should also learn this and pray
earnestly, as all the saints have always prayed and Christ is very
willing to do. For this is his office, and it is called kicking the
serpent right on the head and pressing him down. So the thief on the
cross also asks: "Lord, remember me when you come into your kingdom. As
if he wanted to say: "I will gladly forgive myself for the help here on
earth; let the body get what it deserves, that does not concern me:
only, dear Lord, help me in another life, which is eternal.

32 If then Stephen (as we believe and know to be true) asked aright, and
was heard: what opinion may he have of them that believe his faith?

1070 **2.3, 279.280.** On the day of Stephani. **W. xm, 2476-2479.**
1071

but persecute and strangle him for the sake of his faith? This is to be
well calculated. For if Christ alone can and will help the spirit for
eternity, then body and spirit must be lost together where one neither
has nor wants Christ. The holy martyr Stephen also sees this. Therefore,
because he does not doubt how he prays that Christ will receive his
spirit, he begins to pray for the poor people who stoned him and were
false witnesses, saying: "Lord, do not keep this sin from them.

(33) Both come together, as both must be together, a right faith and a
right love. For a Christian should take care of his neighbor, not only
with temporal help, but rather with spiritual help; for such help is
also more important. Therefore, the holy man is concerned that the devil
has so captured and deeply blinded the hearts of poor sinners that they
still despise and persecute their salvation, since they should rather
lose life and limb and everything.

34 We should also learn this from St. Stephen, and not be angry, as the
world is wont to do, when other people do us wrong. It hurts, but think
like Stephen: they can do no more harm than to your goods, and where
they do it most grievously, to your body. On the other hand, the more
they harm you in body and goods, the more they harm themselves in soul.
What will you do with such poor, miserable people? Will you be angry
with them and harm them again? You cannot harm them so much, they have
already harmed themselves a thousand times more; and you will spoil your
cause against our Lord God by such impatience and vengefulness, when you
patiently suffer God to take up your cause.

and will abundantly repay and pay you for such harm. Therefore, nothing
is better than to drop all anger and repugnance with Stephen, and to
take heed of the poor people's highest harm that they are doing to
their souls, and to pray to God for them that he will forgive them,
accept them into grace, and graciously protect them from death and
damnation, where the devil has thrown them in.

(35) In addition to this teaching, we also have the consolation that
we should not doubt that God will hear such prayer and be merciful to
sinners. Otherwise, Stephen would not have asked, where such a request
was against the Lord Christ. But because he also prays for such great
sinners who do not want to see or hear the Son of God and persecute and
kill His saints over it, this is an indication that no sinner should
despair, but hope for grace and forgiveness of his sins through Christ.
As Lucas especially reports that Paul was pleased with the death of
Stephen, and at that time kept the clothes of the witnesses, because
they stoned Stephen. But grace was undoubtedly granted him through this
prayer, so that Christ might show all patience in him as an example to
those who would believe in him for eternal life.

So your love has the history of St. Stephen, what his deeds were, how he
confessed Christ and for the sake of this confession finally gave up his
life, who comforted him with His Spirit and filled him with the hope of
eternal life, so that he gladly gave up his temporal life for the sake
of Christ. May our dear God in heaven, for Christ's sake, through His
Holy Spirit, also enlighten our hearts in this way and make us blessed,
amen.

[**1072** L. 3, 281.282. Of the innocent little children. W. xm,
2478-2481. **1073**]{.underline}

**From the innocent little children.**

**Matth. 2, 13-23.**

And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his
mother, and flee into Egypt, and tarry there until I tell thee: for it
is come to pass, that Herod seeketh the young child to carry him away.
And he arose, and took the young child and his mother by night, and fled
into Egypt. He remained there until after Herod's death, so that it
might be fulfilled which the Lord had spoken through the prophet,
saying, "Out of Egypt I called my son. When Herod saw that he had been
deceived by the wise men, he was very angry, and sent and slew all the
children that were in Bethlehem, and all their borders, from two years
old and under, according to the time which he had diligently learned of
the wise men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken of Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, Crying was heard in the mountains, and much
lamentation, and weeping, and wailing: Rachel wept over her children,
and would not be comforted: for they were consumed. And when Herod was
dead, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto Joseph in a dream in
the land of Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his
mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought
the young child's life. And he arose, and took the young child and his
mother, and came into the land of Israel. When he heard that Archelaus
was king in the land of Israel instead of his father Herodis, he was
afraid to go there. And in a dream he received commandment from God, and
went into the east of Galilee, and came and dwelt in the city that is
called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophets: He shall be called Nazarene.

This is a good story that should not be left out of the church, both for
the sake of doctrine and then for the comfort it gives us Christians.
The teaching is that we see how the devil and the world are hostile to
the child Jesus and his kingdom, and how they fiercely fight to
suppress, dampen or even destroy it. The consolation is that the world
does not succeed in such attempts; it must let Christ, his word and
church remain; and although some Christians must lose over it, it must
be done without their harm, yes, even with their highest benefit; but
the tyrants must go to the ground over it, there it must not help
anything.

(2) That Herod had the innocent infants killed at Bethlehem and all
along its borders was a great desolation. But let no one doubt: Herod
will have made a fine semblance of the matter, so that it was not
considered tyranny, but a necessary punishment. For the world is
especially capable of such art when it is against the Christians.

as all histories testify, and Christ himself says of his disciples:
"Whoever kills you will think he is doing God a service. When Herod's
son, Herod Antipas, killed St. John the Baptist, he still brought praise
and the name of being a true prince who did not like to swear a false
oath. Since the Jews brought Christ to the cross, since they stoned
Stephanum, they both, master and servant, had to bear the name, they
would have been rebellious and would have blasphemed God. There are
plenty of examples in the Scriptures. Therefore, no one doubts that the
same thing happened to the innocent children, that Herod and all those
who advised and helped him made such a pretense of it that everyone
thought they had done a good deed and a necessary good work. But how
could this have happened? Thus:

3 Matthew writes how the wise men came to Jerusalem and asked about the
newborn child, and about the

1074 **L. 3.282-284. Of the innocent little children. W. XIII,
2481-2484.** 1075

He said that the Jews had been told about the miraculous revelation of
the star and were not worried that such a message and guests should
frighten the Jews; Herod, as soon as he heard this, was terrified, and
the whole of Jerusalem with him. Such fright is now the real main cause
of this murderous attack and work, that so many poor innocent children
are strangled. For Herod thinks: "If you are born king of the Jews,
where will you stay, you who are a foreign king and to whom the Jews are
hostile? For this Herod's father was an Edomite, and Caesar Julio made
him a captain over the Jews; but when he died, this Herod, Antipater's
son, became the first king in the Jewish land, by the help of Augustus,
the Roman emperor. Therefore Herod was worried that if another king was
accepted, he would not have room for long, and he thought how he could
avoid the disaster.

4 Without a doubt, the chief priests helped him to do this. For it says
here that the whole of Jerusalem was also greatly shocked by this
message. Why was this? Because the Romans were lords over the land, and
this hurt the Jews very much, and they were always trying to get rid of
these lords. But the Romans were too powerful for them, and they beat
them with all their might. So the chief priests and rulers of the people
thought, "If the cry of the newborn king arises and he brings about an
addition, as will soon happen, then we will have the Romans on our necks
again; they will not suffer. Therefore, to prevent such unrest and
bloodshed, strangle, dear King Herod, wherever you have a suspicion that
this child is to be struck. Otherwise, the country and its people will
not escape without harm or destruction.

So the dear child Jesus must be still in the cradle with the world in
the suspicion that he will take his kingdom from Herod and bring war and
bloodshed, rebellion and all misfortune to the Jews in the country. To
forestall this, they take counsel and confidently murder; and poor
Bethlehem must be used, because the prophet Micah says,

Christ shall be born there. Because Bethlehem was David's city, it is
easy to believe that what was left of the same tribe stayed there and
had its dwelling place there. Therefore Herod took the whole border in
front of him, so that he would not miss the Child, and he made a good
show of his intentions: it was necessary to prevent riots and bloodshed;
it was better to grieve several hundred fathers and mothers than to lead
the whole country into trouble.

(6) To such an appearance they will have led especially the wise
men's future. For they were such guests as were not accustomed to
Jerusalem. Because they had traveled such a long way to this child, and
had promised Herod to come to him again and report on the newborn child,
and the angel had told them to go home by another way, Herod, the chief
priests and the rulers would have interpreted this secret departure as
such: There is a riot going on, the common man will soon be moved, when
many of such guests come into the country, and the matter will become
loud. In order to prevent such trouble, and so that the common man could
see that the authorities did not like it, they used such seriousness and
had the children strangled.

Therefore, the Christian Church sings finely: Hostis Herodes impie,
Christum venire quid times? Non arripit mortalia regna, qui dat
coelestia: You godless tyrant, why are you afraid that Christ is coming?
He gives the eternal kingdom, after the temporal he asks nothing 2c. But
Herod will not be persuaded: the devil has held up a painted glass
before his eyes and those of the chief priests, with whose help and
counsel he has undoubtedly brought this about, so that they see this
child for what it is not, and what it is they do not want to see.
Therefore, they draw their swords and become horrible, shameful
murderers, even if they color the matter in such a way that everyone
must agree with them and believe that what they do is all well done, and
the country and its people should enjoy it.

8) As it was for the child Jesus in those days, so it is still today.

**1076 L.3, 284-286. Of the innocent little children. W. xm. 2484-2486.
1077**

the dear Gospel. The pope, the bishop, the bullfighters, the priests,
the monks, all of them are in Herodi's company, they agree and approve
of his attack. For they consider the gospel to be such a doctrine that
causes disunity, turmoil and all kinds of misfortune in the world, and
they think that if they accepted such a doctrine and let their country
come under their people, it would be the first thing that they would
have to let go of their glory, income and good gentle life, one with the
other. Just as Herod thinks: If the new king should come in, it is over
with you. That is why they go to murder, strangle, execute, drown, burn,
and chase away the Christians wherever they can, hoping to preserve
their power, wealth, honor, and other things.

(9) If the good gospel is not preached for this reason, it does not
teach how to take away what is yours. But this it teaches, that everyone
may know God, come to the forgiveness of sins, and become more devout;
so that everyone may keep the hope of eternal life, which Christ has
purchased for us, and not deprive himself of it. This is the ministry of
the Holy Gospel and its own work, that God may be honored and men may be
saved. But for this, the pope and bishops think, they do not need the
gospel; for most of the people do not believe in eternal life. Because
they are concerned that they might have to pay for the Gospel in such a
way that they would have to forfeit their power, splendor and income,
they would rather be advised of such teachings; indeed, they make every
effort to suppress and dampen them, as Herod did. The devil can
masterfully encourage them to such murderous thoughts. For just as Herod
thinks, "What? if it is a matter of one child or two hundred, there is
no more need;" so the papists also think, "If it costs one priest, one
citizen, or two, the matter is already taken care of; so that it seems
mean that they want to suppress and exterminate them without any effort.
But let them try and see where Christ and his gospel remain on one side,
and Herod on the other. Then it will be found that they do not want to
have it, and from the gospel, from a small mere child, such an
immeasurable

The result can be a very heavy load, as they have to go down underneath.

(10) First of all, this history of the Lord Christ and his kingdom
teaches us how the world will regard him and what it will regard him
for, namely, for such a child, if his neck is not cut in time, that will
bring misfortune to the country and its people and cause riots, murder
and bloodshed. In such hard and heavy suspicion the innocent child, and
still today his dear word, must be stuck; therefore God must be allowed
to rule. The infant Jesus himself in the cradle did not have it better;
we will not have it better either. Our only hope, effort, work, and
diligence is that the world may know God, come to Christ, and be saved;
that it may escape the devil, death, and sin. For we preach for no other
reason, as you can see. A cathedral provost in a monastery has more
income than all the ecclesiastics in a large city and almost in a whole
country. This is what we suffer, hunger and sorrow with wife and child,
and we do not preach about becoming great lords and rich. That is what
we are concerned with, that God may be recognized and honored in Christ,
and that poor sinners may be saved. But slowly the world will recognize
us for this. It considers us and Christ to be rebels and interprets our
teachings as causing all misfortune. One must learn to suffer and be
accustomed to this. That is enough of the teaching; now let us also look
at the consolation.

(11) Herod and the chief priests mean the Lord Christ very badly, but
the devil who drives them means even worse, because he knows what kind
of fare is in store for him. But how do they fare? In one case, their
attack is going on; for the poor little children cannot defend
themselves, they have to stand by, and their innocence before the world
does not help them. But in the other case, their plot is completely
lacking. For before they start to murder, the child Jesus is already out
of the country, in his custody, since Herod cannot do anything to him.

This is very comforting for us Christians in two ways. For here we see,
although

1078 **L. 3, 286-288. of the innocent children. W. XIII, 2486-2489.**
1079

God lets his church suffer and acts as if he does not ask about her: we
must nevertheless confess that he keeps her well and faithfully and
protects her from harm. For since Joseph and Mary would otherwise have
stayed longer in Bethlehem with the child, the angel came and warned
them that they should leave and stay in Egypt for a while. God had made
it so beforehand through the wise men that they should travel such a
long way to the child and give him provisions for such a journey; as
Matthew says: "They offered him gold, frankincense and myrrh. This will
not have been a small gift, but a good treasure, so that the poor people
might have helped themselves for a long time and also helped others.
Whether the devil, Herod and the chief priests have evil in mind,
nothing will come of it. The child, because of which they start such
murders, gets away.

(13) So God wants to keep His word and His church for and for,
although the tyrants are evil, that they still have to let the church
and the word remain, yes, that is even more, their raging and
persecuting should give cause for the church to increase and God's word
to be spread further. For there is no doubt about it, Mary and Joseph,
and perhaps others with them, who knew this child because they were in
Egypt, will not have kept silent, but will have preached about the great
miracle that happened with this child and brought others to faith and
salvation. As especially the wise men in their country were certainly
the first preachers of the New Testament and will have diligently taught
their people about this child. To this Herod gives cause, although he
already knows nothing about it, but even thinks to dampen.

14 Even today, when tyrants rage against the gospel, they do no more
than blow into the ashes; the fire becomes greater, and the ashes are
poured into their eyes. This is how their tyranny shall come to them.
When they shed innocent blood, let such Christian blood be like dung
that fertilizes the field, so that it becomes moist and bears well. For
it is through persecution that Christianity grows.

where there is peace and tranquility, the Christians become lazy and
lax.

(15) Yea, sayest thou, nevertheless it is for the poor little children
that they must suffer, though Christ come away. It is true, in the
kingdom of Christ it shall not be otherwise. For just as Herods and high
priests are found throughout the world, so also innocent little children
are found who must endure. But then think: What harm is there to them?
They are called innocent children: not only because they come to such
death through no fault of their own, but also because they are innocent
because of their actions and omissions, and are not yet tainted with
real sin; but because they have been accepted by God and entered into
the covenant of grace that God made with this people through the promise
of Christ and through circumcision, the sign of the same promise. In
such innocence they are strangled; this not only brings them no harm,
but also double benefit and advantage. For if God had not taken them
away in their youth and innocence, they would have fallen into sin. As
it is the nature of this life that we cannot remain in it without sin.
Therefore, death does not only serve these children to remain in
innocence, in God's grace and without an evil conscience; but they are
promoted to a different and better life, where the body rests gently and
the spirit lives blissfully in the bosom of Abraham.

(16) To this is added the advantage, that without it they should have
died; but now it comes to pass with them, that they die not of their
nature, or of sins, but for Christ's sake. Of such death the 116th
Psalm says: Pretiosa mors sanctorum in conspectu ejus, in the sight of
God such death is a noble, comforting thing, God respects it highly and
dearly, and for this reason will make ample restitution. So that for
this reason death becomes a different thing than it otherwise is in
itself. For in itself death is a punishment for sin and comes from the
wrath of God. But here it is not a punishment for sin, but an obedience
that pleases God, and a high and blessed work. For although these
children were born for the sake of such

1080 **L. 3, 288-291. of the innocent children. W. XIII. 2489-2492.**
1081

If they have not been saved because of their death (for their salvation
is this alone, that God has accepted them in grace for the sake of the
promised Seed, and has attached to them His covenant sign that He will
be their God), such death is nevertheless a special honor for them
before God and all His angels and saints, and for this reason they will
receive their special reward in salvation.

17 This is still the opinion of Christians today, when they have to die
for the sake of the gospel. The body is hurt, but there is never any
harm, because God is pleased with such death and wants to reward it
eternally. Therefore, no one should complain, but thank God that he is
promoted to such eternal honor, since otherwise one would have to die
once because of nature and sins. For we have no abiding on earth; but
the longer we live, the more sin, fear and misery are found from day to
day.

18 Therefore, this is a comforting story. The poor little children are
murdered, that seems to be a miserable trade in the eyes of the world;
but let one open his eyes rightly and look at the word, so it is said,
died blessedly and in the best way. For they die for Christ's sake, who
also dies for them, and by his death delivers them from sins and eternal
death, and moreover will reward such their death to them for eternity.
On the other hand, the tyrant does not have to do anything to the infant
Jesus, our head, but let him live and have no thanks for it. So, even
though the Christians have to forfeit (which, as we have heard, happens
without their harm, even with their greatest benefit), the word and the
church are not only not to be annihilated, but also to be strengthened
and increased by it.

Nineteen: But that such wrath of the fierce Herod should come upon the
innocent children: this also is written there for an example, that
Christians, when they suffer, should not suffer as murderers, thieves,
adulterers, or so as to take hold of another's office. For among
Christians such sins shall not go. They are to fear God and beware of
all trouble, and yet they shall

The world shall afflict them, and they shall not be satisfied; that
their suffering may be even as that of the innocent little children
here, who never deserved such death for Herod's sake, and who alone
must repay the infant Jesus in such a case. So shall the suffering of
Christians be. So the consolation is that Christ suffers with us; as he
says to Saul, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Therefore it must
finally follow that either bodily help will resist us, or that the
tyrants will give cause for us to be delivered from this evil world the
sooner and to come to our Lord and Savior Christ.

20 So nothing bad happens to these children, even though they have to
lose their lives. And which is still more, Herod must leave the child
Jesus content. But how is the tyrant in the end? What reward does he get
for strangling the innocent children and persecuting Christ? You may
read about it Josephum in the 18th book Antiquitatum, and in the other
De bello Judaico. He soon puts an end to the poor innocent children, but
God gives him such a terrible disease that no one could stay around him
because of the stench and displeasure. For his privates rotted and
maggots grew in them, and he swelled from the bottom up terribly, so
that he had neither day nor night to rest. He let himself be led to a
wild bath, he let himself be bathed in oil; but there was no help. In
the end he asked for a knife, as if he wanted to peel an apple, which he
stabbed into his own body to end the pain. So it should go to the
tyrants. And is still everything a joke against that, that they must
suffer in eternity and burn in the hell. For such sin, which is called
persecuting God's word and the Christians (where one does not convert
and repent), cannot be paid off here on earth; the hellish fire belongs
to it.

(21) So your love has the history of the innocent little children,
when you learn in them: Whoever wants to be with Christ and remain in
his kingdom must keep himself innocent, and yet await all the
misfortunes of the world. But there is the consolation: The tyrants
should not end up wanting to curb the church and the word; but just like
the

**1082** L.3, 291.292. On the colonel's day or feast of the apparition.
W. XIII, 2492.2504. **1083**

The angel here says to Joseph: "They are dead who sought the life of
the child"; thus the tyrants shall fall to the ground over it. But
God's word shall remain, and shall preserve for eternity all who
believe it with true faith.

and suffer for it. May our dear Lord God and Heavenly Father, through
His Holy Spirit, grant this to all of us for the sake of Christ, His
dear Son, amen, amen.

**On the Colonel's Day or Feast of the Apparition.**

**Matth. 2, 1-12.**

When Jesus was born in Bethlehem, in the land of Judaea, in the days of
Herod the king, behold, the wise men came from the east to Jerusalem,
saying: Where is the newborn King of the Jews? We have seen his star in
the east and have come to worship him. When Herod the king heard this,
he was afraid, and all Jerusalem with him; and he called together all
the chief priests and scribes of the people, and inquired of them where
Christ should be born. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem, in the land
of Judaea. For thus it is written by the prophet: And thou Bethlehem in
the land of Judah art by no means the least of the princes of Judah: for
out of thee shall come to me the duke that shall be lord over my people
Israel. Then Herod called the wise men secretly, and learned diligently
of them when the star appeared, and directed them to Bethlehem, saying,
Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye find him, tell
me again, that I also may come and worship him. When they had heard the
king, they went. And, behold, the star, which they had seen in the east,
went before them, until it came and stood over where the young child
was. When they saw the star, they were greatly rejoiced, and went into
the house, and found the young child with Mary his mother, and fell
down, and worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and gave him gold,
and frankincense, and myrrh. And God commanded them in a dream that they
should not turn again to Herod. And they went again by another way into
their own land.

On the holy day of Christ, your beloved heard from the prophet Isaiah
about the infant Jesus, who he was and what his own ministry was, for
which he came to earth; that he would bear his reign himself, that he
would counsel and save us against sin, death and the devil, that he
would be our eternal Father and Prince of Peace; as he began this
ministry on the eighth day, when he was circumcised. For for his person
he needed circumcision no more than he needed the incarnation; both were
done for our sake. For since God had so decreed with the patriarch
Abraham, and made a covenant with him, that he would be his and his
descendants' God, and commanded circumcision as a sign and signet of
such a covenant, the infant Jesus also had to be circumcised. For we do
not have to follow the Lord JEsum.

to what he is to himself. For he is God, and does not need to make a
covenant with himself; but we must look upon him according to his
office. According to the same he is the greatest sinner. For if other
Jews, each for his own sins, needed to enter into such a covenant and
God to be satisfied with him, the infant Jesus needed it even more,
since he alone had taken upon himself the sins of the whole world. In
such a hideous and unpleasant garment, the infant Jesus came before God
on the eighth day, and requested the sign of the covenant, the
circumcision, so that God would take him into his covenant of grace.
There we see that God does not throw him away because of this hideous
garment. He accepts him and attaches his covenant sign to him, so that
we may learn that God will forgive our sins.

1084 **D. 3, 292-294. on the colonel's day or feast of the apparition.
W. XIII, 2508-2510.** 1085

He wants to be satisfied with us, because he is satisfied with the
infant Jesus, who put on all our sins like a garment and wore them
before God. Your love has heard these things from the Child Jesus during
these holidays.

But on today's feast we hear about the discipleship of this child and
how we should behave towards him, since we enjoy him so highly that we
should be free from sins and have a gracious God. Lucas in his history
indicates how the angel was the first preacher who made this child known
to the shepherds in the field. These were good, bad people who had no
special office or name, like King Herod, the chief priests, Levites and
scribes. When these shepherds heard such a message, they did not delay,
but set out, went to Bethlehem, looked for the child in the stable in
Bethlehem, in the crib, worshiped him, and announced to everyone what
had been announced to them by the angel and then by the hosts of angels.
Then they go back to their herds and to their work.

3 This is the right service, so that one should and can serve this
child: that one first believes the revelation of what is preached in the
holy gospel of this child, seeks it and believes in it; and then brings
others to faith through public confession. In this way this child is
properly served. After this, let every man be diligent in his office and
station. For this is not why this child came, that he should make a
change in his outward, civil nature. He leaves all ranks and offices
(for his kingdom is not a world empire), and commands that one should
keep himself in good conscience and in the fear of God, so that God will
also put up with such an outward, civil life and accept it for a service
and obedience; as the fourth commandment testifies.

(4) Thus it is seen in part what kind of people this little child is:
among the Jews the poor shepherds, and beside them some other pious
people, Zachariam, Elisabeth, old Simeon, old Hannah: they are almost a
small, poor crowd.

The child is little, since it is not accompanied by worldly splendor or
glory. For as we shall hear hereafter, what is glorious in the sight of
the world, this little child will not accept. As the Lord also says in
the Gospel, that those who have fields, oxen, and a ready-made household
will not come to the wedding; therefore the Lord commands the poor
beggars, the lame, the blind, and the crippled to be invited. These are
the people of our Lord God, the infant Jesus, who are glad and glad to
come to him.

But in today's Gospel we hear that this child is also made known among
the Gentiles and very much by a miraculous means. For God has made a new
and unusual star appear in the sky to them, and because they were people
who were unfamiliar with the course of the sky and the stars, the Holy
Spirit enlightens their hearts through this star, so that they recognize
that a child has been born among the Jews, who is the king of the Jews,
and yet a lord of the whole world, through whom alone forgiveness of
sins and eternal life can be granted to us. For this reason they set
out, and since they had not previously inquired about the kings of the
Jews or other nations, they took the child, sought it in Jerusalem, and
found it in Bethlehem; there they worshiped it, and were only dear and
pleasant guests of the Lord Christ.

(6) We should let such history be dear to us. For there we see the
great consolation that God takes care of the Gentiles, the poor sinners,
and also wants to have them with this child, through whom he forgives
sin and wants to make them blessed. So the work is very finely and
actually in harmony with the word and promise of God. For although God
had ordained that Christ should be born among the Jews, and that a Jew
should be born, yet such a child did not belong to the Jews alone, they
were not to enjoy him alone; the Gentiles also had to be in this
company. For thus the words to Adam and Eve in paradise are: "The seed
of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head." This could by no means
have been fully accomplished if God had not also helped the Gentiles
from sin, death and the tyranny of the devil through this seed. So

**1086 k- 3.294-296. on the colonel's day or feast of the apparition.
W. XIII, 2SIV-25I3. 1087**

God says to Abraham: "Through your seed all the families of the earth
shall be blessed. Here the Gentiles are also included: through
Abraham's seed, the Lord Christ, they shall not be forced to
circumcision and the law, but shall be blessed, that is, come from the
curse to the grace of God and become blessed.

(7) We see this promise at work here, since God made this child, His
dear Son, known to the Gentiles through a miraculous means, and drives
them through the Holy Spirit to seek, worship and honor this child. For
if God had not decreed nor granted this treasure to the poor sinners,
the Gentiles, he would have them sit and know nothing of this child. But
he will not do so, and rather a new, wonderful preacher, a star in the
sky, must appear and make this child known to the Gentiles, and also
show them the house in Bethlehem where the child was; as Matthew
especially reports. God in heaven does this to the Gentiles. The child
on earth, our dear Lord Christ, does the same. When these Gentiles, who
were poor sinners, and until now had known nothing right from God, had
not served Him properly, and otherwise had lived in all kinds of sins,
come to the infant Jesus, and worship Him and sacrifice to Him, the
infant gladly lets this happen, does not reject them from Himself, and
allows Himself to be honored by them, as if He were their King and Lord,
and they His people and His subjects. Let us take note of this and learn
that this child accepts the poor sinners and wants to be merciful to
them, if they only seek him and find themselves in right trust with him.
This is the first and most important part of this history: the glorious,
rich comfort that this child accepts the Gentiles and sinners.

(8) The other is a lesson on how we should behave toward this child
and follow the example of the wise men. For we also have this blessed
star, the holy gospel; we should not despise it, nor let it shine for us
in vain, but accept it with faith, and seek the infant Jesus and worship
him. That is, we should know that he is our God and Lord,

and ask and hope for forgiveness of sins, the Holy Spirit and eternal
life from him. This is the first and highest service which this child
wants to have, that we should cling to him with all our heart, seek
forgiveness of sins and eternal life from him.

The other ministry is, as we heard above from the shepherds, not to be
silent, but to preach about this child. No doubt these Gentiles also did
this, and were the first evangelists or preachers among the Gentiles,
who taught others about this child, taught them and comforted them.

The third service is that they open their treasures and worship the poor
child Jesus. So we (who are able) should spend money and goods so that
the kingdom of our dear Lord Christ may be preserved and increased and
this child may have its nourishment in misery. That is, we are to help
with money and goods to have fine church ministers and schoolmasters;
that the poor, who cannot provide their food because of illness or other
hardship, are preserved; and especially that young boys, who are capable
of learning, are raised up, so that our descendants can also have
righteous preachers and church ministers. In such a case, we should act
like a prudent, careful gardener who always produces young trees, so
that if an old tree dies in the course of a year or two, another one
will soon be planted in its place and bear fruit.

(11) He who so invests his money and goods gives and sacrifices to the
dear child Jesus, as do the wise. For there we have first the testimony
of Christ himself, that he saith, Inasmuch as ye do it unto the least of
these that are mine, ye have done it unto me. It must be especially
pleasing to him, however, when people gladly help to see that the
churches are well provided for and ordered. For with the same work,
first of all, God's honor is promoted and His name is praised.
Secondly, the people are helped by it, so that they can be saved from
the tyranny of the devil. But how could one invest the money wisely and
create more benefit with it?

(12) Therefore, they must be wretched, blind people whom God has made
into a great food and a great blessing.

**1088 L. 3, 296-298. on the colonel's day or feast of the apparition.
W. xm, 2513-2516. 1089**

The money that has come from the people's wealth, and yet does not help
in such Christian work, so that young boys who are capable of studying,
but cannot continue because of poverty, are kept in proper discipline
and brought up in learning, so that in time they may also serve other
people, teach them, comfort them, strengthen them, and guide and raise
them up in all kinds of hardship and challenge. It must also be an
unholy, cursed money, because there will be little luck, which one does
not want to use gladly and willingly for such blessed work.

(13) Thus your beloved see what kind of people the dear little child
Jesus has and how he is served. Among the Jews, it is the poor shepherds
to whom God sends an angel from heaven to preach about this little child
and to direct them to this little child; they are glad of this message
and praise God because of it, while in Jerusalem Herod, the high
priests, and the Christian scholars are concerned about other things and
do not ask anything about this little child because it is so poor and
miserable. The Gentiles are much less than the Jews, but God still calls
them to this child, even though through a lesser messenger. For though
some teachers say that this star was not a star, but an angel, yet the
Gentiles have seen only a star, and have mistaken such a vision for a
star. Now this is this little child's people: poor, despised, wicked
people among the Jews, and then the great sinners, the Gentiles; they
accept such a revelation, look for the little child, find him and preach
about him. But the preaching of the shepherds is despised, for they have
no standing before the people; so the Gentiles are sometimes thought to
know nothing of Christ; if there were anything to it, the chief priests
and scribes should know it much better and sooner. So it is still going
on today. Popes and bishops have the name and the prestige; but those
who have the gospel right and preach it are silly, bad, even infirm
people and poor sinners; therefore the world does not want to believe
them. But what does it do? Then hear further of.

14 When the wise men come to Jerusalem and speak of the star and ask
about the newborn king of the Jews, Herod is frightened.

and all Jerusalem with him. These are especially perverse hearts and
disciples, that they are afraid of the little child, who came on earth
for this reason and was promised to them so long ago, that they should
be delivered from sin, death and the devil through him. They should be
the first to take care of this child, become happy with him, help him,
yes, serve him with whatever they can and want. So they turn it all
around: they do not want it, they are afraid of it, they think about how
to bring it from life to death. And even if they are not able to do so,
they chase it out to the country and push it among the strangers, and
hinder its kingdom with whatever they can. This is what Herod, the chief
priests and scribes did, as we see here.

(15) What then is the cause? Nothing else, but that they are worried:
if this child is to rule, they must become beggars; if this child is to
be held high, they must come down. Therefore Herod rages, wants to know
nothing of this child. The chief priests and scribes also do the same.
So it stands together through and through: This child is the Son of God,
and brings with him forgiveness of sins, the Holy Spirit and eternal
life; but at the same time he is poor and miserable before the world.
The world does not like this about this child, and therefore becomes
hostile to it, and thinks that this child will stay where it wants, if
only it can stay with its glory, splendor and power.

(16) The world began such a thing with this child when he was still in
the cradle and not yet two years old; therefore it does so with him and
his word. For who are they who today are so bitterly hostile to the
gospel and neither know nor want to hear it? Are they not the great
lords of the world? and after that, those who have the name and want to
be praised for the Christian church? As there are pope, cardinals,
bishops, monks, priests, and the same swarm? These are not happy about
the Gospel; they are afraid of it and are worried: If it is to come
among the people, their splendor and power must come to an end; so they
help and incite the herodem, that is, secular authorities, so that they
may

**1090 L. 3, 298-300.** On the day of the conversion of St. Paul. **W.**
xm, **2516-2519. 1091**

should persecute the dear word and eradicate it as a heresy.

(17) The evangelist has indicated this for our comfort and for our
learning. For consolation, that we should not be frightened when this
happens, but know that with this child and the holy gospel it will not
be any different on earth. And for a lesson, that we should not allow
ourselves to be seduced by such trouble, and that we should not follow
great lords, especially those who have the name of being the Christian
church, nor believe as they believe.

18 For here you see both parts. On the one hand, the poor shepherds and
the sinful Gentiles, both of whom have no standing before the world; the
former because of their lowly nature, and the latter because they were
Gentiles and poor sinners. On the other hand, the king Herod, in a high
and great office and position, and the chief priests and scribes, since
it should be presumed that they should know about Christ, hope in him,
be glad of him and find their way to him. But you see the contradiction
before your eyes: those whom no one considers to be God's people, they
are; and those who are considered to be the noblest and the head of the
church, they are not only not, but are also the worst enemies and
persecutors of the church. Who then would have looked upon Herod and the
chief priests and scribes, where would he have gone and what would he
have believed? To

He would have gone to the devil and persecuted Christ.

(19) On the other hand, the shepherds, and after them the wise men, do
not let the blessed revelation of the infant talk them out of it; they
hold fast to it, seek the infant, and worship it; Herod and the chief
priests believe it, and do what they will. We must do the same: we must
not believe what the pope or worldly rulers believe, but what the Word
tells us, we should believe and keep, and not let other people's
unbelief hinder us, yes, we should also gladly suffer what God sends us
to suffer. For in the world it will never be any different: Herod, the
high priests and the scholars of Christ cannot stand Christ, but
persecute him and inflict all kinds of misfortune on Christians for the
sake of the Gospel. But God will not sleep, nor will He hang everything
on His enemies. Since Herod had in mind to perhaps also kill the wise
men when they returned, God warned them through an angel that they
should travel another way and no longer come to Jerusalem. Thus God will
be with those who seek and confess the infant Jesus, and though they
have much trouble, fear and distress, yet He will save them, and at last
make them blessed, and thus make all misfortunes sufficiently happy. May
our dear Lord Christ grant this to us all, amen.

**On the day of the conversion of St. Paul. *)**

**Apost. 9, 1-22.**

And Saul, while he yet spake evil against the disciples of the Lord,
went to the high priest, and besought him to send letters to Damascus
unto the synagogues, that, if he found any that went that way, both men
and women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. And as he went on
his way, and came nigh unto Damascus, suddenly there shined round about
him a light from heaven. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice
saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Lord,
who art thou? And the LORD said: I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. It
shall be hard for thee to lick the sting. And he said with fear and
trembling, Lord, what wilt thou that I should do? The

*) Held in the house, 1534.

[**1092 L.** 3, 30ü.3m. On the day of the conversion of St. Paul. W. xm,
2519-2522. **1093**]{.underline}

And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and they shall
tell thee what thou shalt do. And the men which were his companions
stood still, and were troubled: for they heard a voice, and saw no man.
But Saul arose from the earth, and when he opened his eyes, he saw no
one. And they took him by the hand, and led him to Damascus. He did not
see or eat or drink for three days. Now there was a disciple at Damascus
named Ananias, to whom the Lord said in a vision, Anania. And he said,
Here am I, O Lord. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the
street which is called the right way, and enquire of the house of Judah
for Saulo, whose name is Tarsen: for, behold, he prayeth, and hath seen
in a vision a man named Ananias come in unto him, and lay his hand upon
him, that he may receive his sight. And Ananias answered, Lord, I have
heard of many concerning this man, how much evil he hath done unto thy
saints at Jerusalem; and he hath power here of the chief priests to bind
all them that call upon thy name. And the LORD said unto him, Go thy
way: for this man is a chosen armor unto me, to bear my name before the
Gentiles, and before kings, and before the children of Israel. I will
show him how much he must suffer for my name's sake. And Ananias went
and entered into the house, and laid his hands upon him, and said,
Brother Saul, the Lord hath sent me (who appeared unto thee by the way
thou camest), that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with
the Holy Ghost. And immediately the scales fell from his eyes, and he
recovered his sight, and arose, and was baptized, and took meat, and
strengthened himself. Saul was with the disciples at Damascus for
several days. And immediately he preached Christ in the synagogues, that
he was the Son of God. But all who heard it were astonished, saying: Is
not this he that hath cast out at Jerusalem all them that call upon this
name, and therefore is it not customary for him to bring them bound unto
the chief priests? Saul, however, became more and more powerful, and
drove in the Jews who lived in Damascus, proving that this is the
Christian.

1. the story of the conversion of St. Paul should be kept in the church
as a special miracle of grace of our dear Lord God and preached about
it, both for the sake of the great comfort and useful teaching that is
presented in such a miracle. The miraculous work is held up to us. For
this reason, we will first look at the history and then report a little
about what it is useful for us.

2 Lucas reports above in the beginning of the 8th chapter that Paul, who
was still called Saul, was pleased with the death of Stephen. For he
thought that if only all Christians were treated in this way, it would
be well done. But now we see here what a sin it is to shed Christian
blood. For the blood of St. Stephen presses Paul so hard that he cannot
rest, and would have gladly exterminated and killed all Christians in
one day if he could and God had not granted him. As can be seen in all
tyrants: once they have tasted Christian blood, the devil does not let
them celebrate, always hounds and drives them on to more murder, like a
hunting dog that sees the game before it and has come to the jump. Since
Paul was so angry, Lucas writes how it happened when he was converted,
and says thus:

**Saul was still snorting with threats and murders against the disciples
of the Lord, and went to the high priest and asked him for letters to
Damascus, to the schools** (that is, to the churches), **so that if he
found some of them that way, men and women, he would lead them bound to
Jerusalem.**

This is the first part of the legend of St. Paul, which should be
preached among Christians at least once a year, even if the day is not
celebrated. Not that we should worship St. Paul and make a god out of
him, as the papists do, but that we should hear and learn about God's
miraculous work and improve ourselves from it. For here we see a miracle
above all miracles, that Christ so graciously converts his greatest
enemy. For as Lucas testifies here in clear words, he was a murderer and
a bloodhound and betrayer of all Christians, who blasphemed Christ and
defiled him to the highest degree. In sum, Paul is such a man, as can be
seen from his deeds, who would have gladly destroyed Christ and all of
Christendom in one day, if he could have done so. But what cause had he
for this? No other, because he heard that the Christians preached that
one could be saved by the gift of God.

**1094 L. 3, 381-303. on the day of the conversion of St. Paul. W. xm,
2522-2525. 1095**

If one wanted to be saved, it would have to be through Jesus crucified;
apart from him, one could neither come to the forgiveness of sins nor to
eternal life. When he heard that Moses was not to help, and that all the
prophets had not had enough of Moses, he became mad and foolish.

4 Just like our papists: when they hear that their orders, prayers,
fasts, and masses before God do not help, they want to burst with
malice, because they cannot stand it at all. The same was true of the
wretched Paulo, but he had no better cause than our papists. For he had
God's law and word before him, so he thought about keeping the law, the
sacrifices, the temple, and whatever else God had ordained, not to
reject it, but to let it stand. Then (he thought) I will leave life and
limb above; for how can it be wrong? Our papists do not have God's
word. For this very reason we challenge their observance of masses,
ordinances, prayers, and fasts, saying that they are unjust and cannot
do anything in the sight of God, since God has not commanded them, but
they have undertaken them out of their own choice and devotion, apart
from God's command; and yet we see what they presume to do in order to
maintain their idolatry.

If we now look at Paul's heart, what moves him to become so hostile to
the Christians and the executioner of all Jews against the Christians,
he has a far better cause than the papists, who persecute the gospel
because of money, good, their status and dignity. Paul has no such
opinion; his only concern is that the law and the worship in the temple,
which God Himself had ordered and commanded, should not be diminished or
reduced. Therefore, he does not think otherwise, because he is right in
doing so, since, on the other hand, conscience convinces our papists
that it is not wrong to take the sacrament under both forms, to become
married, to use food and other things freely; for they can never deny
either God's word, the institution of Christ, or the custom of the
first church.

6 For this reason, St. Paul is a sacred

The Christians' followers against the papists, who let the black and
recognizable devil lead them and ride them. For Paul seeks nothing in
this, but to defend God's word and honor, and to dare and suffer what
he can dare and suffer; as he himself says in 1 Tim. 1, 13: "Mercy has
been shown to me, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief. No pope of
today can boast of such a thing, for God's word pushes them to their
eyes and to their heads, so that they must confess that it is the truth.
And yet they will not tolerate it nor suffer it. Therefore, it is to be
feared that whoever persecutes Christians with knowledge, such
persecution will be different from that of St. Paul, who did it
completely ignorantly.

7th Now when Paul was so earnest about the matter, and thought to resist
the new sect in other places besides Jerusalem, our Lord Jesus also had
his thoughts, saying, Hold still, he shall do well: for what he doeth,
that doeth he earnestly. The same earnestness which he now has in an
evil thing, I will strengthen with my spirit, and use it for a good
cause, and set it against the Jews, that he may preach of me among the
Gentiles, and make the Jews, as they deserve, even foolish and foolish,
as he himself hath been hitherto. How then Paul became a very excellent
preacher, and especially among the Gentiles, of whom he boasts himself a
teacher, and we have undoubtedly also enjoyed his teaching, has done
much. This is a great miracle, because Christ kept all the other
apostles and disciples with him for a long time, but he immediately sent
Paul among the Gentiles and had him preach.

This is the great and comforting miracle that our Lord God converted the
man who was so wicked and had persecuted Christ and his Christianity so
earnestly. But such things happened, as you have heard, that he took
letters and thought, "Now I will master them properly. He quickly set
out for Damascus, where some of the Jews had accepted the Christian
faith; they were his blood friends, and yet he intended to inflict all
kinds of suffering on them.

1096 **L- 3' 303-305. on the day of the conversion of St. Paul. W.
XIII, 2525-2527.** 1097

**Now when he came near Damasco, suddenly a light shone around him, and
he fell to the earth.**

The right hour has come when he suddenly sees such a glorious light in
the field. For there is no heart so strong, even if it were pebble or
diamond, that could hold and not break. Therefore Paul falls to the
earth and is blinded in terror, because he undoubtedly did not think
otherwise than: Now it is over, you must die. The painters do not paint
this story correctly, because they paint how a thunderclap struck Paul
to the earth. But as it is written here and in other places, it was not
lightning nor thunder, but a sudden light in which he saw the Lord
Jesus. As Ananias says soon after, and Paul tells King Agrippa himself
in the 26th chapter. Now as he lies in great fear and terror, he hears a
voice speaking to him:

**Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?**

No doubt he will have been even more shocked and thought to himself:
Does this mean persecution? Do I think I am doing God the highest and
best service? And he said:

**HErr, who are you? The Lord said: I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest.**

(11) This is what is said: Whatever you do to my Christians, you do to
me. So take hold of his conscience with sin, and put on him all the
blood that has been shed; so that it would not be a miracle if Paul had
been dead in a moment. For if it strikes the heart and the eyes that one
has persecuted God, there will be little consolation. Our papists will
fare the same way. Either when they die, or on the last day, their
conscience will accuse them and beat them to the ground, so that neither
heart nor breath will be left.

12 Paul hears such words alone, but he does not see the light alone. For
in chapter 26 he says that his companions also saw it and fell to the
ground in terror. But Paul hears them alone

and yet see no one with whom he speaks, as it says here. But the Lord
Christ continues to speak and says:

**It will be difficult for you to lick against the sting.**

(13) This is a sound warning, which all who think to follow this
teaching should take to heart, but they do not have the grace to believe
it. Therefore they are not converted, as Paul was, but continue in sins
until they die and perish here temporally and there eternally. It is a
wonderful thing, says Christ, that you are raging like this; what are
you doing? Nothing else, but that you run into my spear. But is not this
a ridiculous, and even a harmful war, that thou shouldest be very angry,
and in wrath shouldest thou lick thy foot against a goad, and thus vent
thy wrath with hurt?

(14) Therefore this is a very significant and comforting saying for
the poor persecuted Christians, that whoever persecutes Christ is
considered to be licking against a sharp thorn. For there the foot shall
either be paralyzed, or otherwise not be very lucky. So it shall come to
pass whoever rages against Christ. Many great rulers, and especially the
pope and his godless crowd, think they want to tear Christ down from
heaven, that is, to dampen his teaching and word. So they confidently
attack it, persecute and strangle the poor Christians, ban and burn our
books, and do all kinds of things that can be detrimental to the Word.
But we shall soon see how they will fare; for the spear is not made to
be used, but to stab and resist. So the blind people want to jump up
with their feet against it. Paul has had enough of this warning and soon
surrenders, speaking with trembling and fear:

**Lord, what do you want me to do?**

(15) From whence came the trembling and fearing, it must not be asked;
for he should have despaired and died of sorrow, if the Lord Christ had
not comforted him and lifted him up; for the Lord said unto him:

**[1098 8.3, 305-308. On the day of St. Paul's conversion. W. XIII,
2528-2530. 1099]{.underline}**

**Get up and go to the city, and they will tell you what to do.**

16 Here it should be especially noted that although God speaks to Paul
from heaven, he does not want to abolish the preaching ministry, nor
does he want anyone to do anything special; rather, he wants him to go
to the city to the preaching chair or pastor. There he shall hear and
learn what is to be learned. For our Lord God does not want anyone to do
anything special, but gives his baptism and gospel to the whole world,
to one and to another. There we may learn how to be saved, and not wait
to see if God will make something new for us or send an angel from
heaven. For he wants us to go and hear the gospel from those who preach
it; there it will be found, and nowhere else.

(17) The spirits of the mob leave the preaching, sit down in a corner
and wait there for the Holy Spirit. But they arrive and find a black
raven, the devil himself, instead of the blessed dove. For why do they
want to force our Lord God to let them see something special? Paul
himself, who hears the bodily voice and word of the Lord Christ and is
to become the highest preacher, must go into the city and hear Ananiam.
There, saith Christ, go; I will not make any special thing for him, nor
teach and baptize him further in the field; but direct him to Anania
into the city, where is his word and baptism. And Paul gladly follows,
though he does not yet know where he is to go or who is to tell him.

18 Then our Lord God sends Ananiam, as history reports, who preaches to
him, baptizes him and lays his hands on him. That alfo Paul comes to the
knowledge of Christ and the Word through Ananiam. He must receive his
light from the same little sulfur wood, which was not a finger against
Paul and not a candle against the sun.

19 This is to be noted especially here in this history, that one should
learn to hold the preaching ministry in high esteem. For here it is
written loud and clear that Paul, the great doctor, through the

The little doctor, Ananiam, comes to his senses, and as soon as he
appears, he becomes another man, who makes many thousand times more
Christians than he had shed blood before, so that the disciples
themselves cannot be sufficiently astonished that the man should now
preach like this. But the Jews are enraged at this, and become mad and
foolish. For no one else has caused them so much pain and made such a
great rift with the doctrine as Paul.

(20) This is the story, a very beautiful legend; therefore it should
be diligently learned and remembered, for the sake of this great
miracle, that the great persecutor of Christ and His church is thus
converted, and a wolf becomes a gentle, harmless little lamb. This
should first of all serve us for consolation, and then also for teaching
and instruction.

21 The consolation is indicated by St. Paul himself, 1 Tim. 1, 12-17,
with very beautiful words, which every Christian should know by heart.
"I", he says, "give thanks to our Lord Christ JEsu, who has made me
strong and faithful, and has placed me in office, who before was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and a reviler. But mercy was shown me,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. But the grace of our Lord was
the more abundant, through faith and the love that is in Christ Jesus.
For this is certainly true, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am the chief. But for this reason mercy was
shown to me, so that in me first of all Jesus Christ showed all
patience, as an example to those who should believe in him for eternal
life. But to GOD, the eternal King, the incorruptible and invisible and
only wise, be glory and honor forever and ever, Amen."

22 Here thou shalt hear what thou shalt comfort thyself with this
example, namely, that thou shalt learn that God is gracious, and will
gladly forgive our sin, and make us blessed for Christ's sake. For if
he would not bear with sinners and forgive sin, where would Paul have
remained? or what would he have deserved? who would not have been able
to cope with small, minor sins (I have to say it like this).

1100 **2.3. 308, 309. on the day of the conversion of St. Paul. W. XIII,
2530-2533.** 1101

(call them mortal sins) of the other table, but with the highest and
greatest of the first table?

(23) But Paul himself testified that grace had befallen him, so that
God might see an example in him, so that the poor sinners would not
despair, but would also believe in Christ and learn to take comfort in
his goodness. For with our works it is lost; we ourselves will never be
able to help. But this is the only help, that we hold on to Christ and
through him believe in the forgiveness of sins. This comfort should now
shine before all those who are burdened with sins and have an evil
conscience.

(24) Besides such consolation, there is also a good lesson here on how
sinners should conduct themselves if they want to come to grace. For it
is a fine example of right Christian repentance. This is the first
thing, not to continue in sins, but to cease from them, and to be
heartily sorry for them. As can be seen in Paul, as soon as he is struck
with the light, he begins to tremble and shake, and wishes he had never
gone out against the Christians. This is called a true repentance,
because the heart becomes different, and a displeasure follows against
sin and wrongdoing, since one had a liking for it before. Therefore,
whoever comes to God's grace and desires to be freed from sins, let him
start here, recognize his sin, do not deny it, do not gloss over it or
excuse it, but have a right, heartfelt displeasure about it: this is
what God wants. Or if one wants to continue in sins without repentance,
one must await the punishment and His wrath.

(25) But through such repentance and sorrow one is not yet delivered
from sin, but

It is necessary to believe the gospel and to be comforted by what is
promised to us in the gospel and in baptism. For the forgiveness of sins
is based on Christ alone. Thus St. Paul himself says, Apost. 26, that he
did not disbelieve the heavenly manifestation, and that he preached
afterwards among Jews and Gentiles that they should repent, turn to God,
and do righteous works of repentance. "Repentance" means to leave evil
behind, to repent and grieve over it; "turn to God" means to believe
in Christ, that he is our mediator and that through him we have eternal
life.

26 To this should be added another part, that one should do right
fruits, or works of repentance, so that every man may be diligent in
obedience to God and remain in his profession. This is also seen in St.
Paul, that he wants to do it with all his heart, and therefore asks and
says: "Lord, what do you want me to do?

(27) In this way we should also learn to be right, confessing our sin
and forsaking it, believing in Christ and taking comfort in His
suffering, and finally giving ourselves to right obedience to God, so
that we do not again fall away from the great grace through disobedience
and fall into the wrath of God through unrepentant living. This means to
follow the example of Paul, which is prescribed for our consolation and
instruction. Let us therefore thank God that He has given us such an
excellent master, and pray that He will preserve us in His teachings,
and also accept us and make us blessed by grace. May our dear Lord and
Savior, Jesus Christ, grant us this, Amen.

**1102 L.3, 3os-3ii.** On the day of Matthew. **W. xm, 2548-2551. 1103**

**On the day of Mattiä**

**Matth. 11, 25-30.**

At that time Jesus answered and said: I praise you, Father and Lord of
heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them to babes. Yes, Father, for it has been
well pleasing in your sight. All things are delivered unto me of my
Father. And no one knows the Son but the Father; and no one knows the
Father but the Son, and to whom the Son wills to reveal it. Come unto
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in
heart, and you will find rest for your souls. For my yoke is easy and my
burden is light.

Today's gospel is a wonderful, beautiful comfort and necessary teaching
for the poor Christians, who are not only despised in the world and
suffer much, but they must also bear the name and suffer the shame as if
they were not God's people, but heretics and cut off members of the
church. How Christians should comfort themselves in such disgrace and
suffering is what the Lord wants to teach us here.

But that we may understand such comfort the better, we must show how the
Lord came by such thanksgiving. Soon in the beginning of this chapter,
the evangelist tells us how John sent his disciples to Christ and told
them to ask whether he was Christ or not. John does not do this as if he
did not know that he was the true Christ, for he had previously publicly
testified to him in his sermon and pointed out to him with his finger
that he was the Christ and the little lamb of God, but so that his
disciples would also learn this from the Lord Christ's sermon and
miraculous signs, and would recognize him as the true Christ and adhere
to him as their savior. This pleases the Lord Christ very much about
John, that he fulfills his ministry so diligently, and even then does
not cease to lead others to the Lord Christ, since he is already in
prison and can no longer preach publicly. For this reason, he praises
him highly for carrying out his ministry so faithfully.

3 Again, he also severely rebukes the Jews for their unbelief, that
there is no

Preaching to them will help, and they will blaspheme John as well as
Christ and believe no one. In particular, he reported the three cities,
Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, where he had preached first and
performed miraculous signs, but they had changed least of all. This is a
very great trouble, which we also have to bear today, not only because
our doctrine has so many powerful opponents, who neither want to see nor
hear the gospel, but also because there is still so much trouble and
little improvement in our part. This is the reason why the holy gospel
is so often criticized by worldly people, who say that if it were a holy
and blessed doctrine, people would improve and become more devout.
Therefore it grieves the Lord Christ very much that the world is so evil
and wicked, and does not want to become more pious according to the
great grace of the gospel; and first of all he threatens such impenitent
disciples that they will have to bear a heavier judgment on the last day
than Sodom and Gomorrah, Tyre and Sidon. Then he consoles himself and
says:

**I praise you, Father and Lord of heaven and earth, that you have
hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and have revealed
them to babes.**

4 Such words must not be understood as if God were lacking and did not
want everyone to have the knowledge of the gospel. For he is a God who
wants everyone to be saved. For this reason, he does not give his Son to
anyone in particular,

1104 **L. 3, 311-3i3. on the day of Matthew. W. xm, 2S51-2SS4.** 1105

but to the whole world; John on the third v. 16: "Thus God loved the
world" 2c.; and has the sermon of his Son preached not only in this or
that place, in the corner, but publicly and in all the world, so that
one must see that he would like everyone to accept it and believe, and
become blessed. But on the other hand, what is wise and understanding,
great and powerful in the world, is seen to despise the gospel, and is
thought to have no need of it; but especially what are holy people, who
cannot tolerate that their works and merits should be despised, and only
the grace that comes through Christ should be praised. God cannot
tolerate such unbelief, ingratitude and stubborn wickedness; for this
reason he does not want to drag anyone by the hair. Whoever does not
want to accept it, but wants to be wiser and wiser than the word of God,
he lets him go and tries what he can do with his wisdom. And so it
happens that the more such people follow their wisdom, the further they
get from the gospel.

5 This, saith Christ, is right and well done. Father, I praise thee, it
is done for them: if they be not saved by thy name and grace, let them
go to hell in the name of the devil with their wisdom and prudence. Here
no one holds the other. But those who are poor, miserable, afflicted
people, and thank God from the bottom of their hearts, because otherwise
they find no comfort in the world, that they nevertheless have and can
hear God's word: for their sake, says Christ, I also praise you, dear
Father, that you let them grow in faith from day to day, and become
firmer and more certain in the knowledge of your grace, and more ardent
and cheerful in love and in all good.

(6) So this thanksgiving teaches us this much: Whoever trusts in his
own wisdom, piety, power, or anything else, and despises God's word,
should get further and further away from God and His word from day to
day. Again, whoever hears it, accepts it with his heart, and asks for it
to bear fruit in his life, God wants to give him more and more blessings
and spiritual gifts from day to day. This is what God does, and it is
right and well done; therefore

Let no one be offended by it, but praise and thank God for it, as Christ
does here.

(7) It is pitiful and very annoying to see that today popes,
cardinals, bishops and others, who have the name and are called
spiritual, thus hold the word in contempt, thus blaspheme and revile it.
But do not be offended by this, but learn God's judgment and sentence,
that he resists the trustworthy, and can put up with nothing less than
that one despises his word and wants to revile it. Therefore he
withdraws his hand and lets them become more and more hardened day by
day. This is their right reward, so that we may stumble against it and
not fall into such contempt of the word and trust in our own power,
wisdom and holiness; but in all humility hold on to the dear gospel,
hear it gladly, and learn to improve ourselves from it. This is a good,
necessary and useful lesson that we should take from these words of
Christ.

(8) Now the world itself divides Christ in such a way that the wise
and understanding do not accept the word. But those accept it who are
underage children, or despised and wretched people. But it is impossible
that such two parts could get along with each other. For wise, sensible
people do not want to be of the devil; therefore they cannot suffer that
the underage should consider themselves God's people and church and
boast. Therefore, they use their wisdom and understanding to restrain
and exorcise the word and the underage people who have the word. In the
face of such hardships and trials, which Christians must endure in the
world, there is the consolation that Christ says:

**All things have been given to me by the Father. No one knows the Son
except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son, and to
whom the Son wills to reveal it.**

(9) Let this be a great comfort, even the highest comfort, that a
Christian may be able to endure all kinds of trials and sufferings. If
the wise and sensible have honor, power, money, and goods in the world,
that is something; but it is all temporal, it must all be left on earth,
and the danger of it is not to be taken for granted.

[**1106** 3, 313-315. On the Day of Matthew. W. xm. 2554-2556.
**1107**]{.underline}

If they do not exist, it is not necessary that so much the more a severe
judgment and condemnation will follow. But Christians have another
treasure, the Son of God, in whom they can take more and higher comfort
than all that the world is, has and is able to do. For as he says here,
"All things have been given to him by the Father; therefore neither the
devil, sin, death, nor anything else will be able to dampen him and take
him away from us.

(10) Therefore let us take comfort in the power that he has, and be
joyful and of good cheer. For though the world take away all things from
us, yet against its will it must leave us all things; because we keep
him to whom all things have been delivered by his Father which is in
heaven.

(11) Yea, saith thou, how then do I enjoy his? I feel that I have to
pay for it here on earth. If I were not a Christian and did not publicly
confess the gospel, the world would let me stay and not persecute me.
Well, here learn how you should enjoy the Lord Christ here on earth. He
says, "No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the
Father except the Son, and to whom the Son wills to reveal it." This is
what is said: Whoever accepts me and believes my word, I will teach him
to know my Father. If then he know the Father, he knoweth me also, and
hath all things.

How does this work? Thus: The world does not know God; for although it
already knows that God created heaven and earth, gave us body and life
alone, and revealed the law from heaven, this does not yet mean that it
knows God correctly. For we must always be afraid of such God, because
we see in ourselves such manifold sin and such horrible disobedience.
For the more glorious God is in His creatures and the more good He does
for us, the more we must fear and be terrified of Him, since we have not
fully obeyed such a gracious, benevolent God, but have sinned so often
and so much against His will. Reason can never do otherwise. But where
one knows and believes that Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary, is the Son
of God, and

When we see how God did not let him become a man for our sake alone, but
showed us all good things through him, and let him be crucified for our
sake, so that he would pay for our sin, and through his death overcome
our death, and through his resurrection open the way to eternal life for
us, then we learn what God is, that he is not hostile to us, who are
still poor sinners, but loves us, as St. John says on the 3rd verse. It
says that He will not condemn us for our sins, but will help us out of
them and make us righteous, and will not strangle us, but will give us
eternal life.

(13) Thus one can have all joy and pleasure in God. For who would not
also love such a gracious God, who does not spare His only Son, but for
our sake gives Him up to death and the cross! This is a thousand times
and a thousand times a more certain, brighter indication that God means
well with us from the heart, than that He has given us body and soul,
created heaven and earth for our use, led the Jews out of Egypt, and
what other such good deeds there are. But such knowledge of God we have
only from our Lord Jesus, who teaches us with his own ministry and work
what kind of God we have, and what we should think of him and provide
for ourselves.

(14) But now see for thyself whether this is not a great and high
consolation, since a Christian can hold fast in all kinds of trouble,
and overcome all kinds of affliction by it? For here we must say, as
Paul did, "If God is for us, who can be against us? Who also spared not
His only Son, but gave Him up for us all: how shall He not with Him give
us all things? Who will accuse the elect of God? God is here who makes
righteous. Who wants to condemn? Christ is here, who died; even more,
who was also raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of God,
representing us. Therefore nothing can separate us from the love of God,
neither tribulation nor fear, neither persecution nor hunger, nakedness,
peril nor sword" 2c.

15. such comfort comes alone

**[1108 L. 3, 3i5-3i8. On the day of Matthew. W. xin, 2556-2559.
1109]{.underline}**

through the Lord Christ, as he says: "No one knows the Father except
the Son, and to whom the Son wills to reveal it. But he who does not
learn to know the Lord Christ from the Gospel, who speaks or knows
whatever he wants about God (as pagans, Turks and Jews want to know much
about Him), is nothing. He does not really know God, and for this reason
he must be without consolation and fall into despair in all his
temptations and troubles. For it is impossible for a heart to be
satisfied apart from this consolation, which is called the right
knowledge of God; especially when the great temptations come, that one
must leave life and limb, struggle with sins and conscience, and wait
for the future, partly in another world. This is the comfort that the
Lord Christ wanted us to have, so that we would fast for it and build it
up in us; therefore he says:

**Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest.**

(16) The wise, the prudent, are therefore most certain: they are not
afraid of their sins, for they consider themselves holy and pious; nor
are they afraid of the devil, for he leaves them well satisfied and
unchallenged. Thus they can practice and exercise their will to wealth
and violence with the Christians as they wish. Christians, on the other
hand, are always biting themselves with their sins and consciences, they
have to defend themselves against the devil, and they have to bear and
suffer everything from the world; the Lord gives them the name of truth
and calls them troublesome and burdened people, who have enough to do
with themselves, and yet they cannot remain unchallenged by the devil or
the world.

(17) Now where shall they go to find rest, or refreshment, or
refreshment? Come to me, says Christ, and I will teach you, because you
have experienced and know what distress and sorrow you have in the
world, that you may also know what comfort, joy and glory you shall have
in God. So your hearts will not complain about suffering, but also
rejoice in it.

So that these words are primarily intended to teach us what we have in
Christ when we find ourselves weary and burdened. Namely, such a Lord,
who does not want to make more trouble and burden us more, or condemn us
because of sin; but he wants to help us carry the trouble and burden,
and with his comfort and strength, through the Holy Spirit, so intercede
with us that we do not fall to the ground under the burden, but lift
ourselves up and are able to carry it to the appointed place. Otherwise
it would be impossible, if such help and refreshment were not there,
that one should not fall to the ground and thus have to despair and
perish in misfortune.

18 This is a different sermon, because in the papacy Christ was taught,
since he was considered a severe judge, from whom, without other
intercession, no mercy could be found or hoped for. Therefore, not one
person in a thousand was found who did not place more trust in the
Virgin Mary and other saints than in Christ. It is as if Christ, because
we are weary and burdened beforehand, wanted to throw more effort and a
greater burden on us. It has never been possible to have a good hearty
confidence and complete trust in the Lord Christ, since Christ directs
everything, both with his life and his teaching, so that we may love
him, put our heart and trust in him, and have a happy conscience through
him.

Therefore, where there is no other abuse in the papacy but this false,
blasphemous teaching, everyone should flee from it as from the devil and
guard against it with the greatest diligence. For it is Christ, as he
himself testifies here, who no longer wants to weigh down weary,
burdened hearts, but to comfort them, to help them carry themselves and
to refresh them. Therefore, it is only up to him, when we recognize
ourselves to be quite weary and burdened, that we find our way to him in
such confidence, and seek refreshment in him, and not in the world or in
ourselves. But there are two excellent arts involved, as the Lord
further reports and says:

**1110 L. 3, 318-320. On the Day of Matthew. W. XIII, 25S9-2S61. 1111**

**Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me: for I am meek and lowly in
heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.**

The yoke of Christ is called suffering for his sake and for his word.
Such a yoke will never remain outside. Therefore it is not necessary for
you, like the monks and hermits, to make and load your own cross. You
must not go into the wilderness and run away from the people; stay with
and among the people, in your profession, and do only this, that you
take the word of God seriously and confess it freely: then the devil and
the world will have cause enough to lay more on you than you would like
to bear. For so Paul says: "All who want to live godly in Christ JEsu
will have to suffer persecution." And even if the devil and the world
were dead and left you satisfied (which is impossible), your flesh and
sinful nature will give you enough to deal with. So that the yoke of
Christ and the burden find themselves fine. Now if any man will bear it
aright, and so bear it that he shall not fall under it, but shall have
comfort and joy under the cross, let him learn these two things of the
Lord Christ, as the best instructor and doctor.

The first, that he be meek; the second, that he be humble in heart.
These are short words, but it will take a very long time before we can
learn them, or even spell them. For there are two shameful doctors or
schoolmasters in our way, who will not let us come to such an art. The
first, our flesh and reason; the other, the world with its annoying
example. For flesh and reason are unpleasant and vengeful, grumbling and
thinking that they want to remedy their own suffering. As can be seen
from the example of the whole world. To such a schoolmaster and angry
doctor, says Christ, do not follow, but follow me. I am meek, I do not
seek revenge; I put God's revenge at home, and let what God wills go
over me, but trust Him, He will not leave me, but will graciously help
me out. This is what makes me meek and patient in overcoming everything.
Learn this for the first.

Secondly, we see how the flesh and reason, according to the example of
the world, always wants to be above itself and higher, cannot let itself
be restrained, but thinks it must help itself. The same angry doctor,
says Christ, do not let yourselves be deceived either, but follow my
example. I am humble of heart, I do not desire to be in front, but I
follow behind, let myself be kicked and pushed until God lifts me above
Himself and does not want me to be kicked and pushed anymore. If you
also follow me in this, you will certainly find rest for your soul. For
the body was created to carry like an unruly donkey; otherwise it would
become too horny and insolent. Therefore it is enough for us that our
consciences are not weighed down by Christ and his merit; let the body
have its way.

(23) This makes Christ's yoke gentle and his burden light. For let
suffering be what it may, we know that it is only a temporal suffering.
On the other hand, we have the comfort of eternal life, and we know that
if we bear it with meekness and humility, it will bring us eternal
glory; as Christ comforted His disciples, John 16:22."Your sorrow shall
be turned into joy: for I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice; and your joy no man shall take from you"; and Paul, Rom. 8:18:
"It is certain that the suffering of this present time is not worthy of
the glory that shall be revealed in us."

24. Therefore this is a comforting, beautiful gospel, which every
Christian should know by heart, so that he might not only defend himself
against the annoyance that the gospel is despised and persecuted by wise
men; but also to comfort himself in all kinds of crosses and temptations
with the fact that we have such a Lord who teaches us to know God
rightly; through which knowledge, if we are otherwise meek and humble,
we may overcome all kinds of misfortune and pass through the pit of this
life to eternal bliss. May our dear Lord God grant this to us all,
through Jesus Christ, His Son and our Redeemer, amen, amen.

[**1112 L. 3, 320.321.** On the day of the Annunciation. **W. XIII,
2884-2586. 111Z**]{.underline}

**On the day of the Annunciation. *)**

**Luc. 1, 26-38.**

And in the sixth moon the angel Gabriel was sent by God into a city of
Galilee, which is called Nazareth, unto a virgin, which was trusted unto
a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's
name was Mary. And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, blessed
art thou: the Lord is with thee, thou that givest gifts among women.
When she saw him, she was frightened by his words and thought: What
greeting is this? And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou
hast found favor with God. Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and
bear a son, and shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be called great, and
the Son of the Highest: and God the Lord shall give unto him the throne
of David his father: and he shall be king over the house of Jacob for
ever: and his kingdom shall have no end. Then said Mary unto the angel,
How shall this be? for I know of no man. The angel answered and said
unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most
High shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall
be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. And behold, Elizabeth,
thy friend, is also with child with a son, in her old age, and now goeth
in the sixth moon, which is in cry, that she is barren. For with God no
thing is impossible. And Mary said, Behold, I am the handmaid of the
LORD: let it be done unto me according to thy word. And the angel
departed from her.

1 This feast is celebrated in faith for the sake of the article, because
we say: I believe in Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, our Lord, who
was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of Mary of virgins. For this
is an excellent, high article, which reason could not dream of, if the
Scriptures did not tell us so powerfully about it. For who would believe
that (because otherwise all women, as it is created and ordered by God,
become pregnant in the same way, by the presence of the man), that God
should bring forth this certain virgin and start a special thing with
her, which never before was heard of in the world, and for which shall
never happen as long as the world stands: that she becomes pregnant and
a mother, not by a man, but by the Holy Spirit alone? It is impossible,
I say, that reason can know or believe such things. For it abides by the
common saying, "If I do and believe as other men do, I am not deceived.

2. but a Christian must put the proverb here in a corner, and speak:

*From a sermon preached publicly in the afternoon in 1532.

If I want to be a Christian, I must believe and do what other people do
not believe or do. For God's works seem foolish and impossible; but yet
they are great works and are exceedingly fine. So it is here also that
Mary, the pure virgin, becomes a mother, and yet no man on earth knows
it but she alone. Foolish and impossible it is. For if such a thing had
happened before, it would have a semblance and could be believed; but
that God chooses this virgin alone out of all women and performs such a
miraculous work with her, such a thing makes the deal unbelievable.

(3) For this reason Christians are a peculiar people, called to
believe and preach the articles that are foolish and unbelievable in the
eyes of the world. But for this very reason they should hear the sermon
and learn the word all the more diligently. For he that will think of
such things apart from the word is easily overthrown.

4 So that this article of the conception of our Lord Jesus Christ may
remain firm and certain in the hearts of Christians, this feast is
celebrated. Therefore let us take such an article before us, as the
evangelist writes of it, and learn how such miraculous

1114 **L. 3, 321-323.** On the day of the Annunciation. **W. XIII,
2586-2589.** 1115

This work has been accomplished. We will divide this sermon into three
parts: the first, about the person of the virgins of Mary, that she is
of the house of David; the second, about the angel's sermon, in which
he teaches about the Lord Christ and his ministry; the third, about the
faith of the virgins of Mary.

5 The evangelist deals briefly with the history concerning the person of
the virgins of Mary. For he reports nothing about her state and nature,
what she did when the angel came to her, or in what form the angel
appeared to her. But whoever thinks of such things and would like to
know something, let him stick to the worst and most simple thoughts that
rhyme with history and the prophets. For that she was not of great
fortune, there is much evidence in history. So it is easy to assume what
kind of status and character such a virgin had, that she had served a
friend and done the common housework, like another maiden who is bad,
pious and righteous. And it is possible that just as she was doing such
housework, the angel came to her and brought her this message. For thus
it is seen in many histories that angels came to men as they were going
about their business and waiting for their office. Thus the angel
appeared to the shepherds in the field as they tended their flocks. He
appeared to Gideon as he threshed the grain. He appeared to Samson's
mother as she sat in the field. Or she, the Virgin Mary, like a pious
child, would have been alone in a corner, praying for the salvation of
Israel; for angels are particularly fond of prayer.

Now the evangelist does not report a word about who the virgin was
because of her arrival or her tribe. But of Joseph, to whom she was
entrusted, he says that he was of the house of David; yet we are not
concerned about him. But it is because of him that it is known that the
Virgin Mary was of the house of David. But the evangelist considers it
unnecessary to indicate this, since it had been sufficiently indicated
before in the prophets that Christ was to be of the house of David.

The son of David will come from the house of David and will be called
David's son; like this prophecy, Isa. 11, 1: "A rod will come up from
the tribe of Jesse, and a branch from its root. Here the prophet clearly
states that the tribe of Jesse must remain until Christ is born from it.
Since this child has no father on earth, but only a mother, this mother
must be of the tribe and blood of David; otherwise her child could not
be called a son or descendant and heir of David.

(7) This saying is also a good description of the time, as is the
promise in Genesis 49, for it compares the Lord Christ to a branch that
grows from an old trunk and from the root. For the lineage of David had
almost departed, so that not only was it no longer in dignity, but its
people were also few. Therefore, this glorious, royal lineage looked
like a tree that had not only lost its branches and leaves, but had
withered to the trunk. For this is the way God works, when everyone
despairs and says, "Nothing can be done;" then He first starts and
does many glorious and great things that no man could have imagined.
This is how it happened here: since, as Jacob says, the scepter of the
house of Judah has completely fallen and this family has come into the
highest decline, God takes this poor little servant, the Virgin Mary,
and accomplishes the glorious work through her, since all the prophets
and patriarchs had preached about it and put the whole world off.

8 Lucas continues to write how this work took place: The angel came to
the maiden, greeted her and told her that she had a gracious God.
"Hail," he says, "Blessed art thou, or blessed art thou, the Lord is
with thee, thou most blessed of women." These are high and great words,
since the pious child was shocked and thought what kind of message this
might be. For whether she knew at first sight that it was an angel who
was speaking to her, we cannot know, although the words of Luke almost
sound as if she had not known him. For

[1116 **L. 3, 323-325. On the day of the Annunciation. W. XIII,
2589-2591.** 1117]{.underline}

He says that she was not frightened by him, but by his speech and
greeting. For it is an unusual greeting; afterwards she also had to
think that it is an unusual messenger that he starts as soon as: O Mary,
blessed art thou, how hast thou such a gracious God, no woman has ever
come on earth to whom God has shown such grace: thou art the crown among
them all 2c. Such words caused the pious child distress and fright, so
that she did not know where she stood. Therefore, the angel comforted
her and said what God wanted to do with her and what he wanted to use
her for, and said:

**Do not be afraid, Mary, you have found grace with God.**

(9) Mark this word well. For it did not only serve to comfort the
little girl, but also to increase the abominable idolatry that was
subsequently found among Christians by the pope and his monks, and still
exists among the papists, who make a god out of the virgin Mary,
ascribing to her all power in heaven and earth, as if she had it from
herself.

(10) But although the Virgin Mary is blessed above all women, because
no woman has ever received such grace and honor, yet with this word the
angel brings her down and makes her equal to all the other saints,
saying clearly: What she is, that is grace, and not merit. Now there
must always remain a difference between him who gives grace and him who
receives grace. He who gives grace is the one from whom grace is to be
sought, and not he who has himself received grace. This was not done in
the papacy. For everyone ran to the Virgin Mary and sought and hoped for
more grace and help there than in the Lord Christ. To counteract this
error, notice this little word here: "Mary, you have found grace with
God. Then learn to take her for a person who has come to grace, and not
for one who is to bestow grace. For her child, our dear Lord Jesus, is
ordained for this purpose, that we should seek grace from him and
through him come to God.

As John the Baptist says: "We have taken all of His fullness, grace for
grace" (John 1:16). Now let us hear further the angel's message. For
thus he says:

**Behold, thou shalt conceive in the flesh, and bear a son, and shalt
call his name Jesus. He will be great and will be called the Son of the
Most High.**

(11) This is the first part of the heavenly preaching and the first
revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, both of which are written inside.
First, that he is the true natural son of the virgin Mary, borne in her
womb, and born into the world, as all other children are borne and born.
But how he was conceived, that will follow hereafter. And secondly, that
he is the true natural Son of God, born of God for eternity. For there
the words are written loud and clear: "You will conceive in the flesh,
or in the womb, and bear a son.

(12) Therefore this child is a true man, having body and soul like
another man, and having been formed, nourished, and grown in the womb
like another child. Therefore it is a seductive heresy that some in
former times thought that Christ did not have a true natural body. But
some in our time, and especially among the Anabaptists, hold that he
took neither flesh nor blood from the Virgin Mary. For if this were so,
he could not be a son of David, and the evangelist would not diligently
put his words thus, "Thou shalt conceive bodily, or in the body."
Against such and other errors, these words of the angel should be well
remembered; for whoever would deny them should be dismissed as a mad
man, and have nothing further to do with him.

13 Therefore, it is also a powerful testimony against Arium and other
heretics, who did not want Christ to be the eternal, almighty God, that
the angel speaks here: "He will be called a son of the Most High",
that is, so they will preach about him and believe that he is the Son of
God. But now we know,

1118 **L. 3, 325-328. On the day of the Annunciation. W. xm,
2591-2594.** 1119

which means "son", namely something born. Now if this Jesus, born of
the virgin Mary in the flesh, is the Son of God, it must follow that he
is also God. For what God gives birth to must be of His essence, nature
and quality, which is eternal, almighty, just and living. No matter how
you look at it, whoever does not like to deceive himself and to err,
will not be able to pass by these words; he must let this child, born of
the virgin Mary, be the true, eternal, almighty God. As the angel
further indicates, and says:

**And God the Lord will give him the throne of David his father, and he
will be king over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end
to his kingdom.**

(14) This can ever be said of our Lord Jesus, that he is both an
eternal God and a true natural man. For behold, what kind of a throne,
regiment or kingdom did David have? Was it not the people of Israel who
dwelt here below on earth and in the land of Canaan? Now if this child
of his father David is to have a chair, he must also be a man, like his
father David; otherwise neither David would be called his father, nor he
David's heir. But here afterwards a very great inequality is found.
David dies, and leaves his seat and rule to his son Solomon, who also
dies, and so on one after the other dies, except for this little child
Jesus. He takes David's throne and possesses it, not as David and other
heirs of his body for a time, but forever, so that there will be no end
to his kingdom.

(15) Now learn to rhyme the two together. This child is born of the
virgin Mary, lives, eats, drinks, sleeps, wakes, like another human
being; it must follow that he must also die like another human being, as
we confess that Christ died and was buried on the cross. Such is the
nature and characteristic of this temporal life. And yet the angel says
of such a child, that the Virgin Mary should conceive in the flesh and
give birth to it, that it should be

shall sit forever on the throne of his father David. Now dying and
reigning forever are two disgusting things, which do not suffer with
each other; and yet they shall be here with this person with each other.
She dies, and yet cannot die; but reigns forever, as the angel says.
Then I would like to know who would or could rhyme it together, apart
from this one article, that this person, born of the virgin Mary, is not
only a man, but also God? Therefore he must die as a man: again, as a
true natural God, he cannot die; but he is a Lord of death, whom death
cannot hold.

(16) If therefore death shall not strangle him, neither can it,
neither shall sin have any power over him. For life and sin do not
suffer one another: where sin is, there cannot be life, but death must
be there. Therefore, where there is life, there can be no sin, but there
must be perfect righteousness and complete fulfillment of the law. Where
then does death come to the man Christ, if he is not a sinner, but
righteous and without all sin? Here we find the great consolation that
we should regard the death and dying of our dear Lord Christ as an
innocent death, which was not imposed on him by his own debts but by
those of others, for the sake of our sins, so that we, having been
purged of sins by his death, may also live with him eternally.

(17) Thus the angel's words are short, but they are far-reaching, and
teach us that this man, born of the virgin Mary, actually and rightly
recognizes that he is a true, natural God: but that he became man so
that he might die, when he could not die as God and without all sin, but
should possess and reign forever the kingdom that was inherited from his
father David. Thus man and God are here one person, who dies, and yet
lives eternally. Death comes to him from foreign debts, but life he has
in himself from his own righteousness and innocence; therefore we should
accept it, and know that it was for our sake that we were given it
through this means.

[1120 **8. 3, 328-330. On the day of the Annunciation. W. XIH,
2594-2S97.** 1121]{.underline}

from sins and death and also become eternally blessed.

(18) This is the sermon the angel preaches to the pious virgin, that
she may rejoice in this child and let go of all fear and sadness. But
she should not accept this sermon alone; we also belong to it.
Therefore, although this pious virgin alone is the mother of this child,
we also belong to this child's regiment and kingdom. Otherwise we would
be in a very bad position. All that we are and have is temporal and
lasts a very short time. For what are forty, fifty, or even a hundred
years? But he who is in such a kingdom, which is an eternal kingdom,
would stand well and have cause to walk always in leaps and bounds, even
if he were the most miserable man here on earth. Now the angel's sermon
goes to remind us with these words of this temporal life, in which there
is so much driving, sin and death, and wants to make it unpleasant for
us at once, because he says of a kingdom, the like of which has never
come on earth, which is an eternal kingdom and has no end.

19. in such a kingdom there shall be no death; neither shall there be
sin therein, for sin and death are together; neither shall there be any
wrath of God, but only mercy and grace. For life is the highest
treasure, which God gives us after His Son. Who would not want to be in
such a kingdom with all his heart, and no longer worry about remaining
on earth for a long time, where there is nothing but sin, death, sorrow,
fear and misery, and to enter that kingdom? So the angel would gladly
make this life, all kingdoms, power and splendor, and all that the world
has, unpalatable and displeasing to us, since it is all temporal and
transitory, and nothing but a kingdom of sin and death; and point us to
this king, which kingdom shall have no end, like other kingdoms.

(20) How then to come to this king and eternal kingdom, hear your love
throughout the year, that we should accept the gospel and firmly believe
what Christ promises us, and put all our heart and confidence in him who
by his death and resurrection has given us the kingdom of heaven.

He has prepared such a kingdom for himself, that is, he has helped us
from sins and eternal death to eternal life. For if his kingdom is to
remain forever, he must also have people who live forever. For he shall
be king over the house of Jacob; which are ever men, and not angels, nor
unreasoning beasts. Now if men are to live forever, sin and death must
be gone. We should strive for such a life and despise the temporal here;
so we commonly turn it around, and so place ourselves that it is well
seen that if we had enough of the temporal, we would even forget the
eternal.

(21) This is the first part of the angel's sermon, which is mainly to
teach the virgins Mary and all of us what kind of child she will bear,
not a common child like other children. In this it will be like other
children, having flesh and blood, limbs and other things, as other
children have; it will need washing and wiping, eating and drinking,
sleeping and waking. But in this it shall be unequal to all the children
of men, that it is the Son of God and shall reign forever, that is, that
not only shall it live forever for itself, but also in its kingdom it
shall establish an everlasting life, so that those who are in it shall
live forever, and neither sin nor death can harm them.

(22) Therefore the angel preaches further, and shows how this child,
because it will be unequal to other children in so many ways, will also
be conceived unequally. For when Mary heard the message that she was to
conceive with such a son, who is called the Son of God, she wondered,
and asked the angel how it was to be, since she knew of no man; and the
angel answered her, saying:

**The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High
will overshadow you; therefore also the holy one who is born of you will
be called the Son of God.**

(23) As the common course of nature and the order of God otherwise go,
everyone knows that a woman cannot become pregnant by herself alone;
without the Turks being such gross fools, and allowing themselves to be
bere-

**1122 L. 3.330-332. On the day of the Annunciation. W. XIII, 2597-2899.
1123**

that their virgins can bear children and still remain virgins. Now it is
so here that Mary also cannot become pregnant of herself; and
nevertheless she shall become pregnant and know of no man. How is this
to happen?

(24) Now this is the special work, since the angel says here, and no
man can ever grasp with his reason, that this virgin is not to become
pregnant by a man, but by the Holy Spirit; in such a way, which the
angel himself cannot indicate with a better nor clearer word, than that
the divine power will overshadow her. We must leave it at that and not
worry about it any further. For we will not be able to think it out; it
is a divine power that cannot be grasped by our thoughts.

(25) But this we can understand, if this virgin conceives by the Holy
Spirit alone, that first her flesh is sanctified, and that which is born
in her must also be holy and without all sin. For this reason the angel
gives the child Christ, while it is still in the womb, the name and
calls it holy. "The holy one," he says, "that is born of you will be
called the Son of God." With this word the angel makes as great a
distinction between this child and all other children, as with the
manner of conception, since he spoke of it above. For although John the
Baptist and others were sanctified in the womb, they were conceived
unholy and only became holy after the conception, which was a sinful
conception. But this child is a holy child, in whom no sin has ever
been, and therefore has not been sanctified, but sanctifies everything
itself.

26 This is so that we may not only learn to recognize that we are unholy
and sinful by nature, and in such a case are not at all like this child;
but if we want to be free from such unholiness and sin, we must know
where to look for it. A beggar, if he wants money, must not go to
another beggar, who also has nothing; he must go to

to find a rich man who is not stingy and who is happy to spend. So here
also: if we want to be freed from sins and become holy, we must not go
to those who are also sinners, that is, who are also men like us, and
need grace; but here we should keep to this child, who is holy. There we
will find the ability to be helped, and nowhere else.

Why do the blind papists go to the Virgin Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul and
other saints, and ask God to let them enjoy their intercession and
merits? They are holy and God loves them, it is true. But they do not
have such holiness from themselves, but it is a given holiness, to which
they have come by grace. There one does not find the fountain of graces,
it is not the source, but only drawn water. But it is this child who is
born of God in eternity, and is therefore called the Son of God, and is
conceived of the Virgin Mary through the Holy Spirit. So that even
though it has flesh and blood, such flesh and blood is absolutely holy
flesh and blood, in which there is no sin. This is the true fountain and
source of grace, where we should go if we want to be holy and without
sin. For this is also the reason why this holy child is born, that we
unholy, sinful people lay under the wrath of God and in death and could
not help ourselves from such misery. But if we were to be helped, it had
to be by one who was without sin and could also help others from sins.
This is our dear Lord Christ, eternal God and yet true man, conceived by
the Holy Spirit in the womb of the pure and holy virgins of Mary, and
born into the world, so that we might find our way to Him, cling to Him,
and take comfort in His holiness.

If the holiness of Christ had been preached to the people in the papacy
as the angel preaches here, the idolatry that was practiced with the
dead saints would have remained behind. But there one has the words

[1124 **L. 3, 332-334. on the day of the Annunciation. W. XIII,
2S99-2602.** 1125]{.underline}

and yet no one has been directed to the Lord Christ, who alone is holy
and alone can make holy, but all such trust has been placed in the
saints. May God forgive them!

This is the sermon of the dear angel Gabriel about the infant Jesus, to
which he attaches the new newspaper about the old Elizabeth, how she
also became pregnant with a son in her old days. And adds the beautiful,
comforting saying that with God no thing is impossible. But we will
leave such history until its time, and now conclude with the third
piece.

(30) When the tender virgin has enough report from the angel what God
wants to do with her, she answers and says:

**Behold, I am the handmaid of the LORD; let it be done to me according
to your word.**

(31) This is a very fine answer, because not only is there great
humility, but also great faith and heartfelt love toward all people. For
first of all she gives herself in all humility and full obedience: "I
am the Lord's handmaid. As if she wanted to say: Here I am; my God and
Father in heaven make of me what he wants, so I am willing to do it. And
even though I am far too unworthy for this work, since you tell me about
it, I still accept such grace and good deed of God with joy and
gratitude.

For when she says: "Be it done to me as you have said," these are
words that she desires with all her heart, that she is happy and of good
cheer that the blessed time has come, that the devil's head shall be
crushed and the poor, wretched sinners shall be helped. She desires this
from the bottom of her heart, and is glad that God wants to use her for
this; not for her person and honor, but that she knows that through this
child she and all the world shall be saved from sins and death. For she
believes both, first, that God will accomplish such a work with her, as
the angel says; and second, that this child will have an eternal
kingdom, will redeem her and all the world from the devil's kingdom and
death.

33. and by such faith alone is it

blessed and freed from sins, and not by the work of bringing the Son of
God into the world. This was indeed a special grace and glory, as she
herself confesses in the Magnificat: "All the children's child will
call me blessed"; but only by this she becomes God's child and comes
to eternal life, because she considers this her child, as the angel
preached about him that he would sanctify her and give her eternal life
by grace.

34. but just as she alone has the glory of becoming the mother of God
and giving birth to the Son of God in the world, so we are to believe
with her that this child is holy and will have an eternal kingdom, that
is, that he will also give us eternal life and sanctify us.

35) This is the history that is to be preached at today's feast, so
that the article among us may remain firm and certain that our dear Lord
Jesus Christ, conceived by the Holy Spirit, is both true God and true
man in one person. This shall be our hope against the devil and all
other creatures, that we are set in the glory that God Himself shall be
and be called my flesh and my blood. He has not attached himself so
closely to any creature as to man, that he does not want to dwell in man
alone and be around him; which should be enough for a special great joy:
but he himself has become what we are, and has made himself so close to
us that he has such a nature, such a body and soul, as I and you have,
outside of the one piece, that everything in him is holy, but in us it
is sinful.

Such honor, which the Son of God has bestowed upon us poor human beings,
greatly displeases the devil, and does not grant us the glory of being
able to say: My flesh and my blood is God, and sits above in majesty,
ruling heaven and earth.

Therefore, we owe it to God to thank Him from the bottom of our hearts
for this grace and gift, that He has placed us in such great and high
honor and has allowed His Son to become man. For otherwise it seems as
if God is hostile to the world. But here we see that it is not

*) From a sermon of the year 1832.

**1126 D. 3, 334.338. At the Tatze Philippi and Jacobi. W. XIII,
2602-2605. 1127**

is true; because he has befriended and acted so closely to us human
beings that he not only wants to dwell in us, but has himself personally
wanted to become a human being. Such grace is committed today, that we
thank God for having cancelled our impure, unholy birth through his holy
birth, and for having given the soul of our Lord to us.

He has brought salvation upon us all, that through him we may be holy
and blessed. For this is the purpose of his dear word, holy baptism and
the reverend sacrament. May God, our gracious Father, send His Holy
Spirit into our hearts, so that we may believe this and thereby become
eternally blessed, Amen.

**On the day of Philippi and Jacobi.**

**John 14:1-14.**

And he said to his disciples, "Do not let your hearts be troubled. If
you believe in God, you also believe in me. In my Father's house are
many mansions. If it were not so, I would say unto you, I go to prepare
a place for you. And though I go to prepare a place for you, yet will I
come again, and receive you unto myself, that ye may be where I am. And
whither I go ye know, and the way ye know also. Thomas saith unto him,
Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way? Jesus
saith unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh
unto the Father, but by me. If ye knew me, ye knew my Father also. And
from henceforth ye have known him, and have seen him. Philip saith unto
him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it shall be sufficient for us. Jesus
saith unto him, How long am I with you, and thou knowest me not? Philip,
he that seeth me seeth the Father. How sayest thou then: Show us the
Father? Do you not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father is in
me? The words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself. But the
Father who dwells in me does the works. Believe me that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; if not, believe me because of the works.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that
I do shall he do also, and greater works than these shall he do: for I
go unto the Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I
do, that the Father may be honored in the Son. Whatever you ask in my
name, that I will do.

**The first part of this sermon.**

1. Your dear ones have now heard some sermons which the Lord Christ
preached to his disciples at the last supper over the table. The Lord
begins these last sermons with today's Gospel, and it is easy to notice
(as reported in other sermons) that the Lord's main concern is how to
prepare his disciples against future troubles, and how to instruct them
so that they will not be frightened by his death, but will have joy and
comfort because of it; because he will not remain in such death, but
will come to them again, give them the Holy Spirit, and take away their
sins and all sorrow.

(2) But just as the disciples could not grasp such consolation and
understand such clear words; they looked only at the shameful death of
their Master, and could neither provide themselves with life nor help
after such death, nor console themselves: so it is with us even today.
As soon as the cross comes down and we feel it, terror and fear,
impatience and despair immediately follow; and no one can persuade us
that a consolation should follow and that sadness should become joy.
This is why this sermon serves us, because Christ teaches us what he
will accomplish through his death and dying, so that we may take comfort
in this and remember it when we are in trouble. For it is certain that
when we do not remember such consolation

**1128 D. 3, 335-337. on the day of Philippi and Jacobi. W. XIII,
2605-2607. 1129**

Otherwise we will not find comfort in heaven or on earth, especially if
it is to do with how we can be freed from the great burden of sin and
death. Now the beginning of such preaching is that he speaks:

**Do not frighten your heart.**

(3) For this is the first misfortune that is found in the cross, that
it not only hurts the body, but also frightens and anguishes the heart.
Since it is impossible for flesh and blood to be made any other way, for
it writhes and writhes in days of trouble, the Lord would like the heart
to remain free and unburdened, even though the flesh is pressed and
hurt. It is natural that sickness and death are painful. Such pain
cannot be torn out of the flesh; it remains in it as long as the illness
remains. But whoever has a good conscience and a cheerful heart in such
distress, more than half of the pain is already taken away; because it
is in the flesh alone, and not also in the heart. It was the same with
the disciples. It was impossible that they should not grieve and be
sorry that they should see their Lord and Master die so shamefully and
lose him. But Christ says: Beware, let such sorrow remain only in the
flesh, and let it not enter into the heart. But how shall ye ward it
off? Thus:

**If you believe in God, believe also in me.**

4 We want to interpret such words in the most simple way and have this
opinion as if Christ wanted to speak: You are concerned about my death.
For just as you are accustomed to other people, so you also think of me.
What a man is and has, when he is dead, all is finished; he keeps
neither penny nor nickel, even if he had all the world's goods. All
power and authority is also gone. For where before all the world feared
and was terrified of emperor and king, as soon as he is dead, not a fly
is afraid of him, nor can a fly resist him. So it happens with people
when they die that everything they had and lost falls away and remains
behind.

like to have. You know and experience this, and you think that I will
have the same opinion.

5 But I say to you, "If you believe in God, believe also in me," that
is, what you believe about God, you shall also believe about me. Your
none fears that GOD will die. None of you fear that the world, be it
ever so wicked, will do harm to God and throw him down from his throne:
why then will you fear on my account? why will you be concerned about me
dying? Let death and the world and the devil be as wicked as they will;
they will gain nothing for me. For I am God, and what you believe of
God, believe also of me: so your hearts can be satisfied, and will not
only not be frightened when I die, but will also draw comfort from it.
For if I and death come together, death will have to succumb; you can
also enjoy it. For then hear and learn further what I intend to
accomplish by this bodily death.

**In my Father's house are many mansions. But where these are not, I
say to you that I am going to prepare a place for you.**

The first consolation is that death shall not prevail against the Lord
Christ. For he does not find in him a true man, even though he is a
true, natural man; but also a true, natural, eternal Son of God. Though
he strangles Christ as a man and the son of the virgin Mary, he cannot
strangle the Son of God; as Peter also says, "It was impossible that
death should hold him." Apost. 2, 24. And the Lord John in the 16th
chapter says v. 16: It is only for a little thing, so he wants to see
her again. This is a great comfort and would have been strong enough for
the disciples to take hold of him and hold on to him.

7 But this is a great thing, that Christ here saith, When he therefore
shall pass through bodily death into another and eternal life, then
shall he find many mansions, not only for himself, but also for his
disciples. And where such dwellings have not been found before

1130 **V. 3, 337-340. on the day of Philippi and Jacobi. W. XIII,
2607-2610.** 1131

he would prepare it for them. This is what is said: Do not be dismayed
that tomorrow I will die on the cross; for such death does not harm me,
but benefits you; and benefits you, when you are taken from this life,
that you may find good lodging and housing in that life. These have
already been prepared, but if they had not been prepared, I would have
ordered and prepared them for you.

8 In sum, Christ wants to comfort us all with these words, that his
death should help us to eternal life and acquire eternal blessedness; as
Paul says, Rom. 4, 25: "Christ died for our sins and raised us up again
to righteousness. Who would now be frightened at this death, and not
rather rejoice and thank God for such mercy and gracious help? since
otherwise we would have had to remain eternally in death and
condemnation, that through the death of Christ we should be freed from
it and be made partakers of eternal life. But that such is the right and
proper understanding, the Lord explains himself and continues:

**And though I go to prepare the place for you, yet will I come again,
and receive you unto myself, that ye may be where I am.**

The going is decided that he will no longer stay here in this temporal,
miserable life. Again, it is also decided that there is no other cause
for his death and dying than that he wants to prepare the place for his
disciples. Therefore it may ever be called a happy and blessed death to
us, that we may be provided with a dwelling place in eternal life; as
the following words clearly show, that he says: "And I will come again,
and receive you unto myself, that ye may be where I am."

10 Oh God, that we could believe such words and include them in our
hearts! Then it would certainly follow that our hearts would not only
not be frightened, but would always soar, leap and rejoice in joy. For
you calculate what these words entail, that we should be where Christ
is. He is not in sins, in hell, in death; but in righteousness, in
salvation, and in the life of the Lord.

and eternal life. And is so in that he can never get out. That is also
where we are to go. For this, he says, he has purchased for us with his
death or death.

41 For we must beware lest we think that such words and consolations are
spoken only to the young. He speaks verbally to them alone, but he does
not mean them alone. Otherwise it would have to follow that he died only
for them. But we know that he died for us and for the whole world. Since
his death, as he says here, was ordered to prepare the place, it follows
that he prepared the place for all men.

(12) But since all men are not saved and do not come to such a place
as Christ has prepared, this is the reason why they do not accept such a
death and do not ask that Christ prepare the place as he wishes, if only
they had a home here; they would be satisfied with the same. These are
called unbelievers, because they have no faith. But the Christians who
recognize the Lord Christ as the Son of God, and therefore crucified and
died, so that through his death he opened the entrance to eternal life
for us: these are the ones who enjoy such readiness and comfort
themselves with it in all adversity. For they think: Even though I am
poor and miserable on earth, it does no harm; after all, I have no home
here, Christ has not prepared a place for me here. I must make do for
this little while, as in an evil inn, since it is only for one night.
When I come home, to the right Heimbde (home) and fatherland, then it
will be better. For this temporal life is far too small for Christ to
have suffered for the sake of such a life; it is for the sake of
eternity that I must suffer, so that death may not harm me in eternity,
sin may not condemn me, and I may live with my Lord Christ Jesus
forever.

(13) Such thoughts make light of all the misfortunes we suffer here on
earth, and keep the heart from being frightened. For what is it that
Lazarus is a poor, miserable man, full of poxes and sores, and not
enough for that?

**[1132 L. 3, 340-342. on the day of Philippi and Jacobi. W. xm,
2610-2613. 1133]{.underline}**

has dry bread to eat? Is it not true that he is richly pleased in that
he is and lives with God in eternity, and does not wish that it had been
better for him on earth? Since the concern must be that, as Abraham
says, whoever receives good here in his life, must be tormented there.
So it seems to be a miserable business, since Christ sends his apostles
into all the world to preach the gospel, that the world keeps them so
badly, chasing them from one city to the next, not wanting to let them
sit quietly anywhere, but adding all plagues to them. But they care
little, and are still cheerful and of good cheer, that, as Apost. 5:41,
they are worthy to suffer shame for the name of Jesus. So that the cross
lies only on the flesh and old Adam, and does not touch the heart in the
least.

014 Whence then cometh this? Only from the fact that they have firmly
imagined in their hearts the comfort that Christ here speaks of: if the
world will not suffer them, if it will chase them away and put them to
all kinds of trouble, they know that there is another and better inn
prepared for them by their Lord Christ through his death, and that it is
certain. Since they cannot lack the same dwelling place, they are
content to live in the world as in an unfaithful, troubled inn, as they
please. For they do not intend to stay in it any longer, and would like
to suffer well, that they may only depart soon and come to their custody
and right home and fatherland.

15 We should learn such comfort. For if we want to be Christians, and
especially lead, keep and confess God's word, we will not be lacking,
we will have enough temptation and adversity. Whoever does not want to
have peace here, and does not want to be comforted by such a future and
eternal dwelling, sits down between two chairs, and it is not possible
for him to be satisfied. But this will satisfy our hearts when we see
where our Lord Christ has gone, and what he has accomplished by such a
journey, that he has made a dwelling place for us, and will not let us
always remain here in the evil, unfaithful world; he will come and fetch
us, so that, where he has made a dwelling place for us, we may have
peace.

we are and will remain. Whoever does not have a desire for such joy and
does not want to comfort himself with it in all kinds of distress and
challenge, can neither be advised nor helped.

16 Therefore it is a great pity that we poor people, who have nothing
more certain before us than that we must pass away one day and let
everything go, are still so drowned in temporal things and only think
about how we have enough here. This eternal dwelling, which Christ has
prepared for us through his death, we either think about nothing at all,
or rarely, and especially sleepily and industriously. Since, on the
other hand, everyone turns all his diligence here, how he can manage his
business, how he can provide for himself, his wife, his children and his
friends here. But would it not be better to seek the eternal dwelling
and eternal goods and riches, which, as Christ says, no thief can steal,
and the devil himself cannot take; who uses all his power to remove such
eternal dwelling and treasures from our sight, and to load our hearts
with other thoughts, because he is deprived of such blessedness, that we
should be damned with him, and not come to it.

17 This is the comforting sermon the Lord preached to his disciples at
the last supper, concluding, "Now you know both where I am going, and
you know the way, so that you may come afterward; for I am going to the
Father to prepare a place for you, and I will take you and receive you
to myself. But the disciples do not understand. Therefore Thomas comes
forth subtly simple-minded. Verily, dear Lord, saith he, we know not
whither thou goest; how can we know the way? That is to say, we do not
understand a word you say. To such a question the Lord continues to
answer and does not allow himself to be mistaken, they understand it or
not. For he knows that when the Holy Spirit comes, they will understand
it first, and he says:

**I am the way, the truth and the life.**

18 This is an excellent, beautiful saying, which we cannot act upon now
due to its length; nevertheless, we want to say a little about it.

**1134 L. 3, 342-344. on the day of Philippi and Jacobi. W. XIII,
2613-2616. 1135**

**The other part of this sermon.**

**I am the way, the truth and the life.**

(19) Although most of the people go in unbelief and do not think
anything of the future life, because otherwise they should never think
about the future half as much as they think about the temporal half:
nevertheless, such an article does not want to be despised at all;
sometimes a thought must come: Dear, how will it have an opinion, if
today or tomorrow God also demands you from this world? Here you had to
eat and to drink, had money, honor, property and power enough: what will
you have or find there? Such a thought cannot always remain outside; it
will sometimes stir the heart and make it restless. And no doubt, out of
such thoughts and concerns, many a worship service has been wrought
among the heathen. Thus it can be seen that many of them have led an
honorable, chaste, refined life, hoping that our Lord God will let them
enjoy it after this life.

(20) The Jews, in particular, were completely drowned in such
thoughts, for they had the advantage of knowing what they should do if
they wanted to please God. For God Himself had provided them with all
kinds of services in the Law, so they thought, "If we are obedient and
keep these things, we will not be in trouble when we die; God, to whom
we live in obedience, will be pleased with us. Just as the papists do:
what they think is good and holy, when they do it, they make themselves
believe that God cannot deny them heaven. Thus, people make their own
way to God and eternal life, either through the law or through such
works as they choose to be holy and pleasing to God.

(21) Therefore our dear Lord Christ warns and teaches us: If we take
the right way to the Father and do not want to err, then neither the law
nor this nor that good work will be done. For there is only one way, and
that is he himself; he that goeth unto the Father by him, the Lord
Christ, shall go unto the Father.

come. Whoever does not walk on it, neither law, nor holy life, nor
anything in heaven and on earth shall help him. For just as there is
only one true Christ, the Son of God, born of the Virgin Mary, so there
is only one way. But whoever makes another way, makes also another
Christ, there is no doubt about it. And it must further follow that such
a Christ is false and the way erroneous and leads into the abyss of hell
and not to eternal life.

(22) Now this is the doctrine which has always caused trouble and all
kinds of misfortune in the world. For Cain also thought to make a way
for himself to the Father in heaven by his sacrifice; but he lacked it,
and slew his brother Abel to death over it. He also sacrificed, but he
had another way to the Father than his sacrifice, namely, the seed of
the woman, from which the promise had been made to his parents. So the
Jews also did not like it when the prophets punished their sacrifice and
worship, and would not let it be the right way to heaven. Shall it not
please God, they said, if we sacrifice and keep the commandment of the
Lord? Our papists of today cannot stand it either. No monk will allow
himself to be persuaded that it is not a way to eternal life if he keeps
his rule rigidly with praying, fasting and other things. In sum, as the
Pharisee Luc. did on the 18th, who let himself believe that he had kept
the commandments of God, because he had not outwardly sinned against
them: so, of course, do all men, and let themselves believe that their
holy life is the way to the Father in heaven. But when they say, "No,
if you want to be saved, you must go another way; this way will lead you
into the abyss of hell," then it burns in all the gates; everyone
scolds such teaching, calling it heresy, forbidding good works and
deceiving people. As you can see, it is the same for us today.

Now, how shall we do it? If you look at what Christ says here, you can
be sure of the matter. He speaks of the way to the Father, where one is
to find the eternal dwellings, and speaks with round words: "I am the
way, the truth, and the

**1136 D. 3, 344-346. on the day of Philippi and Jacobi. W. XIII,
2615-2618. 1137**

Life." Now, as said above, there is only One Christ, and it is not
possible to say of this or any other work, even of the Law of Moses
itself, that it is Christ. If Christ alone is the way, the truth and the
life, and no work, be it ever so holy, great and delicious, can be said
to be Christ Himself: Then it must follow that the law, sacrifice, all
good works, the ten commandments of God Himself, all chastity,
discipline, respectability, and whatever else may be called, are not the
way to salvation and the Father; and whoever has no more than such
works, that he is and must remain in error, in falsehood, and in death,
until he comes to this way, he is called Christ Jesus.

024 Yea, sayest thou, are the commandments of the toes evil? Is it wrong
to live modestly and honorably and to be pious? Is it not pleasing to
God? or is it pleasing to Him to live in fornication and do no good? No,
by all means; we say that it is right, good and pleasing to God to do
God's will, to be pious. But it does not follow that this is the way to
eternal life or to the Father. Therefore, one should keep the Ten
Commandments in obedience, because God has commanded them and without
sin we cannot obey such a command. But to come to the Father there is
only one way; it is not called good works nor God's commandment, but
Christ Jesus. This one way is the truth and does not deceive us; and is
the life that preserves us from death, since otherwise, with all good
works and holy living, we must remain in death, and cannot work our way
out.

25, And this is also the cause that the Lord makes Himself a new name,
saying, "I am the way." For where there is no way nor path, there is
no way to come. Since no one can come to God apart from Christ, nor can
anyone know God apart from Christ, He says: I am the way to the Father.
Not such a way as one should walk on with feet, but with the heart, that
is, one should trust in Him and place all confidence in Him. Whoever
does this is on the right path to the Father and to eternal life, and is
not able to trust in him.

that he could err. For he has Christ, who is not only the way, but he is
the truth, who cannot deceive nor fail us, and is also the life.
Therefore, whoever has this way before him must not fear sin and the
death that comes from sin.

26 Therefore, the question must be distinguished here. It is twofold
when I ask: What shall I do if I want to live as a Christian? and: What
should I do if I want to go to the Father or to eternal life? The Ten
Commandments belong to the Christian life: they are the way. For there
is God's command that demands such obedience. But whoever does not want
to obey, must wait for the punishment and damnation that is laid upon
disobedience. But such toe commandments are not the right way to the
Father. For there it is said, as Christ says here, "I am the way."
Just as one should not make much Christ, so one should not make much
way. But if a man makes any other way to the Father besides Christ, it
is an erroneous way.

(27) Therefore, the judgment of all faiths and religions can be made.
The Turk, the Jews and the pagans also have a hope that they will be
saved, and they boast that they know God, and serve God, and worship
God. But if Christ alone is to be the way and they do not believe in
Christ, how is it possible that they can come to God? Then even their
best life and their most holy works, their prayer and all worship must
be nothing but error, lies and death. For apart from Christ there is no
way, no truth, no life.

028 So it is with the pope also, and with his multitude; he goeth much
way to the father. One monk has run away to a monastery for this reason;
one priest says mass for this reason; another serves the saints for this
reason and worships them; the third buys indulgences or offers mass, so
that he thinks he is making a way or bridge to heaven. But do what you
will; even the most holy works commanded in the Ten Commandments will
not bring you to the Father. Cause, Christ alone is the way, he alone is
the truth and the life. If thou believest not in Christ, and art not
comforted in his going to the Father, and thy

1138 **L. 3, 346-348. on the day of Philippi and Jacobi. W. XIII,
2618-2620.** 1139

If you do not satisfy your heart with the fact that he has prepared the
dwelling for you through his death, it is of no use; indeed, everything
you do apart from him is error, lies and death, no matter how much the
world may praise it. Faith in Christ alone must do it, and no work; for
apart from Christ there is no way.

(29) Now a distinction must be made here between the works, lest we
fall into the raptures in which the Anabaptists and the Sacramentarians
are. For this is not unjustly spoken, and takes nothing away from the
glory of Christ, when I say, If thou wilt come to the Father and be
saved, be baptized; as Peter saith to the Jews, Acts 2:38. 2:38; item,
if thou wilt be saved and come to the Father, hear the word of God;
item, if thou wilt come to the Father and be saved, go to the reverend
Sacrament. For baptism, sacrament and word are not only commanded by
Christ, but are nothing without Christ. Therefore such works require
faith, and without faith they are of no use; just as Christ himself is
of no use to those who do not believe in him. Whoever then would say,
Christ alone is the way; what need have I of baptism, word, or
sacrament? would dishonor Christ, not only because Christ commanded and
instituted baptism, word, and sacrament; but because Christ himself is
in baptism, word, and sacrament, and in such passages becomes our way.
For he is gone to the Father, and we see him not, saith he, Joh. 16. How
then shall we walk in him, or how is he our way? There is no other way,
because in baptism, in word and sacrament he lets himself be presented
to us, that he died for us, shed his blood for us and reconciled us to
the Father. Whoever would not accept such words and sacraments would
reject Christ, the Way, and would not want to accept Him.

(30) Therefore, since Christ himself is in and with us, such works are
different from the works we do. I give alms, I serve my neighbor, I
preach, I let myself be tortured to death over the word: such works,
although the holy

I cannot boast that they are so much more than Christ, than his
suffering and death. Therefore, we cannot and should not boast of any
way that we would come to the Father and eternal life by it.

(31) But it is useless to speak further of this matter. For the Lord
declares himself, and shows cause why he says he is the way. "No one,"
he says, "comes to the Father except through me." "Coming to the
Father" can ever mean nothing else than having a gracious God, being
without sin and in eternal life. There, he says, you will never come to
it by your works or holiness; by me alone you must come to it, that is,
by me alone going to the Father, suffering and dying. In this way the
Lord beautifully summarizes the article of our faith, which says:
"Through faith alone in Christ alone one becomes righteous and blessed.

032 Now it is still more grievous that he saith, "No man cometh unto
the Father, but by me." For this is still more, that he says further,
"If ye know me, ye know the Father." For with these words he wants to
indicate that where one does not have or know Christ, it is impossible
that one can have or know God. What is it then that all the heathen
boast and speak of God? That the Turks and Jews, even the Papists, say
much about God? The words may guide them, but here is the verdict: If
you know Christ, you know God; if you do not know Christ, you do not
know God.

(33) Yes, you say, is this not knowing God, when a Turk and a Jew say
how God created heaven and earth from nothing, made His covenant with
Adam and Eve in Paradise, brought the children of Israel out of Egypt?
Is all this true, that God did it: not such a God as the pagans have,
but the true and eternal God? But do it as you will, here it is: If you
know Christ, you know God; but if you do not know Christ, you do not
know God; you deny God and do not believe in God. And this is why the
Lord soon after says to Philip, "Do you not believe, Philip, that the
Father is in me, and I in the Father?"

[1140 **D. s, 848-350. on the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2620-2623,2638.** 1141]{.underline}

34 Thus the Lord goes back to the reason which he indicates above, when
he says: "If you believe in God, believe also in me. For there is no
other way out, the man Jesus Christ is God; and God is Jesus Christ.
Whoever then does not know the Son, nor suppose that he boasts, says, or
knows whatever he wants about God, this is not true knowledge. Therefore
he speaks further to Philip: "So long have you been with me, and do you
not yet know me? Philip, he who sees the Father sees me." You hear me
speak, and I do not speak, but the Father does, and the works that I do,
the Father does. All of this is to the end that we should recognize and
accept Christ as a true, eternal God, and take comfort in His suffering
and death as the perfect payment and propitiation to God. Whoever does
this knows God, honors God, and believes in God.

For to know God is not only to know that he created heaven and earth,
that he gave us life and limb, and that he is omnipotent. Such is only
one piece, and the least of the knowledge of God. For where one does not
get any further, we must only fear such God all the sooner and more,
since we have the conscience constantly with us that we are disobedient
to such God, who created everything for our good.

sam. But whoever knows Christ sees in Christ that God is a gracious,
merciful God who does not want to condemn us because of our sin and
disobedience, but wants to be merciful to us and help us out of our
sins. For there stands His Son, whom He gives as a sacrifice for us,
that through Him we may have forgiveness of sins and eternal life. This
then means to recognize God rightly, to know that he is so merciful to
sinners.

But there is no other way to learn this, except from His Son Christ
Jesus. Therefore Christ says: "If you know me, you know the Father: He
is not only an almighty and eternal God, but also a gracious and
merciful God. His omnipotence and eternity can be felt and learned from
the creature of the whole world; but His grace and mercy can only be
learned from Christ JEsu, from His suffering and death, that He goes and
prepares for us the dwelling place, which we on our part would have had
to be deprived of forever.

(37) Thus your love sees how the Lord comforts his disciples and
directs them to know him rightly, so that their hearts will not be
troubled. May God grant us His grace that we may also learn this, and in
all distress remember such comfort, amen.

**On the day of St. John the Baptist. *)**

**Luc. 1, 57-80.**

And Elizabeth's time came for her to give birth, and she gave birth to
a son. And her neighbors and friends heard that the Lord had shown her
great mercy, and they rejoiced with her. And it came to pass, that on
the eighth day they came to circumcise the young child, and called his
name Zacharias, after his father. But his mother answered and said, Not
at all; but he shall be called John. And they said unto her: Surely
there is no man of thy friendship so called. And they beckoned unto his
father what he would have him called. And he called for a piece of
paper, and wrote, and said, His name is John. And they were all amazed.
Immediately his mouth and tongue were opened, and he spoke and praised
God. And fear came upon all the neighbors, and this story became known
throughout all the mountains of Judah. And all who heard it took it to
heart and said: What do you think will become of the child? For the hand
of the Lord was

*) Held in the house, 1532.

[1142 **L. 3, 350-352. on the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2640-264".** 1143]{.underline}

with him. And Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel: for he hath
visited and redeemed his people. And hath raised up for us a horn of
salvation in the house of his servant David. When he spake in time past
by the mouth of his holy prophets, that he would deliver us from our
enemies, and from the hand of all them that hate us, and shew mercy to
our fathers, and remember his holy covenant, and the oath which he sware
unto Abraham our father to give us, that, being delivered out of the
hand of our enemies, we should serve him without fear all the days of
our life, in holiness and righteousness that is pleasing in his sight.
And thou child shalt be called a prophet of the Most High; thou shalt go
before the Lord, to prepare his way, and to give knowledge of salvation
unto his people, who are in remission of their sins; through the tender
mercies of our God, whereby the going forth from on high hath visited
us, that he may appear unto them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death, and direct our feet into the way of peace. And the child grew,
and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the wilderness, until he should
stand forth before the people of Israel.

Every Christian should know the right reason for celebrating this day,
so that we do not have such a foolish joy, as the world tends to do, as
if our Lord God had let St. John be born only for the sake of eating,
drinking, dancing, and other such things. It is true that the angel
proclaims to old Zacharias that many will rejoice at this birth; but
this is not a joy, as we Germans, according to our bad habits, have,
that we fill our belly and take care of our well-being; but a spiritual
joy, that John should be the first preacher, who should point with his
finger to the seed given, and show us salvation and forgiveness of sins,
that God will be gracious to us for Christ's sake and grant us all
mercy.

(2) This is a joy that does not last for one day alone, and after that
the head is sore from it; but that remains for eternity and brings
blessedness with it. For the sake of such joy, this day has been
celebrated among Christians, so that they may also receive a taste of it
and thank God for His good deeds. Therefore, let us now take the history
before us.

This is the very first thing that God does with this birth, a
particularly great miraculous sign. For there we hear that father and
mother had been married for so long, and yet had not conceived a child,
and are now at the age that they no longer have any hope of having a
child. For Elizabeth was not only out of age, but also, as the angel
reports in regard to the virgin Mary, she was in a state of crying, that
she was not at all able to bear a child.

would be fruitful. Then God did a great miracle and gave her such a
great son that Christ himself said: "Among the sons of women, no
greater arose than John. This is what every Christian should know and
learn today about this child, how he was miraculously conceived and
born, and how other miracles took place: that the angel from heaven
brings the first message about such a son; the father Zacharias is mute
from that day on until the child is eight days old; but the mother gives
him the name and says: "He shall be called John", which name she had
not heard from any man. After that, the father began to speak again and
preached a beautiful sermon about this child out of the Holy Spirit.

From all this, one must conclude that God has something special in mind
for this child, as the whole friendship and neighborhood is amazed at
such a wonderful being, and concludes that God will do something special
through this child. But it makes us think twice to hear how the angel of
God preached about such a child before it was conceived in its mother's
womb. For God is not frivolous; neither does He send His angels for the
sake of small things: it must always mean something especially great
when He speaks and sends His angels. But the angel, as soon as he tells
Zacharias that he will have a son, also says what kind of man he will
become and what special things he will do in the world, and says: "You
will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth.

[1144 **D- 3, 3S2-3S4. On the day of St. John the Baptist. W. xm,
2644-2647.** 1145]{.underline}

rejoice." This is said so much that this birth will bring a special
benefit to the people; for he reports two kinds of joy.

One is the parents. It was a natural joy for them to have a son in their
old age. But especially the barren Elizabeth will have rejoiced, who for
so long had to bear the curse and disgrace of being barren, and because
of that had to flee other women like the owl flees the birds. This is a
joy that father and mother had over this child.

6 But the other joy is greater still, that others also, and not his
father and mother only, should take the wife of this child; not because
of his birth only, but because of his ministry, that he should thus have
a joyful and comforting ministry. For thus the angel prophesieth, He
shall be great in the sight of the Lord." And Zacharias, his father,
interpreted this in a fine way, saying, "You will be called a prophet
of the Most High; you will go before the Lord to prepare His way and to
give the knowledge of salvation to His people, who are in the remission
of their sins. As if he wanted to say: "We have had Moses and the
prophets until now, but they have left us all in sins and with an evil
conscience; we have not been able to escape death, there has been no
help, no counsel. Just as it happened to us under the papacy, when he
ran to St. James, the other to Rome; when he flagellated himself there,
and another fasted himself there. When one had tried and done
everything, the conscience was still not helped. The poor, miserable,
sorrowful people knew not where to turn, could have no comfort nor rest
against sin and death. But now, says Zacharias, it will be different.
For God has given us a child who will show the way to forgiveness of
sins.

7 The angel says that you, Zechariah, will not only rejoice, but also
other people who were not present at such a miraculous birth and did not
see it; they will rejoice with all their hearts, thanking and praising
God that he has made such a comforting preacher appear, with his

Finger pointing to the Son of God, and forgiveness of sins through him
promised to all who accept him and believe in him. O how blessed ears,
he will say, will these be who will hear the voice, "Behold the Lamb of
GOD who bears the sin of the world." How blessed shall be the eyes that
shall see the blessed finger, that it may point to the sacrifice that is
to be offered for the sin of the world. Thus his father Zacharias wants
to make all people's hearts sugar-coated and joyful with the word that
he remembers the forgiveness of sins, that now the time is present when
we will be able to know how we may be freed from sins and become
eternally blessed.

8 For it is in truth a great and excellent thing that John is the first
to come into the world with this preaching, saying, "Behold, this is
the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." For there
each heart must confess for itself: I also belong to the world. If then
this little lamb bears the sin of all the world, it will also bear my
sin. For there is no one excluded. This is the true joy and glad
tidings, that sin shall no more lie in the world, it shall no more
terrify us, condemn us, strangle us; but shall be taken away from us and
laid upon this little lamb of God. John first brings this message into
the world by pointing to Christ with his fingers, exhorting and urging
everyone to cling to Christ and wait for such grace from him.

(9) Other prophets also prophesied of Christ, how he would come and
make the world free from sins; but there is neither Isaias nor Jeremiah,
who could have said, This is he whom ye shall receive, who shall do and
execute it. John is the only one who let the first voice go and showed
the person with fingers, where forgiveness of sins is actually to be
found.

(10) This then is the proper cause of this feast, that St. John's day
should be celebrated: not for his stern life, nor for his miraculous
birth; but for his dear finger and for his word.

1146 **L. 3, 354-386. on the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2647-2680.** 1147

and ministry. For such ministry and preaching was never heard before in
the world. No man has ever had such fingers, nor seen such fingers as
John's, to show the lamb of God. Therefore, whoever is oppressed by
sin, whoever is frightened by the devil and death, let him look at this
preacher's mouth and fingers, and he will teach and instruct him
rightly, so that he may receive forgiveness of sins and be satisfied
with God. This is the joy that all the world, and not only Zacharias and
Elisabeth, shall have in Johanne.

**Interpretation of the Canticle of Zachariah.**

(11) But that we may have cause to speak of it a little longer, let us
take before us the praises of Zacharias the father, to whom the
evangelist bears witness, that he was full of the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied of his Son, and of the special ministry which he should have
in the world. For thus says the evangelist:

**And Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying, Blessed be the LORD God of Israel: for he hath
visited and redeemed his people, and hath raised up for us a horn of
salvation in the house of his servant David, as he spake of old by the
mouth of his holy prophets. That he might deliver us from our enemies,
and from the hand of all that hate us.**

(12) Then you hear how happy the pious old Zacharias is about his son:
not only because of his person, but that this is now happening, which
God promised so long ago through his prophets: how he would give David a
son who would save us from all enemies, that is, from the devil, sin,
death and hell, who want to devour and condemn us. This, he says, is now
coming, since all the prophets have written and cried out about it, that
it will happen one day. Now it is here, praise be to God forever and
ever. It has been promised, and all the prophets have promised it; but
they have not been able to bring it to pass, nor to preach it, as my Son
will preach it, who will point with his fingers to such salvation and
point men to it.

(13) But here we must be accustomed to the Scripture that Zacharias
does not say badly, "God has raised up for us a salvation or help
against our enemies," but he says, "a horn of salvation. This is said
in German as a kingdom of grace, to which all those who are in sin, fear
and distress should find their way; they should find help in such a
kingdom, so that sin will not harm them and death will not choke them;
For David's true Son, who shall begin an everlasting kingdom of grace,
is now conceived in his mother's womb and shall soon be born; he shall
rise up against our enemies, sin, the devil and death, and shall prevail
against them, and deliver us from them, that they shall not hurt us for
ever. Such a kingdom of grace is now at the door, and this little child,
the dear little goose, will bring the first message of it to his people.
But the pious Zacharias cannot speak enough of such grace and mercy for
joy, and continues to speak:

**And that he might shew mercy unto our fathers, and remember the
ancient holy covenant, and the oath which he sware unto Abraham our
father to give us; that we, being delivered out of the hand of our
enemies, might serve him without fear all the days of our life, in
holiness and righteousness that is pleasing in his sight.**

(14) This is a very beautiful text, which well and truly informs us of
the kingdom of our Lord Christ. Your loved ones have often heard how
there was a terrible misunderstanding of Christ's kingdom among the
Jews: that they thought he would begin a temporal reign and lead a
splendor like other kings, and help his people to honor and great
things. But Zacharias tells us differently: that this kingdom will be a
kingdom where mercy will prevail. With this he wants to throw back Moses
and the whole law. For there they preach that God will be merciful to
those who keep his commandments and are righteous. But where mercy is to
go, there even those who have not kept the law and are sinners will have
hope and should not despair.

(15) Now Zechariah interprets this mercy here in such a way that it
also applies to the deceased.

1148 **L.3, 3S6-358. On the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XHI,
2650-2653.** 1149

The fathers of the deceased should benefit from it. Therefore, it cannot
be a mercy that affects the temporal, since the deceased can no longer
have a part in it. What would it help Abraham, Jacob and other fathers,
if Christ should set up a worldly regime, give great money and goods to
his people? But they enjoy the mercy that God, through Christ, forgives
sin and gives eternal life. They also need such mercy if they are to be
saved from eternal death. What else could Abraham and the other fathers
gain from the promise of Christ, which they did not experience and only
believed?

16 Therefore Zacharias said, "God has made a holy covenant, the
covenant of forgiveness of sins through Christ, and swore an oath to
Abraham that he would keep it. Now what is this covenant and oath?
Nothing else, but that through Christ, the blessed Seed, we should be
delivered out of the hand of our enemies. These are not temporal
enemies, although God also wants to help against them and keep them over
his Christians. But the covenant is not based on such temporal help. It
is set against sin, eternal death and the whole kingdom of the devil.
Such a covenant, says Zechariah, is made by God; and my son shall bring
the first message of such an achievement into the world.

(17) Now it should be especially noted here that he calls it a holy
covenant or testament. For with this he looks again to Moses, through
whom God had also made a covenant with His people before at Mount Sina,
when He gave the Law; but it was a covenant that they could not keep.
For flesh and blood is so corrupted by sin that it cannot obey the will
of God, but always desires, does and wants something other than God
through His word. Therefore, although the same covenant and the law were
holy and good, they became unholy because of the people who could not
keep them; therefore, they had to have an evil conscience and remain
under sin and death. Therefore, God, out of His Fatherly mercy, was
moved to make another covenant through the blood of Christ,

of his Son with us. This is a holy covenant, by which we are freed from
sins and become holy. For in this holy covenant we are promised
forgiveness of sins, not through the blood of oxen or calves, but
through the blood of the Son of God. By this this covenant is made,
established and confirmed; therefore we can certainly take comfort in
it.

(18) Then, says Zechariah, a new and holy life will follow. Namely,
those who accept such a covenant will serve God all their lives, not the
devil, as the world is wont to do, but God, without fear, in a good and
happy conscience. For whoever may not be afraid of sin, death and the
devil, what else would such a person be concerned about, what would he
be afraid of? This is the first and highest service of God, that one has
a right trust in God through Christ without fear, that he is our Father,
that he means well with us, that he does not want to condemn us, but
through Christ, for the sake of his death and resurrection, makes us
eternally blessed and protects us from sin, hell and the devil for
eternity.

19. after such worship follows the other; which is not that one (as the
papists teach) dresses himself specially, keeps himself specially with
eating and drinking, sleeping, watching 2c.; there God will grant the
people to do it with according to their need and opportunity, with
measure and thanksgiving, as they will: but in holiness and
righteousness.

20 The word "holiness" means nothing else, except that one should be
pious and holy for the sake of the outward life, and keep himself in a
good conscience, that one should not be attached to sin and the flesh,
but should subdue them, and should set his heart on the right obedience,
which God demands in His Word and the Holy Spirit brings about in the
believers. For the Christians will not fail, both their own flesh and
afterwards the devil, the evil spirit, will not celebrate, and will
provoke, drive and persuade them to fall into sin. Then it shall be, as
Zacharias says here, that the Christians cheer up and think of their
profession and service, and serve God in holiness.

**1150 D.s, 3SS-361. on the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2653-2635. 1151**

That is, to beware of such sins and to be pious. And it will be found
that the Holy Spirit will then come upon them and help them overcome
flesh and blood, even the devil himself. So that Christians should serve
God their Father in heaven in holiness all their lives.

21 But here we find that we stumble very often in such service. For it
is exceedingly soon that a man falls into this or that sin. The flesh is
too strong, the evil spirit too clinging; and the Holy Spirit is still
very weak in us, so that we cannot fully perform such holiness. For here
on earth we receive only the firstfruits, as Paul calls it, to the
Romans, in 8 Cap. V. 23, and not the tithe nor the fullness of the Holy
Spirit. Now how should a Christian do this, if he is either fallen, or
does not feel perfect, nor without sin? St. Zacharias teaches us
further, saying that God still has a ministry called "righteousness";
so that, if we still feel sin in us, we may recognize such sin, refrain
from it, and consider God righteous, who, for the sake of Christ His
Son, will remit and give us all our unrighteousness. This is called
"serving God in righteousness," not despairing in sins, but refraining
from them and certainly believing and hoping for forgiveness of sins
through Christ. Such service in righteousness helps the service in
holiness to become perfect, since what is still lacking in holiness is
made up for through faith and the forgiveness of sins.

This is Christ's kingdom, and such treasure shall his people, the
faithful, have of it, that they may be justified by the forgiveness of
sins, and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and fear neither death nor the
devil. This is what Christ will tell, says Zechariah; and my Son shall
be the first messenger to make it loud and clear in the world, as
follows:

**And you child will be called a prophet of the Most High.**

23. He is silent, the dear Father, of the holy, austere life that his
Son leads.

shall. For of this he had heard the angel himself speak, that he should
drink neither wine nor strong drink; and boasts only of the ministry of
preaching. "Thou shalt," saith he, "be called a prophet"; not badly
a prophet, as other prophets, but he that goeth hard before the LORD.
For he himself, the Lord, will come and preach himself. But before he
does, you will appear and say, "This is the man through whom all the
world will be saved. He who has this man, who has a gracious God, shall
be fearless and without fear. No other prophet has done this.

**You will go before the Lord to prepare His way.**

(24) A prince does not go first, but lets his courtiers go before him,
and his most trusted servant goes first before him; when he is seen, all
give way, and everyone gives way. So shall my son be also: he shall go
before, crying out to be given place; he, the prince of life, follow
hard after him. For John preached of Christ, how he was present, and how
soon after him he would enter the preaching ministry, that every man
should remember and receive him.

(25) This is the joy that we are to experience today: that whoever is
afraid of his sins, whoever is afraid of death, may look here at this
blessed finger and listen to the voice that says, "Behold, this is the
Lamb of God who bears the sin of the world. This finger we should praise
today, and give thanks to God for the sake of dear John's ministry and
his comforting word. For he is the paragon above all prophets and
preachers.

(26) Here consider, and tell me if we have not been great fools in the
papacy? For all the praise in the pulpit and all the joy have been
interpreted to mean that John led such an austere life, drank neither
wine nor strong drink, ate locusts and wild honey, and clothed himself
with camel skin. But what good is this to you and me? What is the use
and service of it for us? Is it not true that whoever wants to consider
John only for his own person will not be able to draw comfort from it?
For although God therefore gives such a hard life to the

[1152 **L.3, 361-363. On the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2655-2658.** 1153]{.underline}

The reason for this is that he was not a bad man, but led a special way
of life above all others, in honor of and for the advancement of the
Gospel: yet this does not help us today, it does not give us any special
joy. But this comforts and rejoices all believing hearts, that John
comes with such a finger and sermon and points to the one who is all joy
and comfort, namely, to the Lamb of God who bears the sin of the world.
He shows such a little lamb with his finger, not to geese, cows, stones
or wood, but to us men, who are poor afflicted sinners, that we should
accept it and take comfort in it, as follows:

**And that thou mayest give knowledge of salvation unto his people,
which are in remission of their sins, through the tender mercies of our
God, whereby he hath visited us from on high.**

(27) This is an excellent, beautiful, rich and comforting saying,
which was very proper, concerning the new preaching that John was to
bring into the world. The Jews had the law before, and such teaching and
preaching that they knew what they should do if they wanted to do God's
will. This is also a wonderful, great knowledge and excellent teaching,
but it is very bad for us because we cannot follow it. For since we know
that God lays out His Ten Commandments for us and wants us to keep them,
but must confess that we do not keep them, it follows that such
knowledge of the law has no more effect on man than that he must fear
God and await His wrath and deserved punishment. That is why Paul says
that the law causes wrath, the law kills and accuses us, and is like a
handwriting on our own neck.

028 Now therefore John shall come and give a different knowledge unto
his people, which is not a knowledge of death, and of sin, and of wrath;
but a knowledge of salvation; that is, such a preaching as teacheth how
to be saved, and to be delivered from evil.

Death and sin may be saved. This is an art of which the world knows not
a word. In the papacy, people came so far that they felt they needed
help against sin and death, but no one knew where to find such help.
Therefore, the one called on the Virgin Mary, the other on St. Anne; the
one did this, the other another: but it was not only in vain, but also a
criminal, abominable idolatry. Now John is to be a master of this art,
and give people the knowledge of salvation, that is, he is to bring such
a sermon into the world, so that people may learn how to be saved, and
be delivered from sin and death.

But how will this happen? What kind of teaching will it be? Such a
doctrine, saith Zacharias, when men hear that sin is forgiven them, that
whosoever would know how he shall be saved, must know that it is by
grace alone, and by nothing else. The Jews preached, as can be seen in
the prophets: Whoever wants to have forgiveness of sins and a merciful
God must sacrifice much, or (if they did it best) keep the Ten
Commandments. The pope preaches the same way. One must do good works,
give alms, fast, pray, hear mass, etc., that is the way to salvation.
No, says John, this is not the way. I have also fasted and lived
strictly; if then works should help, mine should also help.

(30) For John, in outward appearance, lived a holier life than Christ
Himself, who lay on beds, stayed with the people, drank wine, and ate
flesh; for John made his most meager living with water, honey, and
locusts in the wilderness. And yet, saith John, such a hard life doth
not, that I should not enter into heaven: but forgiveness of sins doth;
as he saith John 1:16, "We have all received of his fulness, grace for
grace"; item, "This is the Lamb of God, which bareth the sin of the
world." This is St. John's preaching, that he always points to Christ,
that we should hope and have forgiveness of sins through him alone. We
are to be pious and live holy lives.

[1154 **L. 3, 363-365. on the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2658-2661.** 1155]{.underline}

It is true, but salvation comes to us only through the forgiveness of
sins, so that each one may know God in such a way that he will be
merciful and forgive sin, and say, "Lord, do not reckon with me, for I
do not know how to stand by my works. I would gladly guard against sins
and be pious, but that does not help me. This alone helps me, which you
preached through St. John, that we should be saved through the
forgiveness of sins.

31 But mark this with diligence: If the world is to be saved through the
forgiveness of sins, then it must follow that the world is full of sin.
For where there is no sin, there is no need of the forgiveness of sin.
Again, where there is need of forgiveness of sins (as Zacharias says
here: Whoever wants to come to the knowledge of salvation must have it),
there must be sin. So it follows that all men are sinners, and as much
as there is in them, they are damned. But if they are to be saved, this
is the only way, that sin must be forgiven them. But this happens, as
John teaches, only through the Son of God, who is the little lamb, where
all our sins lie, which must help us. For if sins should lie upon us,
that we should bear them, we should be lost for eternity.

This is called St. John's sermon, by which one learns how to be saved,
namely, by the forgiveness of sins alone. The pope and his crowd do not
want to suffer this: they sing the Benedictus every day at Mass, but do
not understand it; instead, they oppose and persecute it as the highest
heresy when we teach that one can be saved only through the forgiveness
of sins and not through good works.

But where does forgiveness of sins actually come from? Who does it?
Zacharias answers very finely: "The heartfelt mercy of God does it.
That means, I think, that all merit and good works are exactly cut off
from the forgiveness of sins, so that one cannot say: one deserves it;
the sins of the virgins Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul are forgiven, because
they have been so holy and pious.

are. No, says Zacharias, forgiveness of sins comes only from the fact
that God is merciful, and out of such mercy sent and gave His Son to us,
that He paid for us, and through Him we should be saved. This does not
mean merit, nor our good works; but his heartfelt mercy, that he loved
us, who, because of our sins, deserved nothing but hellish fire. But
there is the causeless mercy, which hath brought such things to naught;
wherewith the exit on high hath afflicted us.

34 This is a great sermon about our dear Lord Christ, to whom Zechariah
gives a special name, calling Him the Exit on high, that is, above all
creatures in heaven, who rises from the Father like the brightness of
the sun. So Christ speaks of Himself Joh. 3, 13: "No one leads to
heaven except the one who has descended. For his being does not first
arise here on earth, when he is conceived and born: he comes down to
earth from on high from heaven. He, he says, has visited us, he has come
to us on earth, and has given forgiveness of sins to us poor lost
sinners, who otherwise would have been eternally condemned. This is true
grace and mercy.

35 Therefore we cannot boast that we have done words or works, for no
one has known of such things. But John is the first to point to him with
his finger, and to lead us to him; otherwise, like the Jews, we would
have seen Christ and thought him to be a man like others. For he did not
keep himself like the monks in a but life, and in addition was poor and
miserable. Who would have considered him to be the coming forth from on
high and the Lamb of God, if John had not shown him and made him known
to us? Therefore, no one can boast of anything here; it is pure grace
and heartfelt mercy.

**That he might appear to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow
of death, and direct our feet into the way of peace.**

**
[1156 L. 3, 365-367. on the day of St. John the Baptist. W. XIII,
2661-2665. 1157]{.underline}**

Here Zacharias concludes his thanksgiving and joyful song, and includes
not only his people, the Jews, but also the Gentiles, and says that all
the world is in death and darkness. For even if we live as long as we
do, the last hour will not be absent; our eyes will finally be closed.
So that everything is under death and must die, no man is exempt or
exempted. Now those who are to go under the earth and sit in darkness,
to them, says Zechariah, God has kindled a light to illuminate the dead
under the earth and in death. If they have believed in this little lamb
of God and have been baptized, they shall have a light, and a light of
life, which shall shine unto them in death, and keep them so that the
devil cannot hurt them.

(37) Now this is the joy: not a foolish joy of the world, with dancing
and jumping, with eating and drinking, or which is made up of great
money and good things; it is to do with something greater and higher,
namely: how we remain alive when we are dead and rotten in the earth;
how we become godly when we are in sins; how we come out of hell into
heaven, out of damnation into blessedness. For we must finally go down
and see and hear the devil; this usually happens at the last hour, when
one wrestles with death: then every Christian must come to feel sin and
death rightly. There is then no other help nor counsel, but to follow
the finger of John, and to look upon the little lamb that bareth the sin
of the world, and comforteth us, saying, He that believeth on me shall
never see death; and though he die, yet shall he live again." From such
great things, from sin and eternal death, from righteousness and eternal
life, comes this joy, as we are to walk around on St. John's Day,
thanking God for having given us such a prophet, seeing his fingers and
hearing his preaching.

38. the devil and pope have other fingers pointing to plates and caps
and commandments of men; but it is the infernal

Fire with it. For if such a thing should help, it would also have helped
John, and he would have comforted himself. But then he is silent about
all his good works and hard life, and says to Christ, "I need to be
baptized by you," and seeks and desires nothing else, except that God
may be gracious to him through Christ. Thus the Virgin Mary and all the
saints were also saved by grace and not by merit.

39 This is St. John's sermon on the knowledge of salvation in the
forgiveness of sins; such an art and wisdom that every Christian should
know that the forgiveness of sins is the only way to salvation. John was
the first to preach this message to the world, pointing out the Lord
Jesus Christ with his finger; therefore it is worthy to love him and
rejoice in him, as his name implies. For "John" is the name of one who
is in favor, a charming, kind, friendly man to whom everyone is
favorable. John should have such a name because of his office, and not
because of his life or his person; otherwise he should be called
Sauermann or Hartmann. But his life is of little use to us; therefore it
gives us no joy: but his teaching brings comfort and joy, that through
him we may see and know Christ our Savior, and so be saved.

(40) Therefore, let the young people know that this day is celebrated,
not for the sake of dancing, eating, and drinking, but so that John may
teach how to be saved; so that everyone may give thanks and praise to
God for having given us the dear John, and through him the joyful word
and the blessed finger, so that we may know where to find salvation and
eternal life. So the feast is to praise God and His mercy, and not St.
John's person: so that God may receive thanks from us that He has given
us His Son and such a comforting sermon that we may fear neither sin nor
death, but that God's goodness and grace may comfort us for eternity.
May God grant this to us all, amen.

[1158 L 3, 367.368. On the feast of the beheading of John. W. XIII,
2668-2671. 1159]{.underline}

**On the feast of the beheading of John the Baptist. *)**

**Marc. 6, 17-29.**

And Herod sent and took John, and put him in prison for Herodias' sake,
his brother Philippi's wife: for he had espoused her. And John said
unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife. And
Herodias pursued after him, and would have killed him, but could not.
But Herod feared John, for he knew that he was a pious and holy man: and
he kept him, and obeyed him in many things, and heard him gladly. And it
came to pass on a convenient day, that Herod gave a supper in his yearly
feast unto the rulers and captains and nobles of Galilee. And the
daughter of Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them
that sat at meat. Then said the king unto the damsel, Ask of me what
thou wilt, and I will give it thee. And he swore an oath to her: What
thou shalt ask of me, I will give thee, even to the half of my kingdom.
And she went out, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she
said, The head of John the Baptist. And she went in quickly with haste
unto the king, and besought, saying: I want you to give me the head of
John the Baptist on a dish as soon as possible. The king was grieved,
but for the sake of the oath and those who were at the table, he would
not let her make a false request. Soon the king sent for the executioner
and ordered his head to be brought here. He went and beheaded him in
prison. And he carried his head on a dish, and gave it to the maid, and
the maid gave it to her mother. When his disciples heard this, they came
and took his body and laid it in a tomb.

Your beloved ones have heard about his birth and ministry on the day of
John, how it was such a glorious and great thing. Therefore, it is
necessary to know the end of what he deserved, and how the world
rewarded him for having begun the blessed preaching of the forgiveness
of sins, and for having pointed with his finger to the Lord Christ. The
first thing to be surprised about is that in the 3rd chapter Lucas
indicates how John began to preach and baptize at the Jordan in the
fifteenth year of the emperor Tiberii. Now it is also certain that
Christ was crucified in the eighteenth year of Tiberius; that there is
therefore the account, because John was killed a good time before
Christ, that he did not lead his preaching ministry for one and a half
or two years.

(2) This is a short time, and it rhymes very badly with the great
prophecy that the angel makes of his ministry before his birth, how many
will rejoice at his birth and he will go before the Lord and prepare the
way for him. For such a great cry is followed by the small work, that
the dear

*) From sermons of 1331 and 1534.

John preaches barely two years, and still does no miraculous signs; only
he baptizes and preaches repentance, until he comes over such preaching
for life and limb. How your love will hear in history that he has to
lose his head so viciously for the sake of the whore that he is not
beheaded in public but in prison, and the young hurdle with his head is
paraded in front of the guests. It is a miserable bargain that the good
man should lose his life so shamefully.

(3) And that it is still more to be wondered at, the evangelist says
that Christ was not particularly angry about it; only, as he hears, he
says to his disciples, "Let us go especially into a wilderness"; that
he does no more to it than that he departs and will no longer trust. Who
then will serve such a lord, who so shamefully executes his dearest
friend? Does this mean that the holy great man, the like of which has
never come on earth after Christ, is honored that he should preach for
such a short time, do no miraculous work, and finally perish so
miserably?

(4) Therefore, whoever wants to be a Christian, and especially a
preacher, may learn here how God deals with His children and the

[**1160 L. 3. 368-371.** On the feast of the beheading of John. **W. xm.
2671-2674. 1161**]{.underline}

The saints are the most beloved saints. For Christ, the Son of God, did
not fare any better, he did not preach much longer than three years and
was then crucified. This did not harm St. John, because he was promoted
to blessedness and freed from all misery. But it was also a sign of a
terrible wrath against the Jews; God wanted to show them, because he
took this excellent preacher from them so soon, that he had nothing good
in mind for them, but wanted to punish and punish them for their sins.
And this is what happened. For after forty years Judaism has come to an
end, and the priesthood, the temple, the worship, the government, the
land and the people, everything has fallen to the ground. They deserved
this because they strangled the prophets, persecuted God's word and
persisted in all their sins without amendment.

(5) So John, the highest preacher after Christ, conducted his ministry
very briefly, so that no such thing is read of any prophet or martyr.
But, as reported, it was a sign of a great wrath against the Jews. As
Isaiah very finely reports, Cap. 57, 1: "The righteous," he says,
"perishes; and there is none that takes it to heart. Holy people are
taken up, and no one pays attention. For the righteous are snatched away
from calamity, and come to peace, and rest in their chambers; for they
have walked rightly before them. "2c. There it says both: when GOD
takes away pious people, that it means no good to the rest of the
multitude which they leave behind them; for it is a calamity from it:
but it does them no harm; for they come out of trouble into rest, that
when the world is all calamity with murders and bloodshed, they lie in
peace and have rest. As the Lord also says to the pious king Josiah, 2
Kings 22:20, "I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be
gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the
evil that I will bring upon this city." Therefore, the pious have no
harm when they worship God.

by death from this evil world. But the world should be terrified of it,
because it is an indication that it is going to be evil.

(6) For this reason, St. John will not have been greatly distressed
because of his death, but because he sees that God has so decreed it
with him, he will have said: Well, dear world, you did not ask about it
when I preached to you about repentance and the kingdom of God; you
would not even have said: Oh God, be merciful and help us to mend our
ways! You laughed and made a mockery of it. Well, I am going there; but
now we will turn back: I have had trouble and work until now, now I will
go to my grave and rest there; you have had happiness and all your will
until now, and have not asked for God's word, now you will find
misfortune and trouble enough 2c.

For our Lord God seldom lets his prophets see the calamity of which they
preach and warn the people. Jeremiah is almost the only one who had to
see and experience his prophecy himself, with the prison and the
destruction of Jerusalem. The others, like John, God took away
beforehand so that they would not see the misfortune.

Therefore, we should not be offended by the fact that God deals with His
saints as if He does not know them, as if He does not ask anything about
them, and lets the world do its will as if it were right in all things.
This does not harm the saints, for they are promoted to their peace. The
world, however, promotes its own destruction and gathers the wrath of
God; for this reason, it must finally fall to the ground. Now let us
take the history before us and see how it happened.

9 Your dear ones know what kind of calling St. John had, that he should
preach repentance and prepare the way for the Lord Christ. Now those who
recognized themselves as sinners and believed in God's grace and
forgiveness of sins through Christ, who was soon to be revealed, he
baptized at the Jordan, as a sign that Christ was already at hand and
that their sins were to be forgiven through him. Therefore the

1162 **2.3. 371-373.** On the feast of the beheading of John. **W. xm,
2674-2676.** 1163

The evangelists named the baptism of John as a baptism of repentance for
the forgiveness of sins. But how he preached repentance is seen in Luc.
3, that he punished everyone for what was wrong and admonished the
people to desist and send themselves to grace, otherwise God's wrath
and judgment would overtake them.

010 Now it came to pass, that Herod the king lived in public,
confessedly vexed. For he had his brother Philippi's wife, who was
still alive, with him as his wife. This was an unpleasant thing for John
to do, because he was supposed to punish all the trouble by his
preaching and to turn people away from it, because he was called to do
this. Therefore he did as a pious preacher should do, not allowing
himself to be challenged that Herod was a great king, but just as he
punished other people for their sin and admonished them to desist, so he
also punished and admonished Herod, saying, "It would not be right for
him to have his brother's wife. This displeased Herod; it displeased
the harlot even more, who feared that such a sermon would go out over
her. She therefore chased after John and would have liked to kill him,
but she could not. Herod would also have liked to do it, but he was
afraid, because he saw and knew what a testimony and praise John had
with everyone. Therefore, because John would not cease his punishment
and admonition, he had him seized and imprisoned, so that he would no
longer be publicly proclaimed.

011 And when the devil had brought Herodem and his harlot so far that
they were hostile to John, and laid hands on him for the word's sake,
he drove them to depart, and made such an accusation, saying, Because
they had no right to be a pious man, this was the nearest and best way:
Herod should hold a great banquet on his birthday. Then, when the guests
are at their happiest, Herodias' daughter should dance before the king
and the guests and entertain them. There will be no lack of
entertainment; everyone will take a liking to the maiden and praise her.
Then the king shall promise the maiden with an oath that what she asks
he will give her.

ben. If the maiden asks for John's head, then she has it already. For
it behooves a king to keep what he promises (especially in front of many
people). This is the cart that Herod, his whore and the whore child make
and put together over the pious John. That their main concern is that
they kill John, and then that they do it with a good appearance and that
everyone gives them justice.

(12) For this is a peculiar thing that attaches to all Christians, but
especially to the death of preachers, that they are still wronged, and
blasphemed as heretics and children of devils, to whom be justice. Their
enemies, however, are glorified and called pious people and the
Christian church, who cannot err or do wrong. Herod's oath here also
serves this purpose, so that everyone may say: "He did not like to do
it to John, he would have liked to grant him his life longer; but
because he had sworn, he had to leave; otherwise he would have lost many
thousand guilders sooner. 2c. O holy St. Herod, what a great service you
are doing, that you are so stubborn about your oath.

No doubt the Pharisees will have faithfully advised and pushed the cart,
so that he would not go behind the oath, saying, "It would be better to
kill ten Johns than to swear a false oath. So it shall be: Christ
himself, and after that all his saints, are slain in the name of God,
and in honor of God; as Christ says, John 16:2: "He that killeth you
shall think that he doeth God service thereby." We must learn this and
become accustomed to it, since we see here that the greatest saints have
done so.

14 Now the bell is cast, and such a cart is made over St. John that no
man shall be able to wrong Herod by killing John. Now as they made the
plot with each other, so it goes. When the king is at his happiest with
his guests, the whore child comes in and makes a court order in front of
the guests, and pleases everyone. Then the king wipes out, swears to the
maiden-

[1164 **L. 3, 373-375. on the feast of the beheading of John. W. XIII,
2676-2679.** 1165]{.underline}

The child takes an oath that if she asks him for half the kingdom, she
will have it. The little whore runs to her mother out of sheer
simplicity and asks what she should ask for. The mother tells her to ask
for John's head. Soon she runs to the king again and says: "I want you
to give me the head of John the Baptist on a bowl as soon as possible.
The little whore is afraid that the king will regret it or that other
people will talk him out of it; therefore she wants to have it on a bowl
in her own hand as soon as possible. So dear John comes for his head,
without all preceding judgment and sentence, butcherly in prison, for
the sake of a wicked, evil, desperate whore.

This is the history, as much as Marcus and Matthew report of it. The
most important thing is that we should learn two things from our dear
John. The first is for the preachers, that he who is in the office of
preaching should not hold his life in high esteem, but should fulfill
his office, and should freely and unhesitatingly punish everything that
is offensive. God is pleased with this, and as it is written in the
prophet Ezekiel, everyone saves his soul; otherwise he must give account
for their sin, which he does not punish, as he should do in office.

Now everyone sees how the world does not like to be punished, and how it
does not like to be justified in everything. And especially those who
are special because of their office, money or fortune do not like it;
they think that because they do what they like, other people, especially
preachers, should also speak what they like. But where a preacher wants
to look more to God's will and office than to the favor of men, then
(as Aristotle has a fine fable) it is like the hares, who undertook to
preach to the lions and to make them devout; but before they opened
their mouths properly, they were torn apart by the lions. As we also see
here with Johanne. Herod would have asked nothing of John for baptizing
and preaching repentance to everyone, but when he attacked him and
chastised him for adultery, saying, "It is wrong for you to have your
brother's wife," Herod could not stand it, but

wanted to be unpunished because of his power and glory. So John could
not let it go unpunished because of his command and office. Above him
the poor little hare and the fierce lion come in multitudes, and the
little hare must remain above them. This is the lesson, that one should
be accustomed to such things and not be frightened.

The other lesson is not only for the preachers, but for all Christians,
that we can learn especially from this example that God does not mean us
harm, even if he persecutes us, puts us under the cross and makes us
suffer all miseries. For John is a true friend of God and a dear child.
That God is now justified in strangling him so shamefully, this is not
done in bad faith, as reason would judge; it is done for his own good,
so that Christ can grant the kingdom to his servants, as it was granted
to him by the Father. Whoever wants to be in the kingdom of Christ must
not shy away from the cross and death. For this is the testament of the
Lord Christ, and he, Christ himself, has thus entered the kingdom.

18 Therefore it is a fine word that the church sings today in the
sequence: Vicinus dignitate Christo fit et morte; nam morte turpissima
damnatur sponsus, et sponsi amicum damnant recte morte turpissima: John
is after Christ the greatest of those born of women: even so, as he is
next to Christ according to the worthiness of his office, so he is also
most like him in death. Because Christ, the bridegroom, dies an
ignominious death, John, the bridegroom's friend, also dies an
ignominious death.

Nineteen Therefore let no man be afraid of such things; but where they
are so, let it be known that they are right, and that to do otherwise
would be an evil sign. For there are the excellent examples of our Lord
Christ Himself, then of Saint John the Baptist, and before them of the
holy prophets, and after them of the holy apostles, all of whom were
most faithfully waiting for their office, and were dear children of our
Lord God; and yet at last they were so rewarded that the world made them
shameful.

1166 **L. 3, 375-377. On the day of Peter and Paul. W. XIII,
2679-2681.2700.** 1167

has directed to it. You should also learn to wait for this reward, if
you are otherwise a true preacher; or be content with the preaching
ministry. For the kingdom is not given to us apart from our Head Christ
Jesus, who himself had to die on the cross. John had to lose his head so
shamefully for the sake of a whore; meanwhile Herod sat at the table,
banqueting and in good spirits, as if he had only been well prepared.

20. But God is long-suffering, and forgives the punishment, even if he
does not remain outside. This Herod's father, who is called Ascalonitam
Herodem, persecuted Christ while he was still in the cradle and
strangled the innocent children. God watched until his time, when he
punished him with a severe and horrible disease, so that worms grew in
his body, and no man could remain around him for lack of breath. But
such temporal punishment is nothing compared to the eternal punishment.
His son Herod Antipas, as we hear about today, strangled John for the
sake of the whore he had with him, thinking that when John was gone, no
one would be able to deceive him. But what happened? Emperor Tiberius
deposed him and sent him to the misery in France to Lyon, where he died
miserably. This Herod had a brother's son, named Herod Agrippa, who
followed his ancestor and cousin's example and strangled the apostle
Jacob. But as such tyranny had befallen the ancestor and cousin, so it
had befallen him. For the angel of the

The Lord smote him so that he, like his ancestor, was eaten by worms,
Acts 12. 12 So shall it be with tyrants.

21 Therefore one should look at the end. At first sight, it seems as if
St. John is doing very badly, but Herod is doing as he wishes. But just
as the love of God is hidden in St. John, so the wrath of God is hidden
in Herod. But both are revealed afterwards, that the love remains in
eternity with John and the wrath in eternity with Herod. So the tyrant
wanted it.

(22) Therefore let no one be astonished at the suffering and the
cross. Let no one envy the persecutors of the gospel, that they sit in
honor, great and mighty. For the cross and suffering is the only way by
which you may come to the inheritance and kingdom of Christ; and all the
saints, Christ himself, have gone this way. Who then would be dismayed
by it or complain about it? So you see how soon it turns with the
tyrants, that their suffering is found here in its time, and lasts
afterwards for eternity. May God graciously protect us from this, and
rather let us suffer all kinds of shame, disgrace and sorrow here on
earth with the holy Baptist John, so that we may come to the kingdom of
God; as our Lord Christ says that it is granted to us, as it was to him,
through the cross and suffering. May our Father in heaven, through his
Holy Spirit, grant us this for Christ's sake, amen.

**On the day of Peter and Paul.**

**Matth. 16, 13-19.**

Then came JEsus into the region of the city Caesarea Philippi, and asked
his disciples, saying, Who do men say that the Son of man is? They said:
Some say that thou art John the Baptist; others, that thou art Elias;
others, that thou art Jeremiah, or the prophet ?iner. He said to them:
Who do you say that I am? Then Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art
the Christ, the Son of the living God. And JEsus answered and said unto
him, Blessed art thou, Simon the son of Jonas: for flesh and blood hath
not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say
also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatsoever thou shalt bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven.

**1168 L. 3, 377-379.** On the day of Peter and Paul. **W. xm,
2709-2704. 1169**

This is one of the excellent high gospels, for it contains exceedingly
high and excellent articles, for which we Christians are especially
concerned. Namely, to learn what Christ is, what his church or people
are, what enemies the same church has, and then also what excellent
gifts and goods no one else has in the whole world, so that it may stand
firm and be preserved against the devil and all his power.

Now it is a wonder beyond all wonders that through this very gospel,
which is so comforting and the highest treasure of Christians, the devil
has caused all misfortune and the highest abomination and has done the
greatest harm to the church. For on this text the Antichrist, the pope,
has placed all his power, that he is the head of all churches, that he
alone, as the supreme head, has the keys. Which they point to such power
that he may conclude, set and do among the Christians, also in worldly
matters, what and how he wants. In sum, by this text he has made himself
Lord in heaven, on earth and in hell. For these are the two things on
which the papacy is built and on which it stands: the first, that the
Lord builds his church here on Peter, and gives the keys to him alone,
and not to other apostles; the other, that he, the pope, is a successor,
and that such power as the Lord gave to Peter is inherited by him alone,
and belongs to him alone. For this reason, he excluded from the church
all those who did not want to recognize him as the supreme head, who
alone had the keys to heaven, and condemned them as heretics and gave
them to the devil.

For this reason it is necessary that we act diligently on this text, not
only for the sake of the excellent doctrine and great consolation which
is held out to us in it by our dear Lord Christ, but also so that such
misunderstanding of the papacy may be eradicated and the right
understanding may be maintained.

The first thing we are to learn and remember here is what Christ is,
what we are to believe him to be, and what we are to believe about him.
For this is why the Lord asks his disciples first of all what other
people say about him, and then especially what they say about him.

so that, if they are under a false delusion like other people, he may
instruct them correctly and help them. For as has often been said, it
all depends on knowing Christ rightly. He who knows him rightly has
eternal life. But he who does not know him rightly must remain in his
sins and be eternally condemned; there is no other way out. As we also
heard on the day of John.

(5) There are many thoughts. Some take him for John the Baptist, some
for Elijah, some for Jeremiah. Not that he is the same person (that
would be too foolish to believe), but that he comes with such a command,
office and spirit as John, Elijah and Jeremiah. But these are still
pious people. For the Pharisees and chief priests thought him not a
prophet, but a deceiver, having not the Holy Ghost, but the devil; as is
more than seen in one place in the gospel'. The disciples do not speak
of them here, but of the pious, who thought highly of Christ. But Christ
makes it sufficiently clear that he is not satisfied with such things.
He who knows him well must hold him higher than John, Eliam or Jeremiah.
Therefore ask his disciples in particular, and say:

**Who do you say that I am?**

6 First of all, notice that he does not ask Peter alone, but all the
disciples together. For from this it is evident that Peter's answer,
and after that Christ's answer, is not to be drawn from Peter's one
person alone, but from all the other apostles who confessed with Peter.
Mark this well, for this is the first thing that can be done to catch
and drive in the papists. As the holy teachers, and especially
Augustine, clearly testify, the Lord does not speak to Petro alone, but
to all.

7 Peter is soon ready for this question, answers for himself and the
others, and freely says publicly: "You are the Christ, the Son of the
living God. This is a short confession, but the right core of the whole
holy scripture. For the word "Christ"

**1170 2.3, 379-381. On the Day of Peter and Paul. W. XIII, 2704-2706.
1171**

was a well-known word among the Jews, that it was called the Seed of the
woman, who crushed the head of the serpent and through whom all
generations were to be blessed; who was to establish an eternal kingdom
on earth, save people from sin and death, and bring them to eternal
life. He, says Peter, of whom Moses and all the prophets testified, is
you; and through you such grace shall be given to all the world. This is
what we, your disciples, believe and think of you.

(8) Now it seems as if it were enough of such a confession that he
says, "Thou art Christ. But he adds another excellent piece, since few
Jews knew of it, and all the world does not yet want to believe it
today, and says: "You are the Son of the living God. This is a new and
previously unheard of word, that God has a Son. Now God cannot give
birth to anything out of His being or nature; God must also be eternal
and omnipotent. That therefore Father and Son, because of their essence,
are two different persons, must be one being. Even today the Jews do not
want to believe this; the Turks do not believe it either. But whoever
looks with Petro rightly at the office which Christ is to lead in the
world and carry out with us, must conclude with Petro that Christ must
be God in equal omnipotence. For overcoming sin, death and the devil,
and giving eternal life, no man, as we see, can do; sin and death hold
them all captive. Therefore, if this man Peter is talking to is the true
Christ, who is to help us from the curse, from sin, from death and from
the devil's kingdom, then he must also be the Son of God, who has life
in himself and is omnipotent like God. With men it is lost.

9th Now this is to know and confess Christ, not only to say the words,
Thou art the Christ, the Son of God, but to believe in one's heart that
this Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary, is the Son of God, who therefore
came to earth and was made man, that he might tread on the devil's
head, remove the curse, since all men are under sin.

and on the other hand will bring us to grace. If the heart firmly
believes this, and is not afraid of sin and death, because he has
Christ, that is to confess and believe rightly.

(10) But one does not find much of such Peter; most of the people
still consider Christ to be John, Eliam or Jeremiah, even though they
profess with their mouths that he is Christ, the Son of God. For if the
pope and his crowd considered him to be the Christ and the true Son of
God, they would rely on his works, on his suffering and death, as the
only atonement for their sin, and would not dare to atone for their sin
and do enough. But because they still subject themselves and think that
they must save themselves from sins by their own works and piety, this
is a certain testimony that they think no more of Christ than of John,
Elijah, Jeremiah. They have long passed away and died; therefore they
dare not enjoy them. They hold Christ in the same way, and nothing else,
even though they may not confess it with their mouths. They are good
Turks. They also consider Christ a pious man and a great prophet, but
they do not dare to enjoy him for the forgiveness of sins and eternal
life. All papists have such a Turkish faith.

11. Therefore, let us keep this confession in mind and learn it
correctly, so that we not only repeat it with our mouths, but also
firmly and surely believe in our hearts that this Jesus is the true
Christ, the Son of the living God, who alone has done enough for sin,
has strangled death, captured the devil and torn hell asunder; that we
may take comfort in him and hope for certain help against sin and death
through him, and not be frightened, but keep the hope of God's grace
and eternal life firmly in our hearts. This is the first thing we are to
learn today.

The other is from the holy Christian church, in which such a confession
alone goes and remains. To the Lord Christ

**1172 L. 3, 381-383. On the day of Peter and Paul. W. XIII, 2706-2709.
1173**

He likes such faith and confession very much, praises Peter for it, and
comforts him: because he believes such things, there is no need for him,
and says:

**Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah.**

(13) An excellent word is this, that he saith, Blessed art thou. For
by this the Lord means that he who has this confession and knowledge has
everything that leads to salvation. Again, he who does not have it has
nothing that leads to salvation. But such a word would not have remained
unchallenged if the unbelieving Jews had been there and heard it. Just
as the papists of today do not leave it unchallenged when we speak as it
says here: Faith in Christ alone makes blessed. They would have said:
How can Moses, the Ten Commandments, worship and sacrifice be nothing or
help? As our papists also say, "Shall good works be nothing?

014 Well then, it is written, Blessed art thou, Simon the son of Jonas.
Now Peter did nothing but confess with his mouth what he believed about
Christ in his heart. Christ says that he is blessed because he believes
this and not because he does this or that. For although God demands and
wants good works, this alone shall serve and help to salvation, if one
believes and confesses Christ, for which Peter believed and confessed
Him. As St. Paul also says, putting the two together very finely, Rom.
10:10, 11: "If a man believe with all his heart, he shall be saved."
For the scripture saith, He that believeth on him shall not be put to
shame.

(15) The pope and his crowd vehemently oppose this article of faith,
and cannot mock enough that we say, "Faith alone makes you blessed;
good works do not make you blessed. For they consider faith to be a bad
art, thinking that whoever can say the words of Peter according to them,
believes. But hear thou what Christ saith and holdeth: for thus saith
he:

**Flesh and blood has not revealed these things to you, but my Father in
heaven.**

(16) Now if any man would learn what faith is, and whence it cometh,
let him hear the Lord Christ. "Flesh and blood," he says, "has not
revealed it to you." That is to say, such faith is not a human thought
that a person could create and make for himself; the Father in heaven
must give it and kindle such light in the heart. But by what does the
Father do it? By nothing, but by the Word and His Holy Spirit. This is
the only way to come to the knowledge of Christ and to faith. But where
the Word and the Holy Spirit are not, it is easy to learn and repeat the
words. As the pope and his crowd often do in all churches today. But
there is no faith there, no heartfelt trust, that they should set their
heart on Christ alone, and nothing else in all the world should comfort
them before God and His judgment.

(17) Therefore flesh and blood, that is, our reason, knows nothing of
such things, but is even as a light which is lighted by night, and
shineth fair: but when the bright day cometh, and the sun shineth over
all, then such light is lost, and shineth and shineth no more: for the
sun is too bright and fair. It is the same with faith. It is a bright,
great, beautiful light, since our reason is black and dark against it.
Whoever wants to say that such a light, which is above all human reason
and can be kindled in our hearts by God alone, is a bad, small thing,
may do so. But we must regard it as the highest and greatest work of
God, whereas all human work, reason and ability are nothing.

18 But this is also so that we should not be sure or presumptuous, as if
we already had such grace completely. For we must ask God daily to
kindle and sustain such light in us through His Holy Spirit. For the
devil does not celebrate, he is very hostile to such light, raining and
shuddering, blowing and blowing on all sides, if he could dim and
extinguish such light. Therefore, we have good and great reasons to ask
God to keep us in such a heart and trust in our dear Lord Christ,

1174 **L. 3, 383-385. On the Day of Peter and Paul. W. XIII,
2709-2711.** 1175

and graciously guard them from all other thoughts.

19 For there is a fine example before our eyes. Soon after such a
confession, the devil sets upon Peter, that he forgets such faith and
confession, and thinks no more of the Lord than of another man, and
warns him to take heed and not to be carried away. Therefore, just as
the Lord says here, while he still believes, "Blessed art thou"; so he
says afterwards, "Get thee, Satan, out of my sight; thou art vexatious
to me, for thou meanest not what is divine, but what is human." That it
is therefore highly necessary for both parts of prayer: first, that God
through His Holy Spirit may reveal the Lord Christ to us and kindle the
right faith in our hearts; and second, that He may graciously preserve
us in such faith and confession to the end.

20 This is the doctrine of Christ and the right faith. Now follows the
text about the Christian church, who it is, what enemies it has, and
what its comfort should be.

**You are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church (or
congregation), and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.**

In the first verse of John 21, when the Lord first saw Peter, he said to
him (v. 42), "You are Simon son of Jonah, you shall be called Cephas,"
which is interpreted as "a rock," and is called Peter or Petra in
Greek. Because Peter says and confesses here in such a fine and round
way what he believes and holds about Christ, Christ answers him: "You
are Peter"; as if he wanted to say: "You have such a name, it is not
without reason that you are called Peter (a rock); because your faith
and confession is rock-solid, firm and certain, it stands right and
firm, as on a strong rock; and in spite of the devil, if you only remain
so that he does you harm. Upon this rock I will build my church or
community. Upon this rock (understand), not that thou art; for thy
person would be too weak for such a foundation: but upon the confession
and faith that made thee the rock.

I will build my church on it. The foundation can hold and is strong
enough; the devil will not be able to overturn it or tear it down.

22 This is the text, which is very comforting; but as reported above, it
has been most shamefully misused by the pope. For this reason, it would
be necessary to report all such abuses and refute them; but, since this
has been done enough elsewhere, we want to stay with the right
understanding alone, and see the comfort and teaching that is held out
to us here.

(23) There has always been the greatest controversy in the world about
who is the true church, as we learn even today. For there one is sure
that one stands on the rock and may not fall in eternity, as Christ
teaches here. Now if anyone wants to make a right judgment and not fall
short, let him learn here from Christ that the church is nowhere else,
for where this rock is, there is the confession and faith that Peter has
and the other disciples have. If you find such faith and confession or
doctrine, do not doubt that the church is there, whether such people
have standing before the world or not. Again, if you find this doctrine,
faith and confession of Christ either not at all, as among Turks and
Jews, or not pure, as with the pope, do not doubt that the church is not
there. For just as building and foundation must be together, so, says
Christ here, this confession, doctrine or faith will be in the church,
and nowhere else. You cannot divide one from the other. Where the
foundation is, there is the building, and where the building is, there
is the foundation.

(24) He who follows and accepts such a judgment cannot be deceived.
For he will not look to see whether the pope wears a triple crown,
carries the keys in his coat of arms, and emperors and kings kiss his
feet and worship him as the highest bishop; but he will see whether the
doctrine, so that the pope rules, rhymes with this confession, whether
he considers Jesus to be the Christ and the Son of the living God, and
comforts himself with all his heart for the forgiveness of sins and
eternal life, and teaches others that they too may be like him.

[1176 **8.3, 385-387. On the Day of Peter and Paul. W. XIII,
2711-2714.** 1177]{.underline}

comfort. If he does not find this, he immediately judges, "Pure, you
are not the church that is ruled by God's Spirit, but the church of the
devil. Cause, the triple crown, the keys in the coat of arms, the name
pope does not make the church, but the confession of Christ and the
faith in him. Again, if he finds such a confession and doctrine among
those who have no special standing, indeed, who must also bear the name
that they are heretics and cut-off members of the church, he is not
mistaken: let the world judge what it will, so he knows that they are
true Christians and the true church.

(25) Whoever, then, had looked at the confession, and not at the
splendor, the great name, and the great power, would have considered the
pope a great lord; but he would not have considered him the head of the
church, or, if I may say so, the least member of the Christian church.
For this reason, he would have given nothing to his commandment, nor
would he have accepted his worship, since the whole world alone has
allowed itself to be deceived with pretense and false words.

26 Thus we have who the Christian church is, that it is bound neither to
place, time, person, nor anything else, but only to this confession of
Christ. This is the rock and foundation on which Christ himself builds
it, through his Holy Spirit and the preaching of the Gospel.

Now this church, which is built on this rock, has its enemies: not only
the world, but also, as Christ calls it here, the gates of hell, that
is, the devil with all his power; he cannot stand such a confession, for
it breaks his kingdom and power. Therefore he tries it and confidently
storms against it: first in the hearts of Christians, that he wants to
take away the comfort they have in Christ, as if God did not want them,
as if he had forgotten them, as if he did not want to forgive sin but to
condemn it; then he sets up mobs and heresies, by which the ministry of
preaching is miserably corrupted and distorted; and yet there is no end
to it. He also stirs up worldly authorities to go against the Word,

persecute Christians and even eradicate the preaching ministry.

Therefore there is no creature on earth more afflicted or miserable than
a Christian, as St. Paul says in 1 Cor. 15:19. If it were not for the
consolation we have of the life to come, we would be the most miserable
people on earth. We must be accustomed to this, and see what Christ says
about it, and how he comforts us. For this he confesses plainly, that
Christians who are built on such a foundation will have the gates of
hell for enemies, as well as the world, which is bitterly hostile to
them. But this is the consolation, although the devil is evil and tries
Christians everywhere, that he will not prevail, but the victory will
remain with the Christians. As we finely see in experience. He who can
hold fast to the Word and this reason finds comfort even in the greatest
troubles and temptations, since otherwise all the world despairs. The
devil, as we partly see in the histories and partly experience
ourselves, has done very great harm, and still does, through heresy and
tyrants; but still the church has remained: they have perished, died
shamefully, and become corrupt in body and soul.

29 Therefore, even if it happens to us this very day that we feel the
gates of hell pressing on us and pressing on us in all places, let us
only hold fast to these rocks, and we will retain the victory. Again,
the world and the devil must leave off with shame and suffer for
eternity; since the suffering of Christians is only a temporal and small
suffering, which nevertheless shall finally be paid for with eternal
joy. Therefore, although the world and the devil with their power bring
things to such an extent that the Christians have to go down and leave
life and limb; nevertheless, the gates of hell do not yet have the
victory, but the victory shall finally remain with the Christians.
Cause: they have forgiveness of sins; therefore death cannot harm them,
they will remain heirs through Christ to eternal life. What, then, is
evil or terrible about such death and decease, and who would not a
thousand times rather give up life and limb than live there in eternity?

1178 **L. 3, 387-389. On the Day of Peter and Paul. W. XIII,
2714-2717.** 1179

die? This is what the devil and the world do when they are at their
wickedest, so that the poor Christians here are also taken away from
temporal sorrow and misery and promoted to eternal joy.

30 Therefore this consolation is certain: If you are a Christian, built
on this foundation by the Lord Christ, so that you recognize him as the
one who overcame sin, death and the devil, who acquired eternal life
through his death, then there is no need to let the devil be angry, the
world rage and rage, you will remain safe, not because of temporal life,
which you must let go without, but so that you will remain in eternity
in peace and quiet, and the devil will no longer drive you or torment
you.

In addition to such victory and comfort, which shall be found in that
life and remain forever, Christians also have a great treasure here on
earth. For thus the Lord speaks further:

**And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatsoever thou
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.**

32 Here the pope and the gates of hell have proved themselves worthy of
having so miserably mangled this comforting saying. First of all, the
pope said that he alone, as the head of the church, has the keys;
whoever wants to have or use them must take the power from him.
Secondly, he did not mean such keys only for forgiveness of sins and
excommunication, but that he might make statutes and command whatever he
wanted, even in temporal matters, although the Lord clearly says that
they are the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And since the Lord gives
such power, John 20:23, after his resurrection, to bind or loose sin, he
does not give it to Petro alone, but to all the apostles at the same
time, one as much as the other, as the words there clearly imply.

33 Therefore it is a gross lie, so that the devil has done much damage
to Christianity through the pope, that he may say that the

The keys are given to Petro alone. But enough of that now; let us take
the right opinion and the consolation that is in these words before us
now.

(34) The keys of the kingdom of heaven are nothing else, but that
those who believe in Christ and accept the gospel and desire forgiveness
of sins should have their sins forgiven, and thus heaven opened to them,
which is otherwise closed, where sins are not forgiven. But again, those
who do not believe in Christ and do not accept the gospel, but continue
in sins without repentance, their sins shall not be forgiven, but heaven
shall be closed to them. This is the treasure of the church, that is,
the group or assembly that confesses with Peter that Jesus is the Christ
and the Son of the living God.

35 The Christian church distributes this treasure, not only in the Word,
through absolution and public preaching, but also through baptism and
the Lord's Supper. For "he that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved". So if you believe that Christ's body was given for you and his
blood poured out for your sins, and in such faith receive the reverend
sacrament, the body and blood of Christ, you also have forgiveness of
sins.

(36) Since the church is commanded to distribute forgiveness of sins
in this way, let no one despise such means of grace, but use them gladly
and often. For it is not without cause that Christ has appointed them.
He knew very well that we need such remedies, for it may soon happen
that the devil and our flesh hurry us and throw us into sin. Where will
we go then? For we know well the wages of sin, and must therefore fear
it. There is nowhere else to go but to the church, to which Christ has
given this command to forgive sin through Word, baptism and sacrament.
Baptism is an eternal covenant, in which we are to remember God's grace
and mercy, and it is not necessary to be baptized again; indeed, it is a
grave sin. For to be baptized again

1180 **L. 3, 389-391. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W.XIH,
2717-2719.** 1181

It is just as much as accusing God of not keeping the promise He once
made to us in the first true baptism. At such baptism, our dear Lord
Christ has arranged both the Word and His Testament, so that we may
always remember this covenant and the forgiveness of sins in the name of
Christ. This is to remind and assure us of this covenant and the
forgiveness of sins in the name of Christ.

Therefore, it is not enough for you to find yourself in absolution and
the sacrament once or twice a year. Whenever your heart becomes dumb and
fearful for the sake of sins, take before you the covenant that God made
with you in baptism at the beginning, and adhere to the Word and
reverend Sacrament by which God has assured you of such a covenant that
you should not doubt the promise of forgiveness of sins. There you will
find a certain righteous comfort. For the Holy Spirit wants to be with
such work and word, so that it shall not depart without fruit.

(38) Now this is the treasure of Christians, that no one, not even
their own sin, should bar them from heaven. For though they have sin
like other people, yet they have the keys of the kingdom of heaven, that
through the forgiveness of sins, which is promised and given to them in
many ways, heaven may be opened to them again. Such grace is found not
only in those whom Christ has ordained to preside over His church, but
also in the case of need in every Christian man. For where forgiveness
of sins is proclaimed in the name of Jesus, there

they should be believed and accepted. For the church, that is, all
Christians have such power and command that they should not let any
sinner despair in sins, but should comfort him and promise forgiveness
of sins in the name of Jesus.

(39) The ministers of the church are also commanded to proclaim the
forgiveness of sins to anyone who desires it, to communicate holy
baptism and the testament of our Lord Christ. We should be more
comforted by such grace than by the daily approach of the gates of hell.
For if there is forgiveness of sins, there is no need; heaven shall
remain open to us, and if the devil should be sorry. So we should not
let the world frighten us either. For the more it rages against Christ
and his word, the further it is from God's wrath and forgiveness of
sins. And we know that it cannot come to forgiveness of sins except
through our gospel. For she does not have the keys to heaven; the church
alone has them. Because she rages against the church and the word, her
sins are retained. It is impossible for her to come out of it, unless
she converts, accepts the Word, and is thus freed from sins through Word
and Sacrament. Thus our dear Lord Christ comforts His Church, since the
confession and knowledge of Christ is within. May God grant us His grace
that we may be preserved in such confession until the end and be
eternally saved, through Christ, our dear Lord, amen.

**On the day of the Visitation of Mary.**

You will find the Gospel on the day of the Visitation of Mary on the
feast of the Assumption of Mary.

[1182 **L. 3, 391.392.** On the day of Magdalene. **W. XIII,
2778-2781.** 1183]{.underline}

**On the day of Magdalene.**

**Luc. 7, 36-50.**

But one of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him. And he went into the
Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat. And behold, there was a woman
in the city who was a sinner. When she heard that he was sitting at the
table in the Pharisee's house, she brought a jar of ointments, and
stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wet his feet with
tears, and to dry them with the hair of her head, and to kiss his feet,
and to anoint them with ointments. When the Pharisee who had invited him
saw this, he spoke to himself and said, "If this man were a prophet, he
would know who and what kind of woman this is who is touching him, for
she is a sinner. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Simon, I have a
word to say unto thee. And he said, Master, tell. A usurer had two
debtors. One owed five hundred pennies, the other fifty. Since they did
not have to pay, he gave to both of them. Tell me, which of them will
love him the most? Simon answered and said: I will give the one to whom
he has given the most. And he said unto him, Thou hast judged rightly.
And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman?
I came into thy house, and thou gavest me no water at my feet: but this
woman hath wetted my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hair of
her head. You did not give me a kiss, but this woman, after she came in,
did not stop kissing my feet. Thou hast not anointed my head with oil;
but she hath anointed my feet with ointments. Therefore I say unto thee:
Her sins are forgiven much, because she loved much; but to whom little
is forgiven, he loves little. And he said unto her, Thy sins be forgiven
thee. Then they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves: Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he said unto the
woman, Thy faith hath saved thee: go in peace.

This is an excellent history, which should be preached in the church on
a special day every year. For it sets before us the two most noble
pieces of Christian doctrine, what is right repentance and how one
should come to the forgiveness of sins.

(2) But anyone who would only look at such history with carnal eyes
and judge it by outward appearances would not only see nothing special
here, but would also have good reason to be annoyed by it, like the
Pharisees here, and to dislike the whole business. For it is very bad
for a woman to run into other people's houses, and especially to run
over honest, brave people. That is why the Pharisee here was offended by
this woman, and is so offended because, since he had previously
considered Christ a prophet, he now thinks that he is not as good as a
prophet. For if he were a prophet, he would know the infamous woman,
reject her, and not suffer that she approached him without shyness and
touched him in front of brave, honest people in a strange house. But

Whoever wants to judge this story rightly and know this woman well,
should not only look at her outward actions, but should also look into
her heart, where she will take on a far different form with her conduct.

But how can we see into her heart? She is silent as a stone. If she said
something, it would be safe to take so much from the words that one
would know what she had in mind. But trade does not need many words,
just look diligently at her works. These are not silent works, but they
speak and show very finely what kind of heart she has. For the fact that
she steps behind the Lord, lies down at his feet, and weeps so bitterly
is an indication that she is not safe nor careless, but is most grieved
in her heart. For such hot weeping does not come from forwardness and a
cheerful heart. Anger, sorrow, anxiety, fear, terror and heavy concerns
are the right well from which to draw such water of the heart. This is
the first thing we should see, that she weeps so bitterly.

1184 **L. 3, 392-398. On the day of Magdalene. W. XIII, 2781-2783.**
1185

4 She does not say what the cause of this sorrowful heart is. But the
Lord Christ understands it very well, and says it finely with round
words twice: first, when he says to Simon, "Many sins are forgiven
her"; and then, when he says to her, "Your sins are forgiven you. Now
this is the request that she does not leave at home, but it drives her
out among the people, knowing that she will find Christ. She does not
ask anything about it, other people judge and think what they want about
it; everything is important to her that she can come to Christ and hear
this gracious word from him: "Your sins are forgiven. This is the first
thing that pleases the Lord Christ about the woman, that she is not safe
like the Pharisees; she recognizes her sin and desires to be freed from
it with all her heart. This is not spoken in words, but her weeping
shows it, as Christ himself understands and interprets it.

5 The other part is that she does not know how to be friendly enough to
the Lord Christ, and how to discover and reveal her love for him. For
the fact that she lies at his feet, wets his feet with her spikes, dries
them with her hair, kisses them, and pours delicious water over them;
all this is an indication that she is not hostile to the Lord Christ.
This is the other virtue that pleases the Lord Christ; for this reason,
he wants the woman to be unpunished and unblamed by her host, and he
approaches him over the table in front of everyone, reads him a chapter,
and teaches him how he should have kept such a guest.

(6) I, saith he, am come in unto thee; yea, that thou hadst given me
bad water to wash my feet (for this was the custom of the Jews, as is
seen in the Histories, Gen. 18:19). But what does this woman do? She
washes my feet with the water of her heart. You have not given me a kiss
(for this is how the Jews used to kiss one friend another, the host his
guests, as a sign of a friendly heart and that they were welcome); but
this woman cannot refrain from kissing my feet. You have not anointed my
head with. Oil; but this female

has anointed my feet with delicious water. In sum, the Lord will not and
cannot suffer the Pharisee to punish and wrong this woman. For he, our
dear Lord Christ, looked at the heart; because it was so righteous and
noble, he could not dislike the work. Again, the Pharisee looked only at
the outward appearance and knew nothing of the heart; therefore he could
not let himself like it.

(7) This is the history which the evangelist has prescribed for us,
that we should learn from this woman, and that we should also be so
disposed: that we should first weep with her, that is, do righteous
repentance; then put our trust in the Lord Christ, that through Him we
may have forgiveness of sins. In the papacy, they also preached and
taught about repentance: that repentance is to think about the sins one
has committed, and with such thoughts to repent of them and to feel
sorrow; then to confess them; and finally to do enough for them by
one's own works. But such a doctrine is basically wrong and a pure
poison of the souls. Therefore we may learn here from this example what
true repentance is; then we know that we cannot fail. For what pleases
Christ our dear Lord must be righteous.

The evangelist does not mention this poor woman by name, although some
think she is Mary Magdalene, since the evangelist reports in the
following chapter that the Lord cast out seven devils from her and that
she followed the Lord wherever he preached. But whatever her name is, it
is true that she was a poor sinner and let the devil lead her into
fornication, adultery and other sins. For what such a few sins have
caused to the soul, body and property is unnecessary to tell here; it is
seen every day. She got into such mischief, and perhaps lay in it for
many years. Since our dear Lord Christ allows himself to be seen with
miraculous signs and heard with preaching, the poor woman also comes to
the sermon, and her heart is so moved that she beats within herself,
confesses herself, and says to herself, "You wretched man, what have
you wronged yourself with, that you have sinned against the Lord?

[1186 **L. 3. 395-397. On the Day of Magdalene. W. XIII, 2783-2786.**
1187]{.underline}

Have you lived by God's commandment, fornicating, dragging others with
you into your body and soul? If God now came with His judgment, how
would your fornication turn out? Instead of shameful joy and pleasure,
eternal suffering and damnation would come. O God, be merciful, forgive
me my sin, do not condemn me, I want to repent, let go of my shameful
debauchery, and improve my life 2c.

(9) This is a true repentance, that first the heart is frightened by
God's wrath because of its sin, and desires from the heart to be rid of
it, and to begin to desist from it; then another life will finally have
to follow. For it is impossible, if repentance is right in your heart,
and you are sorry that you have sinned against God so far, that you
should willingly give yourself up to such sin again.

(10) Such repentance a man will not be able to make for himself when
he wants; it is the work of the Holy Spirit, which he does in us through
the word of God, which first reveals sin, and then also shows the
punishment of sins, eternal death. This is such a punishment, which
cannot be despised, but penetrates and drives the heart to such an
extent that it does not know where to end, and can almost no longer
breathe because of anguish. Hence the poor woman's heartfelt weeping
and righteous change of her whole life, so that she no longer runs after
the young fellows, no longer teases with her eyes as before, no longer
hopes with her hair; but all this is needed so that one must see that
she is heartily displeased with her former life, and now wants to
improve herself and become more pious.

(11) Here also we are to begin repentance, not to be sure, but to
watch diligently every man in his station; and where we have lived
contrary to the word of God, that we may soon cease from it, confess our
iniquity unto God, and pray that we may beware of it another time, and
become more godly. This is the first thing we should learn from this
woman, if we want to begin to repent.

12. but this does not complete the atonement, for it does not make your
sins

forgive her, that you may be sorry for her. It is also necessary that
you run with this woman to the Lord Christ and ask him for forgiveness;
yes, that you have the heart and trust in him that he will help you from
sins without any merit, only by grace. This is the right thing, by which
repentance becomes complete and we obtain forgiveness of sins.

(13) And this woman has no advantage over us in this respect. For
though we cannot come to the Lord Christ in person, and see and hear him
as she has seen and heard him, yet our Lord Christ has left his command
and word here on earth, that sins should be forgiven on his account and
in his name. And not only is the ministry of preaching and absolution
ordained for this, but also the holy sacraments, baptism and the Lord's
supper. For to this we are baptized, that through Christ we should be
freed from sins and be children of God. For this reason, in such
temptation and fear, we should hold on to holy baptism, so that we
consider what God has promised us in it. The Lord has also instituted
the Last Supper for us as an assurance that through the death and dying
of the Lord Christ we shall certainly believe in the forgiveness of
sins. Therefore, whoever has a troubled conscience because of his sins
and desires comfort, let him come here to the Lord's supper,
remembering his baptism, seeking absolution from an ecclesiastic or
other Christian, and he will find the Lord Christ, who will speak to him
just as he spoke to this sinner, saying, "Your sins are forgiven. As
the words of the Lord Christ clearly say: "He who hears you," he says,
"hears me.

14 The pope preaches nothing of such a thing, but instead of our Lord
Christ and faith, he puts the merit of our own works, that we should put
away sin with our works. But how does this rhyme with the example of
this sinner? If she had wanted to repent after the priest's sermon, she
would have had to go to the priests and confess her sin there. After
that, she would have had to undertake special works and, after such
obedience, first of all

**1188 2.3, 397-399. On the Day of Magdalene. w. XIII, 2786-2789. 1189**

If such obedience had been enough, she would have waited for forgiveness
of sins, but she would have had to doubt it forever.

But this is a seductive, heretical teaching. Confessing to the priests,
that is, telling the sin, as is customary in the priesthood, is not what
God told you to do. And even if someone called you, do not think that
you would consider such a confession as if God would forgive your sin.
It is considered humility and an indication of true repentance when a
person goes and tells from one thing to another what he has done wrong.
But because God has not commanded or commanded it, one should not
command or require such in the church. It is especially contrary to
Scripture to consider such confession as serving for the forgiveness of
sins. But it is Christian and useful that young people and the common
people be held to it and admonished to receive absolution from an
ecclesiastic if they are troubled in their consciences and desire
consolation; and especially if they wish to go to the sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, that they first be shown, interrogated and
instructed.

(16) But such instruction may well be given and received without the
recital of sins which the pope has commanded. All ranks are to help that
the youth be properly instructed: the church servants, father and
mother, schoolmasters, and the like. But let no one be so foolish as to
place the forgiveness of sins neither on confession nor on instruction,
as the pope did with his confession, since there was no proper
instruction.

(17) For this reason we have been urged to reject such confession, and
to instruct people, if they wish to confess properly, to lament their
sin to God in heaven with all their heart, and to take comfort in the
forgiveness promised by the gospel for Christ's sake, and to strengthen
such faith, also to hear the verbal absolution commanded by Christ to
the church; and besides, to see that they are really serious, that they
will henceforth forsake sin and flee. Where there is such earnestness,
there can be no lack of it.

then another life will be found. For your heart is ever so set as to be
hostile to evil works, and desires not only to forbear the same, but
also to practice good works, as you have hitherto practiced evil works.

18 But beware again, lest you take such a change to mean that your sins
are forgiven. For forgiveness of sins comes to you only through faith in
Christ, that you come to him with this woman, with heartfelt trust that
he has taken your sin from you, borne it, and paid for it with his death
on the trunk of the cross and done enough.

(19) These are the right things that make a difference between
Christians and unbelievers. For Christians and unbelievers are alike in
this, that they are both sinners, that is, they have a sinful nature and
cannot keep themselves from sinning; though one more than the other
follows the devil and his sinful nature and evil inclination. But after
that the difference is found, it is excellent and great. A Christian
does not live so rough and safe, he knows that his nature and
inclination is evil; therefore he is in good guard, and where he has
followed such a sinful nature and the devil's inspiration and done
wrong, he is sorry, admits himself guilty before God, and desires mercy.
On the other hand, he hopes for grace and does not doubt that grace will
come to him through Christ. On the other hand, the unbelievers are sure
as if they had not committed any sin, always follow their desire and
will, and fear nothing in doing so; therefore they do not ask how they
can be freed from sins.

(20) So the Pharisees sit here, and especially Simon the host, who
thinks himself pious, and does not think that it requires the Lord
Christ to forgive his sins. He thinks of it as the Jews and Turks still
do today: if they have sinned, they want to put away that sin themselves
through repentance or their own works. Therefore you do not see that
they have wet eyes, like the poor woman here, or that they are very
concerned about the Lord Christ. They hold him like a

[1190 D. 3, 3ss-4oi. On the day of Magdalena. w. xm, 2739-2791.
1191]{.underline}

other people, and much less than themselves. For they are such saints,
who would not willingly let a sinner woman deal with them before men, as
the Lord Christ lets this woman deal with him.

(21) We should diligently guard against such naughtiness, for it is
impossible to love God and our Lord Christ properly. But those who
recognize their sin, and see what an awful burden and heavy judgment
they have upon themselves, cannot refrain from it; they must love such a
gracious God with all their hearts, thank Him, have His will and His
word before their eyes, and follow it; as the Lord indicates in the
parable of the two debtors. For this is the way of nature, that we love
and value him whom we have enjoyed and who has done us good; just as we
become enemies of him who has done us harm. Therefore Simon answers,
"To whomsoever is most given, he shall love most." Whoever does not
believe that God has forgiven all his sins by grace and has abolished
the punishment of sins, eternal death, will say with his mouth that he
loves God, but it is impossible for this to be true in his heart.

22 Therefore the Lord makes a very fine judgment between the poor sinner
and the holy Pharisee, his host. "To whom much is given," he says,
"he loves much. The Lord proves this with the parable of the two
sinners; then he concludes, "This woman has loved much. He proves this
with her works, that she has netted his feet with her spikes, dried them
with her hair, kissed them with her mouth and anointed them with
delicious water. Again he says to the host, "You do not love me, for
you have not done to me what this woman has done.

(23) What then will be the conclusion of this syllogism? Nothing else,
but as the Lord summarizes it very precisely and finely: "I tell you,
many sins are forgiven her. This is proved by the fact that she loves
much. But the sins of you and your companions are not forgiven, but you
are still in it up to your ears, and will die and perish in it. For no
special love is ever felt for you toward me;

What love would have to follow, where you considered yourselves sinners
and believed that you should get rid of it through me.

(24) The papists make this statement against our doctrine of faith,
saying that because Christ said, "She is forgiven much, because she
loved much," forgiveness of sins is not obtained by faith, but by love.
But that this is not the opinion is proved by the likeness, so that it
clearly shows that love follows from faith. "To whom much is given,"
says the Lord, "he loves much." Therefore, where one has forgiveness
of sins and believes, love follows; where one does not have it, there is
no love. And Christ himself soon after says to the woman, "Go in peace,
your faith has helped you." This is absolution and comfort, that she is
assured of forgiveness, not on her worthiness, but that she seeks
forgiveness from Christ, hopes and grasps it by faith, and is not
deterred by her unworthiness; for she is full of sins and brings great
impurity to Christ.

(25) Now with this similitude our dear Lord Christ has presented to us
a common doctrine, how we must come to the forgiveness of sins. For that
he says of two guilty men rhymes with all men. They are guilty before
God's judgment, not only because of the sins that each one commits for
himself with his works, but because of nature; for we all come from one
father and are born of one mother, both of whom have had sinful flesh,
have been in sins, and have been under the wrath of God because of sins.

(26) Whether there is a difference between these two debtors in that
one owes five hundred pennies and the other only fifty pennies is not
the issue. There is no difference, for they are the same in the main
thing, that they are both debtors and cannot pay. So the difference
among us remains, for the sake of the outward life; for one keeps more
to the bridle than the other, we are not all thieves, adulterers,
murderers according to the work. This inequality remains, as can be seen
in the Pharisee and the

[1192 **L. 3, 401-404. On the day of Magdalena, W. XIII, 27S1-27S4.**
1193]{.underline}

of the sinner here. The Pharisee owed fifty pennies to the world, while
the woman owed five hundred. For he had not lived in fornication and
public scandal as the woman had. But nevertheless, let the difference of
the outer life be half and among us, as it may, when we come before
God's judgment, so it is said: We have not to pay, and must remain
debtors, the one with the little, as well as the one with the large sum.

27. Now when those who are little guilty with the Pharisee get into the
bad habit of interpreting their little guilt as if they were guilty of
nothing at all, and also boast of great merits, and rightly defy mercy:
Then it is reversed, that the small guilt becomes a great guilt, and the
greatest a small one, nay, none at all; as can be seen, the Pharisee is
more pious for the life of him than the woman; but because he thinks
himself as if he were guilty of nothing, and will not confess his guilt,
such guilt remains upon him. Again, the woman is much more guilty, but
she confesses it and asks for mercy: so she gets rid of the guilt.

(28) This is the first of these things, that no one should exaggerate
discipline, respectability, or anything else, but that everyone should
plead guilty before God and confess that he is in God's register and
owes a great deal, but that he cannot pay or help himself out of the
debt. But what does God want to do with such debtors? how will He keep
account against them? The debt is there, no one can deny it. For our own
conscience and God's law, the debt book, as Paul calls it, Col. 2:14,
convince us. But he who would deny the debt can think how it will please
his creditor. For he who does not have to pay, let him beware that he
would be right and insist on his creditor, and if he demands the debt,
make him a liar. This will accomplish nothing, except that he will be
justly convinced and put in irons or in the debtor's prison. This is
the other part of the doctrine, and the greatest consolation that we
poor people can have.

here on earth, that if we freely confess the debt, and only humble
ourselves against God, our creditor, and desire mercy, he has such a
kind and gracious heart that he will forgive and give us all our debts;
as the Lord Christ clearly and loudly testifies in the other parable,
Matthew 18, of the servant who owed ten thousand pounds.

29. Take heed of this comfort, and put it into your heart; for
otherwise it is impossible for you to be saved and to be saved. For
there will never be a lack of guilt; your own heart will convince you
that you have not done the will of God, but have often sinned against
it. Now we must not think that God will forget such things or not call
us to account. If it does not happen sooner, it will happen at death's
door. Where will you go now? You are guilty, and yet you cannot pay. It
is impossible for you to run away and hide from the creditor. This is
the only consolation, that you get to know this debtor properly. For it
is the same with other usurers: when they lend, they at least want to
have the principal sum back again, if the usury wanted to stand outside
them. God does not want to be such a usurer, as Christ testifies here:
he wants to leave usury and the principal sum behind, one with the
other, and give it to you, if only you understand this for Christ's
sake and desire it from him with an undoubted heart.

(30) He that will not learn these things, and comfort himself with
them, shall find no comfort against sin in heaven or on earth. This can
be done by being secure for a while, not being afraid, and going with
ease, as if you had paid for everything. For our Lord God can lend you
for a while, but when the hour comes that the debt book is held up to
you, and you do not have this comfort, that you say: "My Lord, be
merciful to me through Christ, your Son, who has paid for me, and
forgive us our debt, then it is over with you, you will have to die and
perish in despair.

**1194 D. 3, 404-406. On the Day of Magdalene. w. XIII, 2794-2706.
1195**

Now it is true, we can hardly believe that God would deal with us so
graciously. We always remember: Just as we will do to others in such a
case, so will God do to us; he will want to have his own, and will need
the severity. But we should not give room to such thoughts, but see how
we can be sure of God's grace toward us. For it is true that God is
just and cannot suffer sin. How then do God and we sinners come
together? Christ teaches this in another place, when he says: "God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." And as
you will hear on St. James' Day, "The Son of Man did not come to be
served, but to serve, and to give His life in payment for many." There
you will hear what God causes to such grace, and how we can be sure that
He will not reckon nor demand our debt, but will forget and forbear it.
For since we poor wretches could not pay, God sent His only begotten
Son, who owed nothing, but was altogether righteous and holy, that He
should enter into our debt and pay for us; He suffered death for us, and
thus paid what we owed to God. Therefore, it is all up to you to take
comfort in this payment and to be certain in your heart; as the Lord
says here, the usurer is so good-willed that what cannot be paid, he
will let up and give for Christ's sake.

(32) Behold, therefore, your love, how it all depends upon this, that
we may know our Lord Christ aright, and seek forgiveness of sins from
him with the sinner. This means a right faith and heartfelt trust in
God's goodness, that he will forgive sins and be merciful for Christ's
sake. This is why our article of faith is very finely illustrated here,
that one can receive forgiveness of sins and eternal life through faith
in Christ alone. As the Lord concludes here, and says to the woman:

**Your faith has helped you, go in peace.**

What did she believe? Nothing else, because she was a poor sinner, and
if she is to be freed from such sins, it must be through this Jesus.
That is why she runs after him, and since she cannot get him otherwise,
she runs into a strange house, among brave, respectable people, without
any fear that they are sitting at the table and eating. The Lord takes
such earnestness, promises her forgiveness of sins, and teaches us how
she received forgiveness of sins, saying: "Your faith has helped you.

(34) But the Pharisees, sitting there, do not think that they owe
anything to God; and even if they had such thoughts, they do not
consider God to be so merciful that he would forgive them the debt in
vain. Therefore they do not respect the Lord Christ at all. Just as they
do not respect him, Christ does not respect them either and lets them
sit and eat. But he deals with this woman and reads them a good chapter,
that they are in sin and hostile to God, even though they make
themselves believe that they are his best friends. Let us beware of such
certainty and unbelief, and with this woman have a right hearty
displeasure at our sins, and hope for forgiveness of them through our
Lord Christ, who paid for us and redeemed us from God's debt book by
his suffering and death. This is the most noble piece and main teaching
of this history, and the right core of the art, which only Christians
can do, and no one else can learn from it, except from the holy Gospel.
It cannot be learned from the law. For it teaches absolutely how God
will punish sin, and does not say a word about God forgiving sin without
merit, for the sake of His Son. But for what we need such preaching of
the law, you will hear elsewhere, and Paul especially deals with such a
piece diligently and finely to the Galatians in the third chapter.

In addition to this doctrine, history is a very fine picture of the
Christian church. The

**1196L .** 8, 406,407. On St. James's Day. W. xm, 2796-2799. **1197**

lies at Christ's feet, that is, she clings to his word, with which she
comforts herself against sin and an evil conscience, and ventures
everything she has on the word. For these feet are her highest treasure
and comfort, and she lets herself be found here in this misery, as in a
strange house. But Simon the host and his guests, who sit at table with
Christ, that is, those who have the name, the office, and title and
glory, as those who are closest to Christ and the most distinguished
(such as popes, bishops, and other great people want to be considered),
they judge this poor woman, consider her a damned sinner, and for her
sake think nothing of the Lord Christ. But they think a great deal of
themselves, they pretend to be holy, and they do not think that they
need the Lord Christ. They sit upstairs, the poor lady crawls around
under the table; they sit down in front of Christ.

to the side, the poor woman helps herself to his feet.

Thirty-six: But there goes the judgment, Simon, thou host of the house,
thou lovest me not; little is forgiven thee. But to the woman he says,
"Your sins are forgiven, your faith has helped you; go in peace. The
poor Christians are content with this, and do not mind at all that they
are under the table at the feet, and that the hypocrites sit at the head
of the table. It is also comforting that it is so finely shown in this
history, as in a painting, how the right church here on earth is
miserable, but the false and unrighteous church is honored and held
high. May the dear God keep us with the small group and make us
eternally blessed with this pious sinner. May our dear Lord Jesus Christ
grant us this through His Holy Spirit, Amen.

**St. James Day.**

**Marc. 10, 35-45.**

Then Jacob and John, the sons of Zebedee, went to him and said: Master,
we would that thou wouldest do unto us whatsoever we shall ask of thee.
He said to them: What would ye that I should do unto you? They said unto
him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on
thy left, in thy glory. But JEsus said unto them: Ye know not what ye
ask. Can ye drink the cup that I drink, and be baptized with the baptism
that I am baptized with? They said unto him, Yea, we are able. But Jesus
said to them: Ye shall drink the cup that I drink, and be baptized with
the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on
my left, it is not for me to give you, but to whom it is prepared. And
when the ten heard this, they were displeased with Jacob and John. But
JEsus called them and said to them: Ye know that the worldly princes
rule, and the mighty among them have power. But it shall not be so among
you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant. And
whosoever will be chief among you, he shall be servant of all. For even
the Son of man is not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his
life in payment for many.

1. it is very good that in the church some histories of the saints have
been preserved, which are so diligently distinguished in the holy
scriptures for this reason, that we may follow such examples and improve
our lives. For this cause the Holy Spirit has decreed that one should
not

of their holiness, faith, and good works alone, but also of their
weakness and sins: to instruct and teach us, that as their faith and
good works are to shine before us, and we are to follow their example;
so also their sin and weakness are to warn us, that we may

1198 **2.3, 407-409. On St. James's Day. W. XIII, 2799-2802.** 1199

not to be safe, but to keep ourselves in good stead. For it has happened
to such great and excellent people, to whom we will not be like in our
lifetime, that they have stumbled and sometimes even fallen: how much
more can it happen to us, even though we are now standing, that we fall
and lie down unawares! Therefore, it requires great diligence and
constant prayer that God will preserve us and not let us fall into
temptation.

2 So Lucas the evangelist remembers how Paul and Barnabas were at strife
with one another, not because of them, who are now long dead and gone,
but because of us, that we should beware of the devil, be of one mind,
be diligentlyware of dissension, and of all that can occasion it. For
where the devil causes preachers to be divided among themselves, it is
to be feared that all evil will follow. So in the Gospel, the
evangelists diligently report the case of Peter, that he so severely
forgets himself, and three times denies Christ his Lord, who before was
willing to go with him even unto death. For such a case serves us to
pray always and not to be sure, as it has happened to them very soon,
that the devil will shamefully take us.

(3) So hear your beloved in today's Gospel, how James and John are
doing exceedingly badly, and want to badly urge the Lord Christ to make
something special of them above all his other disciples. There is not
only the shameful sin (which can suffer nowhere less than in preachers),
the hope and their own honor; for whoever wants to see his honor,
benefit and the like, and to direct his preaching to it, will not do
much good: but they also have no understanding at all what Christ or his
kingdom is. For they think that he is to establish a worldly government,
like other worldly lords. That he will forgive sins and give eternal
life, and that they need him for this, they cannot think of; but think
that if they were great princes and lords, they would have enough
already. The other ten disciples are neither much wiser nor more devout.
For the sake of such things

they also raise a murmur, and did not like to give anything to the two
brothers.

004 But why do the apostles write these things, and not be silent of
their own shame? This is done for our sake: not only that we may beware
and not be sure, but that we may pray diligently and not give way to
temptation; but also that we may learn by such examples how Christ deals
with such sinners and weak people.

(5) For although most people live in such a way that they do not ask
much about the sermon, nor do they care much about their sin, yet we
learn that the devout hearts have no greater complaint nor higher
concern than sin. Cause, they see the punishment decreed for sin,
eternal death. Therefore, they cannot be satisfied, they must fear and
be afraid of God's judgment and sentence. These examples serve for such
fear and distress, so that we should not only learn that when we are
sometimes overtaken by the devil and sin and fall, such things have
happened to other and greater saints, that we are not alone; but that
God wants to deal with us with compassion, not to throw us away for our
sins, but to accept us with grace and bring us to justice. As we see
here in the case of the two brothers, they fall with great difficulty,
and yet they think that they are not doing wrong, that they will
succeed.

But what does Christ do about it? Does he also treat them badly, or does
he no longer want to consider them his disciples, because they have been
with him so long and yet have learned nothing at all? No, he deals with
them in the most gentle way, gives them no evil word, but instructs them
in the most kind way that they should refrain from such desires, that
they should have other thoughts about his kingdom and their ministry, as
a father admonishes his children in all kindness.

(7) So these examples are exceedingly comforting, and agree well with
the doctrine of our dear Lord Christ. For he commands that repentance
and forgiveness of sins be preached in his name. But repentance is
nothing

**1200 L. 3, 409-411. On St. Jacob's Day. W. xm, 2802-2805. 1201**

other than to confess that we are poor, frail sinners, and for this
reason we should be careful and not indulge in sin. And after that we
are to believe forgiveness of sins through Christ. So we see in this
example that James and John fall into such hopefulness and foolishness.
This is an indication that we are all, one and the other, frail, poor
people. Therefore we should not be secure nor hopeful, but humble and
godly. But that Christ should deal so kindly with such sinners, not
giving them a harsh word, let alone beating them or pushing them away,
is an indication that he does not want to avenge sin but to forgive it,
and to deal graciously with sinners. This much we should learn today
from the story that happened here with the two apostles, Jacobo and
Johanne, and their mother, as Matthew reports.

(8) Besides the history, we must also look at the two sermons the Lord
preaches; one to the two brothers, and the other to the other ten
disciples. They, the two brothers, go about with the thought that
because they have such a Lord and Master, they will yet come to great
honors and become mighty lords.

(9) But what does Christ say to them? Ye, saith he, if ye would be my
disciples, and partake of my kingdom, ye must drink my cup, and be
baptized with my baptism: yet shall ye not sit on my right hand, nor on
my left.

This is a sermon that does not rhyme at all with the disciples'
thoughts. They think of great, worldly glory; so the Lord tells them of
great suffering, of anguish and adversity. So that the sum of this
sermon is: Whoever wants to be a Christian and confesses the Lord Christ
as a disciple, let him only let go of the thoughts as if he wanted to
enjoy the Lord Christ for worldly honor, power and wealth, and send
himself to suffer and await all misfortune. As Paul also says: "All who
want to live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

This is the kingdom of the Lord Christ, and he himself, the king in this
kingdom, starts the round dance. He drinks the cup and is baptized, that
is, he suffers, and suffers more and more severely than all his
subjects, as we see in his history. Such an example must be followed by
all those who recognize Christ as their Head and Lord; as Paul says to
the Romans in 8 Cap. V. 17, that we must be conformed to the image of
the Son of God in suffering, and afterward also in glory. And Christ,
John 15:20: "The servant is not greater than his lord: if they have
persecuted me, they will persecute you also." This is the color of the
court that this King gives out; whoever is ashamed of it, and will not
bear it, is ashamed of the Lord Christ, and does not abide with Him.

(12) As it is seen, it does great harm to the kingdom of our dear Lord
Christ, as he himself testifies in Matthew 13, when he says of the seed
that falls on the stony ground, that though it sprouts, it cannot remain
in the heat, for it has no root, and withers. So it is with many
Christians: if it were not for the temptation and the cross, they would
well remain Christians; but that they should risk their life and limb,
wife and child, house and farm, money and goods, honor and power, for
the sake of the gospel, they will not do it. But now it is decided: If
thou wilt be in the kingdom of Christ, thou must drink the cup with him
and other Christians, when thou wouldst rather be thirsty; and be
baptized, when thou wouldest rather be unsaved. For he will not have
such a kingdom as to divide money and goods and honor and other things
among men. "My kingdom," he says, "is not of this world." Therefore,
what the world has, he does not care for, but goes about with other
higher and greater things. Money and goods do not remain long; and even
if they remain, we must still get rid of them and cannot take them away
with us or enjoy them in another life.

13 Because our dear Lord Jesus Christ has not a worldly kingdom, but an
eternal kingdom, it follows that we should stand in peril for the sake
of the worldly, but wait for the eternal goods through him, that

1202 **D. 3, 412-414. St. James's Day. W. XIII, 2805-2807.** 1203

Our sins are forgiven, the Holy Spirit is given, and we are heirs of
eternal life. These are the things the Lord wants us to see and wait for
from Him.

(14) But there it is, as is seen here in the two apostles. If Christ
were to pay a thousand, a hundred, or even less florins to every
Christian who is baptized, how would there be a fuss about baptism? And
there is no doubt that the Jews themselves, no matter how hostile they
are to Christ, would still come for money and want to be called
Christians, just as they sometimes let themselves be baptized for the
sake of the baptismal penny. But because Christ not only does not give
money or goods, but whoever wants to be a Christian must put money and
goods on the road and risk everything for Christ's sake: this makes his
kingdom thin and narrow, so that few turn to him from the heart and want
to suffer and leave something for his sake, even though he promises his
Christians eternal goods and eternal life instead of temporal things.

But we should learn it here, and not let our reason and the world's
example deceive us. For when our dear Lord Christ offers us his cup and
wants to baptize us with his baptism, that is, when he lays out his
cross for us, we judge that such a cup and baptism is an indication that
God is angry with us and does not mean well with us. For this is what
reason holds: whoever is happy and well, has a gracious God; but whoever
is unwell, has an ungracious God. But here we see that the judgment is
wrong. For Christ himself drinks the cup and is baptized; and yet he is
his Father's dear child, in whom the Father has the highest and
greatest pleasure, and cannot be angry with him. Now Christ also means
well to his Christians, and in the most kindly way; for otherwise he
would not have given himself to death for their sake. Since he himself
gives the cup to his Christians, it must follow that such a cup is not
an indication of an ungracious will. For this reason, Christians should
not be terrified under the cross, but should accept it (as it is in
truth) as a certain sign that they are

are children of God and in the kingdom of Christ. For there it shall be
so, and not otherwise.

16 But for what purpose such a cup and baptism serve, hear your love at
other times, that our old Adam very well needs to be girded and
restrained between the spurs, for otherwise he would become too brave
and unruly. But when the cross weighs him down, he has cause to pray, to
keep the word, and to exercise faith. For there is no other means for
the flesh to be fed and sin to be subdued, except that God keeps His
Christians under the rod, as a father does his children, and does not
translate too much to them; otherwise they would be accustomed to
disobedience and would not want to be drawn at all. Therefore the rod,
as Solomon says, is nothing but an indication that God is not hostile to
us (as reason judges without reason), but that we are his children and
he is our father and loves us dearly. For otherwise, if he did not love
us, he would leave us in our souls. But that would be our ruin in body
and soul; against this the rod and the cross forbid.

17 So this is the sum of this sermon, that the kingdom of our dear Lord
Christ is such a kingdom, where we have to do a little bit of hardship,
so that our eyes go over, that is, we have to give ourselves up under
the cross. For the devil and the world are bitter enemies to Christians.
For this reason our Father in heaven must tie a shillelagh to the dog,
so that we do not run out of his way and he can hold us; besides that we
owe God our obedience and follow the example of our dear Lord Christ.
This is what has been decided here; therefore we should learn to live by
it, and with Jacobo and Johanne not look for great power, honor, goods,
and the like. For here it is not called sitting on the right hand or on
the left; it is called drinking the cup and being bathed.

18 According to this teaching, we must also realize that our dear Lord
Christ in his kingdom and glory does not want anyone to be like him or
to suffer. For he is, as it is written in the prophet Isaiah, Cap. 63,

1204 **L. 3, 414-^16. St. James's Day. W. XIII, 2807-2810.** 1205

who alone has trodden the winepress. He alone died for us and paid for
our sin with his death. He alone is the one who wants to help and save
us from all our troubles. He alone wants to hear our prayer and finally
make us blessed. Therefore, he can suffer no one to be placed beside him
and equal to himself. Yet the pope, contrary to his command and will,
places the Virgin Mary and other saints at his left and right, teaching
that they should be invoked and that we may enjoy their intercession and
merit. Christians should beware of such idolatry. For besides the fact
that Christ forbids it, it is dishonoring Christ to the highest degree
if we place our comfort and confidence in men, and in the meantime leave
our Lord Christ behind, who alone through his suffering reconciled us to
God, paid for our sin and overcame death.

(19) The other sermon which the Lord preached unto the ten disciples
was chiefly to teach them concerning the ministry of preaching. For as
the evangelist writes, when they heard that James and John would be
somewhat more than they, they were displeased with them, and thought
that they were as worthy to sit on high as they. The Lord sees this and
admonishes them in the most friendly way, saying: "You know that the
worldly rulers rule, and the mighty among them have power"; this is
what God has decreed and must be, so that there may be peace, unity and
good government among the people. But you shall not think according to
such an example. "Among you," he says, "it shall not be so; but
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your servant; and
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be servant of all." This
means that the office of preaching has not only been stripped of its
worldly power and authority, but also that it is to be nothing but an
office of service, with nothing to gain but toil and labor, and after
that all ingratitude, and even all misfortune.

20 This is a very necessary teaching, for we see how there are different
offices in the church. The apostles have more commands than the bishops;
the bishops and pastors more than other common teachers and ministers.

Preachers, or their ministers and deacons. Our dear Lord Christ wants to
make all these different offices equal with this command, so that no one
will use them for his own honor or benefit, but only to serve other
people, and to have trouble and work from them. For, saith he, if any
man should have power and great glory of it, I would ever have it right
before all others, who am the Son of God, and bring this command with
me, that I should direct men unto the kingdom of God. But I do not need
such a command and office to become glorious, great and mighty; I serve,
and serve with my body and life, so that I pay for all the sin of the
world. So learn to send yourselves also into your office, let not the
devil deceive you, as if my kingdom were a world kingdom. In the world
there are princes and lords who must have more and be more powerful than
their subjects. But in my kingdom it is different; there it is the
greatest prince and most powerful lord who lowers himself the lowest and
serves the people the most diligently with his office, gifts and graces
that he has.

(21) The wicked pope has not done this, for because he has the office,
he wants to be honored above emperors and kings and to be lord of the
whole world. Thus he testifies with his own work against himself that he
is not Christ's disciple, but an antichrist or a counterchrist, who
does everything differently than Christ commanded and said. But we will
hear more about this on St. Bartholomew's Day.

(22) But the saying here is special, that Christ says, "The Son of
man is come to give his life in payment for many. For such a saying
teaches, as we heard on the day of Magdalene, of the forgiveness of
sins, how we can obtain the same. With our works and merit it is lost;
for we owe God such a great sum that it is impossible for us to pay. How
then do we get rid of the debt? Not otherwise than that our dear Lord
Christ enters into our debt, and takes away our sin from us, and lays it
on his back, and suffers the death which we have with our sins.

**[1206 s. 3, 416,417. On St. James's Day. W. XIII, 2810-2813.
1207]{.underline}**

so that we may be delivered from death and set free.

(23) In worldly affairs also it is so. If I owe a thousand guilders
and do not have to pay, but find a good friend who is indebted to me, he
says to my creditor, "I will be good to you for the man; I must not
worry about the debt any further. For my creditor has no more promise to
me; he has accepted another, who has become good for me and pays for me.
In this way the Lord also speaks here, saying: He gives his life as
payment for many, so that through his death we may be set free from
death. Just as when one is a prisoner and cannot be set free until a
certain sum of money is laid up for him. So the devil and death held us
captive because of our sins, and it was impossible for us to help
ourselves and set ourselves free. But God, out of fatherly love, sends
His Son, who must answer for us and pay, since we cannot pay.

(24) But how is it, because the debt of sin is paid by Christ, that
not everyone is saved, but only some? As the Lord says here, "This
payment was made for many," that is, even though it was made for all
men (Isa. 53, Jn. 2, 1 Jn. 1), there are only some who enjoy this
payment and are saved. This is because not all want to accept such
payment; they do not all want to believe. Some think they want to put
away sin by their own works, like the pope and his crowd; some even want
to believe Christ.

They do not accept him as the one who paid for sin, like the Turks and
Jews. Therefore they see for themselves, and because they do not want
Christ, they have no guarantor; therefore they must remain in sins, die
and perish. For apart from our Lord Christ we shall find none else to
pay for us; neither can we.

(25) Some are neither like the pope nor like the Turk; they do not
think to go to heaven by their works, and do not deny Christ; neither do
they want to accept him with all their heart; they are too well pleased
with the world, which troubles them so much that they do not think of
Christ. And because they continue in sins without repentance, and still
take pleasure in them, they are not really serious about seeking
forgiveness of sins. These also get away, and do not enjoy our Lord
Christ and his payment. But those who confess their sin enjoy it, are
sorry for it, ask for mercy, desire to amend, and wholeheartedly cling
to the Lord Christ, as He paid for them with His death and reconciled
them to God.

That is enough of today's Gospel, in which we see how the Lord deals so
kindly with Jacob and John, who have stumbled, and teaches them that if
they want to remain his disciples, they must not think of great honor,
power and authority, but send themselves to suffer, and use their
ministry with other apostles only for service. May God grant us all His
grace through Christ, that we may keep such teaching and improve
ourselves from it, amen.

[**1208** L.3, 4i8.4is. On the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. xm,
2718.271s. **1209**]{.underline}

**On the day of the Visitation of Mary,**

which feast is held on the day of the Assumption of Mary according to
the Brandenburg and Nuremberg orders.

**Luc. 1. 39-56.**

And Mary arose in those days, and went up into the mountains to the end
of the city of Jude, and came into the house of Zacharias, and greeted
Elizabeth. And it came to pass, when Elisabeth heard the greeting of
Mary, that the child leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with
the Holy Ghost, and cried with a loud voice, saying, Blessed art thou
among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And whence cometh it
unto me, that the mother of my Lord cometh unto me? Behold, when I heard
the voice of thy greeting, the child leaped with joy in my womb. Blessed
art thou that hast believed, for that which was spoken unto thee of the
Lord shall be fulfilled. And Mary said, My soul exalteth the Lord, and
my spirit rejoiceth in God my Saviour. For he hath regarded the
lowliness of his handmaid. Behold, from henceforth all the children
shall call me blessed. For he has done great things for me, who is
mighty, and whose name is holy. And his mercy endureth for ever unto
them that fear him. He wieldeth violence with his arm, and scattereth
them that have hope in their heart. He pushes the mighty from their
seats and lifts up the lowly. He fills the hungry with goods and leaves
the rich empty. He remembereth mercy, and restoreth his servant Israel,
as he spake unto our fathers, unto Abraham, and to his seed for ever.
And Mary abode with her three months; and after that she returned again.

**The first sermon.**

The feast of the Assumption of Mary is thoroughly pontifical, that is,
full of idolatry, and instituted without Scripture. For this reason, we
have dropped it in our churches and have kept the day for it, so that
one should preach the story of how Mary went over the mountains to her
mother Elizabeth and what happened there. For first of all, this feast
of the Assumption of Mary has no scriptural testimony; and they
themselves, the papists, have a saying Hieronymi, which is supposed to
say: An in corpore, an extra corpus assumpta sit, nescio: I do not know
whether she was taken up in the body or out of the body, or whether she
went to heaven. And who would know this, because there is no scripture
about it? But this is the first and most annual thing, that they have
made such an ascension a feast, that one should honor and call upon the
virgins Mariam, as they sing in the responsum: Te assumptam nobis
promptam fore petimus etc...: O rich Mother of GOD, we

pray that you, who have been taken up, may be gracious to us and make us
citizens of heaven.

(2) But we Christians know of no ascension which we can enjoy unto
eternal life, but of the one of our dear Lord Christ Jesus; who is
ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God, and hath
received gifts for men, as the scripture hath testified. received gifts
for men, and represents us. Therefore we can and should take comfort in
his ascension, and know that we will enjoy the same, that we will also
go to heaven, but here on earth we will be heard by him in everything we
ask in his name. Therefore it is a glorious, high and comforting feast,
the Ascension of Christ, which the Virgin Mary enjoyed just as much as
we do. But we, even though she has already ascended to heaven in the
flesh, cannot be called to her ascension; for this reason we should not
call upon her, nor ask for her intercession.

**1210 L. 3, 419^21. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. xm,
2719-2722. 1211**

and abandon us, as the pope has taught, and thus has profaned and
dishonored our dear Lord's Ascension, by wanting to make the mother
equal to the Son in all things.

3 It is not only annoying in many cases, but also very ridiculous that
the papists make such a big fuss with the consecration of spices from
such a day, for no other reason than, as their own books testify, that
they interpret the saying Ecclesiast. Chapter 22 (Sir. 24, 18.) to the
Virgin Mary, and they resemble some trees and roses. If children did
this and treated the Scriptures in this way, it would be crude enough.
But the pope, bishops, all monks and priests do it, and scold us
heretics for dropping such a habit and not wanting to fool with them.
But what superstitions have followed from such spicing, and how it has
given rise to sorcery and all kinds of superstitions, everyone knows
well. Therefore we have very good reason to do away with such idolatrous
and sorcerous feasts, by which the Ascension of Christ has been greatly
deprived, as if we were not to take comfort in them alone, and the
people have been led and caused to idolatry, superstition and sorcery.
For this reason, we want to have buried it, and now preach about the
Feast of the Visitation and the beautiful Magnificat.

4. *) Such a feast is also called the Feast of Our Lady, and the pope
instituted it to drive away the Turks. As you can see in the lection
sung at matins, it says: "Just as the Virgin Mary walked over the
mountains and trampled the hills, so you should call upon her to trample
the Turks under her feet. But the longer we celebrated this feast and
called upon the Virgin Mary, the more the Turk trampled us. Therefore,
we cannot and will not celebrate this feast for such a loose reason.

(5) We want to celebrate it, first of all, to give thanks to God for
the glorious revelation that has taken place on this day: that the pious
and old matron, the beloved

*) Held in the house, 1533; after *a b c*: 1532.

D. Red.

Elizabeth, full of the Holy Spirit, who before knew nothing of Christ
and his conception, now comes out and confesses that the virgin Mary is
the true mother of her Lord and God; therefore she is glad that she has
received such a great glorious guest, who is called the Son of God. And
the little child in her womb, dear John, also announces such a guest,
becomes joyful and leaps in his mother's womb. So both, the mother with
her sermon and the child with his jumping, testify that Christ is
present, through whom all the world, but first of all the Jewish people,
shall be saved from sin, death and the devil. This should move us at the
same time to joy and earnest thanksgiving to God. For if God had kept
this treasure secret and had not wanted us to know about it and enjoy
it, such a wonderful revelation would have remained behind.

(6) This revelation is followed by a special piece, namely the
beautiful hymn, the Magnificat, which is also worthy of a holiday in its
honor, so that it may be preached and well understood. For it is a fine
song, as we shall hear.

(7) For the third, a mighty beautiful example is presented to us by
the Virgin Mary, which we should diligently learn and observe.
Therefore, our celebration is far different from the Pope's
celebration, and goes primarily to praising God and thanking Him, as the
dear virgin praised and thanked Him.

It seems as if Lucas had a special pleasure in this history, that he
describes it so diligently, and presents the dear virgin so beautifully
to all of us, but especially to the womenfolk, in a wreath, which is
decorated with three especially beautiful and lovely roses. For there he
praises three special virtues, of which we should also take care. The
first is faith; the second, a very great and high humility; the third, a
fine and chaste manner before men. Where such adornment is on a woman or
virgin, she far surpasses all queens and empresses in all her gold,
precious stone, pearl, velvet and silk.

[1212 **L. 3> 421-428. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
2722-2725.** 1213]{.underline}

(9) Of faith Elizabeth saith, Blessed art thou that hast believed: for
that which was spoken unto thee of the Lord shall be fulfilled. For Mary
is justly praised, not only on account of the common faith which all
Christians have who are saved; that she believed that God would deliver
her from the curse and from sin through the promised Seed, and take her
to grace and make her blessed: but also on account of the special faith.
For she had a special promise that applied to her person alone, since
she was to give birth to Christ, the Son of God. She believed this
promise and did not allow herself to be deceived, even though she could
not know how it would happen. She alone had such faith, so we cannot be
like her.

(10) Since faith must always have God's word for itself, we should
follow their example, that we also diligently adhere to God's word. And
especially the womenfolk should rather be found in church, at prayer and
at the sermon, than at the dance, at the market or elsewhere. For this
is true: where one has desire and love for God's word, likes to hear
it, likes to deal with it, more virtues will be found from day to day.
Again, where one does not like to hear it, there will not be a lack of
many bad virtues. This is the first virtue.

11. The other virtue is: The young maiden, though she is highly honored
(for she is ever God's mother, that Elizabeth should follow her), yet
because God has so ordained that one should honor old people, she
follows the same teaching, does not become proud, but like a pious child
she falls down, bows her heart, and humbles herself that she thus goes a
long way to love her friend; and desires not only of God's great grace
and miracle work to converse with her, but also to serve her. Elizabeth
notices this, and thinking it is too much, says: "Where does this come
from, that the mother of the Lord comes to me?

(12) This is also a very glorious ornament and great adornment on the
dear virgin, that she does not become proud of the honor she has
received.

that she is God's mother and should give birth to God's son. It would
not be a miracle (as the people of women are inclined to hope without
that) that she would have fallen into a hope deeper than Lucifer with
his angels. For behold, what do we poor mudbags do? If we have a penny
or a florin, no one can get along with us for court. A maid who has a
beautiful ribbon; a young man who has a beautiful skirt; all together
they become proud and insolent, if they have something special, be it
beauty, art, money, nobility, we know neither end nor measure of
arrogance: and yet all this is like dung in the street, compared to the
great grace that this virgin has here, so that she honors and adorns God
for and for above all women; and yet she humbles herself and desires to
serve the old Elizabeth.

013 For it is not for silver and gold. If all the gold that all the
world has were in one lump, it would be as fragments against this great
honor, which no man on earth has ever had: that the angels in heaven
themselves, and after them Elizabeth, the greatest woman, who after
Christ gave birth to the greatest Son, call her the mother of God and
the most blessed of all women. And yet, although she is the highest,
noblest, holiest mother, she does not look upon such great gifts; but
lowers herself and says to the angel, "Behold, I am the Lord's
handmaid," and to Elizabeth, whom she thus drags a long way, she says,
"God has regarded the lowliness of His handmaid."

Let us also learn this art and thus humble ourselves, who are moved to
hope by a thousand times lesser causes. It is almost impossible that
such a heart should not rise and become hopeful, as we do when we have a
thaler or a beautiful skirt.

(15) Ah, how the great humility of this high person will disgrace our
courtly journey on the last day, when we will see her, the dear virgin,
and she will address us proudly and say: I have not been proud or proud,
and I have had more than you can have as empress and queen. But what is
the cause

1214 **D. 3, 423-426. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
2725-2728.** 1215

of your court journey? Why have you been so resplendent? A golden chain,
a beautiful ring, a beautiful body made you so proud? But what is this
compared to the fact that I have been the Mother of God, and the angels
and all the saints have praised me, that I am the most blessed and most
gracious of women? and yet I have not exalted myself to this. So, you
foolish saints, you heretics, you riffraff, who let yourselves think so
learned that your belly wants to burst with art, what can you do that
you are so puffed up, so sure and presumptuous? Do you think you can
make a verse in the Magnificat with all your art? I have ever been able
to speak of our Lord God, and yet I have not been worthy of hope, but
have forgotten all my honor, and have gone on foot over the mountains to
my mother's house, and have served her in the crib, cooked, washed
diapers, and done all the other housework from the heart and with joy,
like another maid, and have not taken on anything.

16. disgrace yourself, you shameful hope, and only those who can be
ashamed of this great humility, which is here, that this maiden, who is
God's mother and the greatest woman in heaven and earth, can forget so
much about all goods and have such a low, little heart that she goes and
is not ashamed to wash the diapers, to wipe the little child John and to
bathe 2c. Such humility is too high. For it would have been fair to have
ordered a golden chariot for her, and to have led her with four thousand
horses, and to have trumpeted and shouted before the chariot: Here rides
the woman above all women, the princess among the whole human race. But
all this is silenced. The poor maiden goes on foot such a long way, up
to twenty miles; and yet she is ready to be God's mother. It is no
wonder that all the mountains would have leapt and danced for joy. It is
possible that she did not go alone, but that Joseph and a little child
went with her; but Lucas speaks only of her alone. For it is she who is
most important, and she alone who demonstrates such humility.

This is the other virtue, great humility. All men and women should take
this image into their hearts and be afraid of their proud and stubborn
heads. For we see and experience how naughty, proud and insolent the
world is now, and especially the servants and the household are
everywhere. If a man or woman in the house wants something, they may do
it themselves, or it may happen that it would be better. Thus one finds
proud and disobedient servants, even if they are only poor, miserable
beggars; let alone what the great junk lords and wives do, since honor,
power, property, art and other things are involved. Such things will not
be able to endure long; thunder and lightning will have to strike in the
end, so that arrogance may be increased. But if we were Christians, we
would think: Dear, has this Mother of God been able to humble herself in
such a way; what do I, a wretched human being, want to be so arrogant,
unworthy of service and proud of? If I have yellow hair, a red skirt, a
golden chain, if I am beautiful, learned, noble, rich, powerful: what is
it then? On such hopes, they say, the devil wipes his ass. For in truth
it is all a poor, miserable, stinking beggar's hope. Therefore I will
not be proud, but learn to follow this example, since I hear how the
dear maiden, who is God's mother, and could have stayed at home for
half an hour, sets out on foot and goes to serve in foreign lands,
bathes the dear little girl, the little Baptist, lifts and lays her,
washes her diapers; in sum, she does what the least little child in the
house is used to doing.

18 So this example serves us, so that everyone, especially young
servants, may learn to serve and humble themselves, regardless of
whether you are already more worthy and greater than the one you can
serve. But unfortunately we experience only a vain contradiction, that
even those do not want to serve and humble themselves, who are the most
unworthy, as there are servants and maids in the house, who have
promised to do so, and receive their wages, food and drink, so that they
should do it in all humility and obedience,

**1216 L. 3, 426-428. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
2728-2730. 1217**

what they are called. This is to follow the example of the Virgin Mary,
who did not shy away from becoming the uninvited handmaid of the dear
Elisabeth; it is an example to us that we should also humble ourselves
and say: If the highly graced Mother of Christ was not ashamed to become
the lowest handmaid, why would I not do the same? And even if I did ten
times more, it would still be nothing; for this person is too high.
Therefore it is far more, if she humbles herself with a straw, than if I
humbled myself for a thousand miles. That is why this example stands
here as a mockery and a disgrace to us, against our arrogance, pride and
disobedience.

The third virtue is that Lucas says: "She has gone to the end, that is,
finely chastely, and not so out of arrogance and recklessness, as the
young servants go to the milk, to the dance and to the fair, washes from
one house to the other, and opens everywhere rattling benches *) and
throws the eyes there and there. These are not called chaste virgins,
but slut paners. **But virgins and women shall remain in their houses,
or where they have to go in the street, they shall leave the place in
good order, and not count all the tiles on the roof, nor all the
sparrows under the roof, nor have stands everywhere on the way. So the
Virgin Mary did not keep to herself, she goes about finely, does not
count the trees, stands now there, now there; but thinks what she has to
do, and waits for her own, lets other people also do theirs.

(20) For this reason Lucas was diligent to say that maidservants and
women should not say: Why should I always stay at home like a nun in a
convent, and not go for a walk, since the Virgin Mary did it? If it was
not a sin for her, it is not a sin for me. Yes, do it with manners, as
she did, and with fine, virginal gestures. For she did not go out of
presumption, but meant to serve her mother, when the angel

*) Rattling - chatter. D. Red.

**) Slut - unattached, loose, dissolute, libertine life. D. Red.

She had told her about how she used to walk with a son in her old days,
so she does more outside her home than she did at home. Do the same, and
do it morally, with the chaste behavior that befits a virgin and a
woman, and it will not be a sin for you.

(21) But as the people of women do not follow the dear virgin in
humility, but are proud and hopeful, so they do not follow discipline
either, as is unfortunately evident. There are few of them, women and
virgins, who would let themselves think that one could be cheerful and
chaste at the same time. With words they are impudent and coarse, with
gestures wild, lewd; that is called being in good spirits. But
discipline and cheerfulness should and could go hand in hand, if one
were to look at the example here. In particular, however, it is very bad
that the young people are so exceedingly impudent in words and gestures,
and sometimes swear like lansquenets. Not to mention the shameful words
and rude, annoying phrases that one always hears and learns from the
other. This is because the mothers in the house give them such examples
and do not pay more attention to discipline in youth. But this is a
special and certain sign of a great future punishment, where discipline
tends to fall among the women. For the children take after their
mothers, and the maids learn it from the women, until finally neither
discipline nor honor remains in all classes; as we unfortunately also
see in our times and therefore must await the deserved punishment.

(22) This is the example that the fine virgin Mary presents to us,
that she grasps God's word with firm faith, is finely chaste and
shameful, and disgraces us with our stinking, nasty courting, because
she humbles herself so highly and puts herself in such lowly service,
the blessed Mother of God. With such humility she disgraces all virgins
and women, because she, the most high, throws herself so low. But such
an example should also serve us to strike within ourselves and say:
"Oh, has she done this, the dear Virgin Mary, who is not guilty of
this?

**1218 L. 3, 428-430. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
2730-2734. 1219**

(for she might have been celebrated, but she is not): what did I want to
boast about and be held high? Always descend and humble yourself 2c. So
this example should show us, whether we are beautiful, learned,
sensible, rich, young and strong, that we do not elevate ourselves, but
let ourselves down and serve others gladly and diligently.

(23) But here we must also warn against false humility, as the monks
and nuns did in the monasteries, and we see in the young maidens, when
they are called beautiful, that they talk back, and yet their hearts are
not in it; item, as rich people do, when they are called lords, they
cannot let themselves talk back because of great humility, and complain
poorer than those who are really poor. This is not called humility, but
a twofold hopefulness, a deliberate lie, which also brings dishonor to
God.

(24) For what God has given and bestowed, that shall be confessed and
not denied. One should say: Praise to God who has given it; I have good
food, I am not so uncreated, I can study well, I am learned, I am not an
adulterer, I am a princess, a countess. For what God has given, be it
money or goods, they are all God's gifts; one should not deny them, but
confess them and thank God for them, and see how one needs them. For the
sun does not say that it is black, but confesses it and proves that it
is the light of the world, for it shines without ceasing. So a tree also
does not deny its kind, but what God has given it, it allows to be seen
freely in public. Therefore, if you want to lie and say that you do not
have what you have, this is not called humbling yourself. But if God has
given you something, say: I have this and this, that is true; but I do
not have it from myself, God has given it to me, so I should not and
will not exalt myself, nor despise others who do not have it. Just as
the beautiful sun does; it is more beautiful than all the other
creatures in the sky; but for this reason it does not despise the other
creatures, but says, "Whether you are the moon or the moon, I will not
despise you.

Star 2c. Though you do not shine as beautifully as I do, yet you are
also a beautiful creature of God; therefore I will not despise you, but
help you to stay with your light and also to shine for the people. So
shall we also do.

The Virgin Mary does the same. She does not say no to the fact that she
is blessed above other women and is the mother of God. It is all true,
she says, the greatest grace has befallen me. But from where and to what
do I have it? I do not exalt myself with it; but "my soul exalts the
Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. For from him I have it,
and not from myself nor from men; it is all the gift of our Lord GOD.
Therefore, dear Elisabeth, it does not apply here that I want to press
against you or against any other man. For this reason, even though I
have such gifts, I can still be your handmaid and serve you. "He has
done great things for me, who is mighty and whose name is holy.
Therefore, God forbid that I should profane and blaspheme his name, and
that I should glory in my own name, saying, I have these things of
myself. Let his name be holy; he has done it; let him be praised for it.
And though men also praise me for such grace, and say I am blessed, yet
again will I carry it home to God. For his name is holy, and he is
mighty; therefore he alone shall have the glory.

(26) Let this be said of the example of the Blessed Virgin Mary, which
the evangelist did not want to show us without a reason. The Evangelist
did not want to show us without a reason that, after she had honored God
so highly and distinguished herself from all other women, she did not
exalt herself with such high, unspeakable gifts; but, as if she knew
nothing about it, she set out with all restraint, visited old Elizabeth,
her mother; no doubt that she wanted to wish her happiness, talk to her
about God's miracles and grace, and then serve her and little John for
a while. For who will or can believe that dear Mary did not stay at such
a birth and did not want to see the blessed child, of whom the angel
Gabriel brought her the first message from heaven?

**[1220 2.3, 430-432. On the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
2734-2737. 1221]{.underline}**

27 So the time also agrees finely here. For Lucas reports that Elizabeth
had already left in the sixth month with the child Johanne, since
Gabriel had brought the message from heaven to the Virgin Mary; and that
Mary had stayed with Elizabeth for the three months; so it is good to
assume that she had not left as soon as the next day or had only been on
the road for one or two days.

28 It usually happens that a good friend goes to another in the same
case and stays with her until she recovers from her child and shows all
kinds of service and friendship; how much more is it to be assumed here,
since the angel himself has such a birth,

also indicates the time to the virgin Mary, that she could well have
known at what time Elizabeth would come down.

First of all, these are the two pieces of Revelation and the example of
the Virgin Mary, who shines before us with such beautiful virtues. Such
virtues are also worthy of being presented on a special holiday,
especially to the young people, so that everyone may learn to be
God-fearing, and especially the womenfolk may learn to keep themselves
in all discipline, respectability and humility. May God grant His grace
through His Holy Spirit that such fine teaching will not go without
fruit, but that we will all improve from it and increase in faith, love
and all kinds of discipline, amen.

**On the day of the Visitation of Mary.**

**The other sermon. From the Magnificat.**

Your dear ones have heard why we keep this feast, firstly, so that we
may take heed of the great miracles of God and the glorious revelation
of our dear Lord Christ while he was still in the womb; and especially
so that we may learn from the dear holy Virgin Mary that we may also be
humble and chaste; and thirdly, that we may learn the beautiful
Magnificat, which is a special master song. For this reason, the ancient
Christians ordered it to be sung every evening when the Christians come
together for prayer in the church or assembly.

But with what understanding the pope, his clergy, monks and nuns sing
it, we unfortunately see before our eyes that they do not understand a
letter of it, nor do they think to understand; otherwise they would
beware of the abominable idolatry, and would not lift the Virgin Mary
higher than first God and then she herself has lifted herself in such
singing. On the other hand, they would be especiallyware of courtly
conduct, and would not be subjected to it.

The people of the Vatican would stand before our Lord God and defy their
own human work and merit, and teach people to buy or earn heaven from
God; they would follow the faithful advice and teachings of the Virgin
Mary, humble themselves, not think much of her wisdom, power and wealth,
but take comfort in the mercy of God alone. But the whole papal crowd is
up to its ears in the shameful hope that they do not see God's mercy
and put all their trust in their wisdom, power and wealth.

So that we may learn to guard against such things, let us now take such
a beautiful song from word to word before us, and grasp the teaching of
today's Gospel in detail; so that we may not only learn discipline,
humility, and faith from the example of the Virgin Mary, but also learn
from her sermon what we should comfort ourselves with, what we should
insist on, and what we should defy: not, as the world does, on its
wisdom, power, and good, but only on God's mercy, which He has shown
through His grace.

**1222 D. 3, 432-434. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
2737-2740. 1223**

Christ to all those who fear him. She starts such a noble master song
with such words that everyone must confess and say that she is happy and
in good spirits and immediately drunk with joy. For thus she sings:

**My soul exalts the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.**

4 Here you hear how she rejoices and has a special pride and courage.
For she says that her soul exalts something, that is, she must praise
and extol something, that she rejoices from the heart, so that there is
nothing in her heart that is not full of joy and gladness. What is it
then? Whom then does she exalt? Herself? No. I," she says, "have
nothing, nor do I want to make anything of myself; so that you praise
me, dear Elizabeth, that you give me honor among women and call me
blessed, for this I exalt and praise God, for He is everything, and
nothing is mine.

5 So the little word "elevate" gives a very fine meaning. For he that
lifteth up another oppresseth and humbleth himself. Because she now
says, "My soul lifts up the Lord," by which she confesses that she is
cast down, not lifted up nor hopeful. But this means that we poor
beggars have been run into by the side, and all of us, one and the
other, St. Paulo as well as me and you, have been given a high lesson.
For what do we do? The common saying among our citizens and peasants is:
What? Ick heb ock noch zwe Pennig te verteren; can therefore insist on
money and property, on guilders and thalers. But you fainthearted belly,
will you rise up? Shouldn't you say: It is someone else's property;
God gave it, he can also take it away again: why would I want to
exaggerate? So a riffraff goes along in glory, thinking himself learned,
and flaunts his art. But tell me: How is it? Where did you get it from?
from yourself? Yea, the devil upon thy head; thou hast haft it from
above: therefore shalt thou not glory in thyself, but in him that gave
it thee, and may take it away again at any moment.

(6) For it is not only a vexatious and shameful thing, but also a
foolish and ridiculous thing, to boast of another man's goods; as yet

is the common practice of great lords. He writes himself a king from the
land, another from another, since he does not have a stick. It is as if
I had an empty purse, and yet I wanted to boast that I had a neighbor
who had a lot of money. If the money were mine and the bag full, I would
boast of it, and not otherwise; for it is a boast, since there is
nothing behind it. It is the same here, without being much more
dangerous. We have body and life; the one is beautiful, the other rich,
the one learned, the other experienced. These things we boast of as
ours, but they are not ours, they are God's. If then you have received
it not from yourself but from God, what do you praise? But it does not
help to say what you will; the devil is in the people, who teaches them
to be ungrateful to God (since they have everything from Him) and to be
proud, and to press Him with His own gift. Well, whoever does not want
to leave it, he can take him off again, just as he took Judam off: he
was also proud, and abused his office to betray Christ; but it happened
to him that he himself got over it.

7 The dear virgin does not do this here. "My soul," she says, "exalt
the Lord," that is, I praise and extol God, not only with my mouth and
heart, but my whole life, all powers and limbs, everything that governs
my soul, would gladly sing and praise God. For "soul" means nothing
else, but our life, which speaks, hears, sees, eats, drinks, builds, in
sum, everything that is and sustains life, all my hair, all my drops of
blood, that I would like to sing, so that it could sing Magnificat, and
thus exalt and praise a gracious God. We hopeless drops do it with the
mouth alone; the life and the soul do not experience it. The Magnificat
sticks to our tongue like a foam. If it were thalers, guilders,
beautiful houses, beautiful clothes, we would also sing the Magnificat,
but in small honor of God.

8 "My spirit," she continues, "rejoices in God my Savior. "My
spirit", that is, my inner being, my whole knowledge, since I know God
with it, that rejoices.

1224 L. 3, On the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. xin, 2740-2742. 1225

not in the temporal, but in God. This is also the right joy, when one
rejoices in God. We do not rejoice until we have the money in our
pocket; and, which is sin and shame, ten guilders rejoice us more than
God Himself. For, tell me, is it not true? I have life and limb up to
the fiftieth year, healthy eyes, ears, hands and feet; the dear sun has
served me so long during the day, the night has given me sleep: but when
have I ever been so happy about such things, as when a man finds about
ten florins? Fie on you, that we cannot also rejoice in God. So tell me:
Who rejoices that Jesus Christ is born? Yes, one pursues it in addition.
But if we were not so blind, we should always jump to the fact that God
has given us not only body and soul, but His only begotten Son, and
through Him eternal life.

(9) Therefore, let all the scholars of the earth come together and see
if they can make one verse like this verse, and they will see where
their art lies. She sets the goal high; and yet she is humble, and so
humble that she, the great doctor and prophetess, who is more learned
than all the apostles and prophets, becomes a nursemaid and waitress to
dear Elizabeth. And we mischief-makers, as soon as someone knows only
one Latin, Greek or Hebrew vocable, we do not know where to stay because
of hope. We should be thrown out with lungs, one with the other, for the
sake of the shameful hopefulness that we indulge in for so little a
thing; and forget this example here, that the dear maiden neither
rejoices nor exalts herself in the great high goods, but she has her joy
in God, whom she praises and glorifies, as follows:

**For he has looked upon the lowliness of his handmaid. Behold, from now
on all the children will call me blessed.**

(10) She says, "All the children will praise me, that is, all the
world will sing and say about me. Dear maiden, would it not be time for
you to become worthy of hope, so that the whole world can praise you?

and praise? No, she says, I do not want to become worthy of hope because
of this. But this is that I rejoice, that I have been a wretched,
despised maiden, and yet God, my Lord, has not despised me, but has
looked upon me with favor. For she will have been a young maiden, and
yet poor, wherefore no man esteemed her specially, else she would not
say, "He esteemed the lowliness of his handmaid." But, she says, as
wretched as I am, God, who created heaven and earth, has graciously
opened his eyes upon me and brought me forth for such a great work. He
could have found others who were great proud virgins. But he did not
look at any of them; he looked at me, a poor little girl in my torn
skirt. This makes me happy, and I thank God for it. In sum, I, she says,
am nothing at all; but what I am and have, I have only from God's
goodness and grace. That is pure praise to God and His grace.

(11) But here we must not forget the abominable idolatry, which we
have also thought of before, and which is so completely torn down in the
papacy. She says, the dear Virgin: "All children will praise me, that
is, praise God's grace in me, and say of me how God has so gloriously
honored me that he has chosen me among all virgins, that I should
conceive the Savior of the world in my body through the Holy Spirit and
bring him to the world. But it does not follow from this that one should
call upon the Virgin Mary, take comfort in her intercession, and seek
help in all kinds of temporal and spiritual needs from her and wait for
it; as the pope has pointed out to people such idolatry. Let it remain
with praise; but worship, intercession and waiting for help, these
things are to remain with the Lord Christ alone; as he says: "What you
shall ask in my name, that will I give you. Thus the pope wants one to
ask in the name of the Virgin Mary. This is wrong, and is not praising
Mary, but profaning her to the highest degree and making an idol out of
her. Continue:

**For he has done great things for me, who is mighty, and whose name is
holy.**

**
**[1226 3, 436^39. On the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. xm,
2742-2743. 1227]{.underline}

12. she will not touch the name of our Lord God, that is, she will not
exalt her gifts; she always recognizes that what she has is God's and
not her own work. For this reason, we all want to recognize him as
powerful, but we all want to recognize ourselves as weak, powerless
people; and that his name alone is holy, that is, that his name alone
should be praised and held high, but our name, as an unholy name, should
not be praised. But look around in the world again, where are they who
do it? Everyone would like him to be thought of as great, and especially
everyone would like to be praised for his holiness and piety. But Mary
teaches us to consider God alone as powerful and His name as holy, that
is, to praise God alone and His grace, and nothing else.

**And his mercy endures forever to those who fear him.**

(13) Here she stops with her own person and reaches out to the whole
world, praising God, not only for herself, but for the sake of all
people, that he may be gracious and merciful to everyone who fears him
and humbles himself before him. Just as we also give thanks in our
prayers, not only for the gifts we alone have, but also for those others
have with us. And this is a special masterpiece, that it so finely
combines God's mercy and God's fear: that where one fears God, he
wants to be merciful, that is, to forgive sins, not to punish or condemn
for the sake of sins, but to help with all graces against all misfortune
and to make eternally blessed. Again, where one does not fear God, there
shall be neither mercy nor grace, but punishment and wrath. So it fits
very well with the 147th Psalm v. 11: "The Lord is pleased with those
who fear him and wait for his goodness." Therefore learn here who can
learn. Mary has ever a gracious God, who does her all good. But where
does she get such grace from? Nowhere else, because as she herself says:
"The Lord has looked upon the lowliness of His handmaid." She has not
made herself proud or presumptuous, she has remained humble, in the

She went in the fear of God and did what she was commanded to do; this
pleased God and God graced her.

(14) In this way, she sings, all you people can come to God's grace.
But beware, do not puff yourselves up, do not boast, do not be proud;
but humble yourselves before God and fear Him. Know yourselves rightly
that you are poor sinners who can boast of nothing before God, but
because of your sins you also have reason to fear Him. If you do this, I
say to you: This has always been God's will and work: whoever fears
him, he is merciful to him, he helps him, he has an eye on him; but
whoever does not want to fear him, whoever wants to be proud and think
that he has everything, that he lacks nothing, God will deal with him
differently. For:

**He wields violence with his arm and scatters those who are hopeful in
their hearts.**

(15) The dear virgin taught us how she came to be gracious, simply by
thinking nothing of herself and taking comfort in God's goodness and
grace. She also taught us this art and commanded us to fear God, so that
He would also be merciful to us. But the dear doctor sees that she will
find very few disciples. For there are three kinds of people who cannot
refrain from arrogance and pride. Those who are wise and prudent think
highly of themselves and insist on it; those who are powerful or rich do
the same: all of them are hopeful, as if they did not need our Lord God.
But here, listen, how can such hope be granted to them?

(16) If they want to be wise and take on themselves such things,
especially in matters where they should follow the word of God and his
wisdom, they should start very finely, she says. For my God is a mighty
God, and wants to be so only. Therefore he sets himself against all
proud hearts, and scatters them, so that no one knows where they go.
This is a valiant work, *) that he should take a great king, like Saul,
by the head.

*) Instead of "a valiant work" have *a* and *b*: "his potter's
work". D. Red.

**1228** L. s, 439^41. On the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. xm,
2745-2747. **1229**

takes him who will not fear him, nor have his word before his eyes, and
draws out a poor shepherd, him he makes king. Why then do they want to
be proud, to insist on their wisdom and not be afraid? Why do they throw
up the comb, as if they had everything of themselves? As princes and
nobles, citizens and peasants do now. I am he and he, they say, shall I
let the priest rule me and do what he wills? Well, says our Lord God, be
wicked and wise, you will still have to abandon me; I also have an arm,
if I pull it out, beware, it is very heavy, and will mislead you, so
that you will not know where you are at home. Thus great kingdoms and
principalities have been wiped out; the Virgin Mary knows how to sing
about them here.

(17) But why does she need such words to say, "He scatters them in
the mind of their hearts"? Because it is God's way, when he wants to
overthrow people for the sake of their hope, he first makes them fools
and blinds them. Afterwards, when they are blinded, they are soon
disgraced, so that they have to disgrace themselves in their prudence.
This is called "scattering the wise in their heart's mind"; for he
leads them to destruction with their own wisdom, so that they make their
plots most accurately and best, as Pharaoh did in Egypt when he hurried
after the Jews through the Red Sea. When they have decided in the best
way and say, "We will attack in this way," our Lord God mocks them.
Well then, says he, well then, you are on the right track, just hurry
up. In pride he leads them up, and there they lie in a heap. So he
pushes them and falls them in their proud sense. That is the one heap,
which does not fear God, but is proud, and relies on its wit and
cleverness. Now follows the other heap, which relies on its power and
force; there it sings also thus from:

**He pushes the mighty from the throne and lifts up the lowly.**

18 In sum, our Lord God wants to have humble people, to whom He will do
all good; but what is hopeful, He will punish.

Therefore, even if He exalts the lowly, as soon as they overlook it and
become proud, they must come down; as is seen in King Saul. He was a
poor shepherd, but God made him king; but as soon as his belly swelled
over it, and he would not humble himself against God and His word, God
overthrew the whole family, so that not one remained. It was the same
with David: God made him king from a shepherd, and he remained so high
with his tribe until they became proud, then they had to come down
again. Thus we see in all other histories: what is proud runs into the
spear of our Lord God and must be humbled; in turn, what is humble and
God-fearing rises up.

This is the way of our Lord God, says Mary: what wants to be low, he
wants to be high; again, what wants to be high, he wants to be low.
Whoever does not want to believe it, let him know it. For there have
been many who have punished this song and wanted to make it false, but
they have learned it to their detriment, that it is true. For the Virgin
Mary cannot lie, because she speaks from her own experience. She has
been humble and God-fearing; therefore God draws her out and brings her
to great honors. On the other hand, Herod, Caiphas and other great
lords' daughters have been worthy of hope; they have gone so that no
one knows where they are. Therefore, if everyone learns to fear God and
to humble himself, there will be no need, even if things go badly for a
while.

The poets have also had it from experience that they say: Magnisque
negatum stare diu: What is great will not last long. Cause, when it
becomes great and is felt, pride follows; then our Lord God must come,
and what is great, make small and humble. Rome has come very high, so
that when only the name of Rome was mentioned, all the world had to take
off its little hat and bow down. But what finally came of it? It lay in
a heap and is now destroyed and devastated for the third time. For the
Virgin Mary sings here, no one shall be too high for God, he will
overthrow them all if they want to be proud.

**1230** L. s, 441-t43. On the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. xm,
2747-2750. **1231**

**He fills the hungry with goods and leaves the rich empty.**

This is the third group, which is proud and presumptuous, because it is
rich and has much money and good. Our Lord God must also do his work
with them, so that he lets great good things disgracefully melt away and
perish. Again, he often gives poor people great good fortune, so that
they come into great possessions. Now if everyone were so wise and
learned this art, and humbled himself, God would let them all remain,
and that which is more, he would give from day to day, the longer the
more. So would great kings and princes, then reasonable and wise people.
God could well, and would suffer them (for it is He who makes them kings
and great lords, Rom. 13, 1.), if only they could leave pride. But no
one wants to do it, everyone wants to defy our Lord God with his gifts;
so he cannot and will not suffer. Therefore he says: Stop, fellow, I
have made you fat; I can make you skinny and lean again. So he will deal
with all who do not fear God nor humble themselves, but want to insist
on their wisdom, power and wealth.

(22) Now these are the three groups where God shows Himself to be not
merciful but wrathful. For he lashes out: this makes them not want to
humble themselves, nor fear God; they insist and defy, thinking that
because they are wise, they shall not lack; because they are rich and
powerful, they shall not lack anything. But the dear Virgin Mary warns
and teaches, one should not do it. For there shall be no wisdom so
great: if the fear of God be not there, it must become foolishness and
be profaned. No power shall be so great: if the fear of God be not
there, it shall be overthrown. No wealth shall be so great: if the fear
of the Lord be not there, the people shall become beggars, and have all
misfortunes; that shall surely befall them.

(23) Just as it terrifies and warns the world that lives without the
fear of God, so it comforts the Christians who fear God and teaches
them, whether they are foolish, miserable and poor, that they should not
lose heart, and that they should not be afraid of God.

tells them that God wants to make them eternally blessed for the sake of
Christ. So he will not forget them in this life, but will help them:
For, saith she, this also is God's way and His own work: the lowly, who
think nothing of themselves, and fear God, He will exalt, and the hungry
He will fill with goods. How the world is full of such examples that
God-fearing, pious people bring God upon themselves through His
blessings. So, in one word, Mary teaches us all to be pious and to fear
God. Again, she warns against hopefulness and pride. For God does not
like it. Now follows the right piece:

**He remembers his mercy and helps his servant Israel. As he spake unto
our fathers, unto Abraham, and to his seed for ever.**

(24) Now she concludes, the dear virgin, and finally sings of the
greatest grace that shall befall those who humble themselves and fear
God. For what she has said so far remains in the world, and applies to
this temporal life, that God wants to be the helper of the humble and
the poor, but wants to overthrow the proud. He must do this; otherwise
he could not help them. But this belongs to eternal life, since it now
sings of God giving not only body and soul, but also His Son. This is
the great and spiritual good that He spoke to Abraham and other
patriarchs, and has now accomplished through this virgin, that she
should bear the Son of God to the world, and that He should help us
through His suffering and resurrection from sins and eternal death to
eternal life.

But we must be diligent to look at the words here. For the trade in
which the Virgin Mary speaks is excellent. Thus we must confess that she
is a special master who can speak well of high things. She sees, the
dear Virgin, how Israel has fallen so low: not only in the outward
government, that the Jews have had no king since the Babylonian prison,
and have been miserably plagued by pagans; but also and most of all,
that it has been so bad in the church government.

26. because the order of God with the

1232 **L- 3, 443-445. on the day of the Visitation of Mary. W. XIII,
27SV-27SS.** 1233

The chief priests, Pharisees and scribes had ruined everything most
miserably; as we see in the Gospel that for this reason Christ must
always lie with them. This, I say, is what the dear Virgin sees, and
praises and thanks God that Israel, which had fallen so low, should get
right back on its feet again: not for the sake of the worldly, but for
the sake of the spiritual regime, so that the pure doctrine of the
forgiveness of sins may come to light, the people may know God rightly
and serve God rightly, and may be eternally blessed. This is what it
means to say: God help up His servant Israel.

(27) It also adds the cause where such help comes from, saying, "This
is because God remembers his mercy. Notice this word very well, for that
is where it all comes from. First of all, this is a very great thing,
just as she said above, that God rumbles among those who do not fear
him. For he is a righteous God, who does not want to suffer sin or evil;
so here she boasts that the same God is also a merciful God, who takes
care of our needs and makes us mourn for our misery. Whoever knows this
and believes it to be true in his heart is helped. The reason for all
our fear, anxiety and worry is that we fear God as a serious judge. And
it is true that he wants to be a judge, but only against those who do
not fear him, but insist on their wisdom, holiness, power and wealth.
But he will be merciful and help those who fear him. This is the first.

028 Secondly, if this helping up be done in mercy, where is the merit
here? where is the law? where are good works, sacrifices, circumcision,
the Sabbath, and such like? Is it not true that with all these things
Israel had to lie in sin and eternal death? For what else do they need
mercy? So the Virgin Mary rejects all merit and concludes: Moses and his
law could not help them; Israel had to remain in death, under sin and
the devil's rule because of the law. But this

Help him alone that God is merciful, takes care of the poor people, and
where they must otherwise remain lying, he offers them his hand out of
loud compassion and straightens them out.

29 She also teaches us what kind of help or mercy it is, and says: It is
the mercy that He promised to Abraham and other fathers. With these
words, she directs us behind her to the Scriptures, so that we may see
what God promised to Abraham. Now it is true that God promised Abraham
more than one thing. He promised him a son with his Sarah; that is what
happened. He promised him the increase of his family, that kings and
princes should come from it; this also happened. He promises his seed
the land of Canaan; this has also happened long ago. Therefore, the
Virgin Mary does not speak of such promises. But God promised Abraham
something else, namely, a son through whom all the families of the earth
shall be blessed. Such a promise has not yet been fulfilled until this
hour, and has been promised not only to Abraham, but also to other
fathers. Now this is what Mary says here, that God wants to accomplish
this, and through the blessed seed help us out of the curse and wrath of
God to grace, eternal life and blessedness: not as if we deserved it,
but out of pure mercy.

(30) This is now the greatest and highest benefit, which the dear
virgin saves for the last and thanks God for it. This is to indicate
that she is more interested in such a blessing and is more moved to joy
and thanksgiving than by the other blessing that happened to her alone,
that she alone should be the mother of such a blessed child. For this
was only a temporal honor, but this shall remain forever, as she says
here. She wants to indicate how her child, the Lord Christ, will have
another kingdom than the one that has lived in the world until now,
namely, such a kingdom, which the dead Abraham and other fathers will
also enjoy, and thus enjoy that they will live forever. Now this is the
right and best part, for which we have to do with the love of God.

[**1234** D- 3, 445-^47. on the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. W. xm,
2753-2755.2812. **1235**]{.underline}

We should thank the Virgin God and keep ourselves in His fear, so that
we may remain in such grace and mercy.

(31) So this song is an example of how we should praise and thank God
for all His spiritual and bodily gifts, bring them home to Him, and not
exalt ourselves because of them, but say in all humility: Lord, it is
Your gift, and I thank You for it; by my wisdom or ability or holiness I
have not earned it nor brought it about. As we see, the dear virgin with
her example and sermon tells us not to be hopeful, but to humble
ourselves and keep ourselves in all discipline; and promises that where
we do this, God will also be with us with his graces and give much;
otherwise, where one wants to be proud, he will take everything.

(32) Therefore learn both the sermon and the example, and also be
guided by them, so that you may learn to say: Has the most generous of
all women been able to humble herself in this way, and has she not been
able to overburden herself with her gifts?

walked over the mountains, like another poor maid, she served Elizabeth
with "all the housework: poor me, why or from what should I be proud?
What am I against this virgin whom the angels serve? Therefore I will
also learn to be humble, gladly follow, serve and do what I can, for my
rule or my parents. This would mean to follow this example and sermon.
And it will not fail that whoever, with such humility, diligently
adheres to God's word and practices his faith in this way, God will be
with him with his graces. On the other hand, the other house, if it does
not respect God's word, is insolent, bold and proud, and does not keep
itself chaste, must fall into sin and disgrace and suffer all
misfortune. For the sake of Christ, may God grant us His Holy Spirit, so
that we too may learn to be godly, humble and chaste, and finally take
comfort in the mercy that was promised to Abraham, but has been
abundantly extended to us through Christ, the Son of God, amen.

**On the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. *)**

**Luc. 22, 24-30.**

There was also a dispute among them as to which of them should be
considered the greatest. But he said to them: The worldly kings reign,
and the mighty are called gracious lords; but ye are not so: but the
greatest among you shall be as the youngest, and the chiefest as a
servant. For which is the greatest, he that sitteth at meat, or he that
ministereth? is it not so, that he that sitteth at meat? But I am among
you as a servant. But you are you who have persevered with me in my
temptations. And I will appoint unto you the kingdom, as my Father hath
appointed me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and
sit in seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

In today's Gospel your love hears how the disciples, at the last
supper, when the Lord Christ had met with them and had prepared and
instituted the New Testament, began to quarrel among themselves, because
each one would have liked to be the most important and to be the master
of the others. And it seems as if such quarrels had given the Lord
Christ cause to wash his feet, since

*) Melanchthon wrote this sermon to a friend.

John reports chapter 13: For just as the Lord says in John: "You call
me Lord and Master, and do right, for I am also. Therefore if I, your
Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye shall also wash one
another's feet. The servant is not greater than his lord, nor the
apostle greater than he who sends him"; so he also says here, "The
greatest among you shall be as the youngest, and the chiefest as a
servant" 2c. Is

[1236 **L. 3.447-449. on the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. W. XIII,
2814-2816.** 1237]{.underline}

Therefore this is the opinion of today's gospel, that the Lord makes a
difference between his kingdom and the kingdom of the world. And
especially he that hath an office in his kingdom will beware of
presumption, and will not seek worldly power thereby, but will serve
others, and from such service expect nothing but toil, labor, and
ingratitude in the world. As we can see, this is what happened to our
dear Lord Christ himself.

2 Basil has a very good saying, and says: If those who are in church
offices begin to quarrel about the glory, so that each one wants to be
more and higher than the other, this is like a trade, as if the shipmen
quarreled among themselves, which one wants to drown himself first, if
there is a tempest out of the sea. This is not only a foolish but also a
dangerous quarrel. For necessity demands that they be united and sit
down together to see if they can save the ship, and it is not at all
fitting that they should be divided, one wanting to go out this way and
the other that way. It is the same with the apostles. There was a
terrible weather in the sky, namely, the great sorrow that Christ, their
Lord and Master, should die so shamefully on the cross the next day. But
they are sure that they do not see such an affliction, and in the
meantime they begin to quarrel because no one gives way to the other,
and always one wants to be more and better than the other.

Therefore the Lord preaches to them seriously and says that they do not
want to suffer such things in his kingdom. If they want to become great
lords, let them stay with the world empire. But whoever wants to be in
his kingdom must not rule and be splendid, but humble himself and serve.
The Lord saw it well with the disciples that there would be no need. For
they were so deeply troubled and afraid that they forgot all glory and
did not know where to stay because of suffering and fear, so that their
ambition was exhausted and even lost.

4 Therefore, this sermon is mainly about the last time of the world,
when the church will be at the

And yet the priests, regardless of such misery, that the church with the
doctrine and other gifts is so much pleased, are scrambling for temporal
goods and worldly splendor, and each wants to dampen and squeeze the
other. As the example of the pope shows, the popes did not ask anything
about doctrine and proper worship, but only sought and calculated how
they could rise high, bring much land and people under them, and make a
large income.

Now we see that this kind of quarrel took place among the apostles also
before, when Matthew on the 18th and afterwards on the 20th. But here,
since it is just at the hour that the Lord Christ is to go to his
torture and be captured by the Jews, this quarrel arises once again.

(6) Therefore we are to notice two things in particular about this
history: the first, what a harmful poison such hopefulness is, and how
it tends to take hold once it has been set on the church servants; the
second, because the Lord admonishes the disciples right now before his
suffering that we should take such a warning to heart and guard against
such devilish poison all the more diligently. For we are to hold this
very teaching here as a piece of the testament and last will of our Lord
Christ Jesus, since it was given so hard before his death.

(7) In this doctrine the Lord set forth two things, both of which are
particularly noteworthy. The first is that he teaches what the church
offices should be, that they should be ordered only for service, and not
for glory or worldly splendor. The other, that the Lord here freely
confesses publicly that worldly authority and government is an order of
God; for this reason they remain in it, and nothing is to be done by
Christians that is contrary to such an order of God or destroys it.
"The worldly kings reign," he says, "and the mighty are called
gracious lords." This is a bright and clear saying, that order is to
remain in the world, that some are to rule and the rest are to be their
subjects; and that those who are in the world are to be the rulers.

[1238 **2- s, 449-4si. On the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. W. xm.
As-wis.** 1239]{.underline}

The governors shall have the power to punish their subjects with the
sword if they commit anything contrary to law and equity, and to the
detriment of others.

8. For this reason the Lord here gives the title to secular
authorities, calling them "gracious lords," to indicate what their
office is, what they need it for, and what they are to accomplish with
it, namely: That they should not be tyrants, and should not use their
power and authority to oppress others with it; but that they should show
mercy and help, protect the pious, punish the wicked, administer
discipline and respectability, enforce equal justice, promote marital
status and domestic discipline, keep peace, and especially take care
that the youth is educated properly and not seduced by annoying
examples. This is what secular authorities are supposed to do, which is
why they are called gracious lords who do everything good for everyone.
Yes, that is why they alone have more power and authority than others,
so that they alone should keep such things. As Paul says, Rom. 13, 4:
"The authorities are God's servants for your good. Wherever the
worldly authorities act in this way, God is pleased with them and wants
to bless them. But where it does not do so, and wants to abuse its power
for its own glory and to oppress its subjects with it, God is not
pleased with it and will not let it go unpunished. This is a part of
this doctrine, so that everyone may learn that worldly authority is in a
divine, holy state, if it only wants to get itself right.

(9) "But ye," saith Christ, "not so: but let the greatest among you
be as the youngest, and the chiefest as a servant." As if to say, Mark
me well this doctrine; for there is much in it. Worldly authority should
and must be, so that discipline and respectability, peace and justice
may be preserved, and all public trouble may be punished and abolished.
For this reason, they have the power to set and order everything that
they deem useful for the promotion of peace and justice. This pleases
God well. Therefore, let it remain so. But you who are in church offices
and teach others with the word

You have another office and another command, namely, to preach the
gospel, through which men receive the Holy Spirit and come to the
forgiveness of sins and eternal life. By such doctrine ye shall abide,
and preach nothing else, nor establish any new laws, nor any other
worship. Whoever does not accept such teaching and does not want to
follow you, you shall not punish him with force or with the sword; for
the sword is not commanded to you, but with the word that you threaten
them with the law and wrath of God, and exclude them from the church by
banishment. As Christ says, "Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound
in heaven."

(10) This is called the church office or church government: such a
government, where one alone has the word, and thus rules, that one does
not need any force, nor does one lay hands, nor does one seek any power
or sovereignty before others. But why this? Because God wants to
preserve and govern His Church by His Word alone, and not by human
power. Those who are in church offices and have the ministry of
preaching have the word only for the purpose of serving others with it,
and not for the purpose of making themselves lords through it. Therefore
it is of equal importance, whether a minister is great or small, young
or old, if he only has the word and leads rightly. For it is the word
alone that is to be seen and to rule, and not the person who speaks the
word.

11.. But is it not a pity above all pity that the Lord so diligently
teaches and warns at his last end, how these two kingdoms are not to be
mixed, but are to be finely divided, each remaining in its own circle:
and yet the shameful pope, notwithstanding such teaching and warning,
sets himself up for a head of the church; and because he wants to be the
head of the church, he also wants to be a lord over temporal
authorities, and himself, like other kings and princes, to rule with the
sword? Hence it came about that they lost the word and made the church a
secular government, arranged new services, and sought and invented
everything, so that they might have the

1240 **L. 3, 45i-4S3. On the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. W.** xin,
**2819-2821.** 1241

The money brought by the people and the priestly splendor could
increase.

012 But now would any man ask, saying, What manner of government is
this, and how can it be, seeing there is no head; and they that are in
office are all equal, and none shall have more power nor authority than
another? For reason considers such equality a deformity and a harmful
thing. Again, where there is a head, on whom others may look and be
guided by the same, such an order reason considers useful and good; and
concludes from it: If it is to be right in the church, it must also be
so, or there will be a loud confusion and disorder. And this is the
cause that still holds many sensible, wise people captive. For even
though they are hostile to the pope, and see the public, irresistible
trouble, they still think that there must be order in the church
government; for this reason, they do not want to keep up with those who
tear such order apart, and do not want to accept and recognize either
the pope or others as a head.

(13) To such a question let us answer thus: It is true that reason
considers it a deformity and a harmful error that all who are in church
offices should be equal, and that one should have as much command, power
and authority as the other. Therefore, to prevent such deformity, the
pope has made an order in the church just as in the secular government,
where one is higher, has more command and greater power than the other.
But here we have an expressed command of our dear Lord Christ, who wants
things to be different in his kingdom, which is a spiritual kingdom,
than in the temporal kingdom: so that everyone may learn how in the
kingdom of Christ human power or great prestige should not apply and
rule, but only the word of God.

(14) And yet even in such church government there is an order and
difference, which is called: Differentia donorum, sed non potestatis.
(Difference of gifts, but not of power.) For no one has more power, or a
different command, than the other; and yet one has different gifts and a
different calling than the other; as St. Paul says, Eph. 4:11: "He made
some apostles.

but some were appointed prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and
teachers" 2c. These are the distinct offices, and therefore the gifts
must also be distinct. But for the sake of such differentiated gifts and
offices, no one is to assume worldly authority nor want to rule in a
worldly way. They are all bound together by the gospel, that they may
abide by it and do nothing contrary to it. This is the right order that
should go and remain in the church, and is a far better order than that
of the pope, who makes an order not of offices but of external
authority, contrary to the command of Christ.

(15) The prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others were not high priests,
though they had a very glorious profession and greater gifts than the
high priests: and yet no one compelled them by force, or wished to have
more power than others; but the pious Jews, without outward compulsion,
willingly gave themselves up, and received their doctrine, because they
knew it was not their doctrine, but God's, and not their word, but
God's word. Thus St. Paul has many excellent and high gifts, and the
pious bishops, as Timothy, Titus, and others, keep him in mind and act
according to him: not because St. Paul has more power and can force
them; but because the church, wherever it has seen the word and God's
gifts, has honored the same persons, heard them, and accepted them, not
because of the persons, but because of the word. For it is all in the
word, and nothing at all in the person.

(16) So that the summary of today's gospel is this: There will be
bishops, pastors, preachers, and other such officials in the church;
they alone are to serve, and are not to arrogate to themselves any
outward authority or glory because of such office or service; as the
Lord Christ here sets before us his own example. "Which," saith he,
"is the greatest, he that sitteth at meat, or that ministereth? Is it
not true, he that sitteth at meat? But I am among you as a servant."
And Joh. 20, 21.: "I

**1242 L. 3, 453-455. on the day of Bartholomew the Apostle. W. XIII,
2821-2825. 1243**

send you as my Father has sent me." Now it is before our eyes and in
our day that Christ was not sent by his Father to rule like a worldly
prince and to seek worldly splendor. But he was sent to preach and to
suffer. So he also sends his servants. Therefore, those who serve in the
church should never let this image leave their eyes and hearts, and
beware of the devil, who would gladly lead them to abuse their office
for his own glory and splendor. In the secular government, it must be
like this: he who has the office must also have the power. But in the
church it means to serve and to suffer, not to rule or to have gentle,
good days. He that will do it, let him do it; he that will not do it,
let him not boast that he serves in the kingdom of Christ.

17 Therefore it is an abomination above all abominations, that,
notwithstanding such doctrine and warning, the pope should be lord over
all kings and emperors, because he is St. Peter's successor or
descendant; whereas Peter undoubtedly kept himself according to the
command of Christ, and renounced all temporal power and authority.

(18) Therefore let every man beware: the devil will not leave it
alone, and will try thee, whether thou exalt thyself in thy office.
Where this happens, it follows that one will think of how to press
others and raise oneself even higher. This is what has happened to the
word and the pure doctrine. The Lord warns of this here, and admonishes
that honor, authority and other things must be abandoned, and that where
one has most diligently carried out this ministry, the greatest
ingratitude will follow, and he will have to suffer honestly.

(19) Someone might ask: If the ministry of preaching does not entail
more than toil and labor and all misfortune, should it be much better to
leave it and do something else? And indeed the world does it honestly.
For the fewest part, and almost the weakest, who are thought to be good
for nothing else, go to the church service.

20. but the lord says here finely what his

He says, "You who have persevered with me in my temptations," that is,
"You see my example, that I have not had many good days, but all kinds
of temptation, toil and labor from the preaching ministry; you know this
and have seen it. Well then, as my Father has granted me the kingdom, so
I will also grant it to you: through cross and suffering, through great
toil and labor you will come to it. Then send yourselves up, and leave
other thoughts behind. For it has happened to me in the same way. My
kingdom on earth means nothing else but serving and suffering. Whoever
wants to have it better on earth, he may look for it elsewhere and take
a chance on my kingdom. But when it comes to that life, there it shall
be different. Here you must serve at table, there you must sit; and the
more is, you must sit with me at my table. Here you must suffer
yourselves, and let the world deal with you and judge you as it will.
There you shall sit on chairs and judge the world. In sum, in that life,
Christians, especially those in the ministry of preaching, will be paid
and repaid abundantly for all they have done and suffered here on earth.

21 For just as it is a sign of great grace when one sits at table with a
prince, so also the Lord wants to show that if we faithfully wait for
our ministry here, we will enjoy it in the other and better life.
Therefore all Christians in general, but especially those in the
preaching ministry, should set their hope on that life, and think:
Christ, our dear Lord and Head, had it no other way, he himself had to
suffer and through suffering enter into his glory; now the servant shall
not have it better nor desire it better than his Lord: therefore only be
bold; we must suffer here with Christ and for Christ's sake, we shall
also reign with him in that life. For in both these things we are to
become like the Lord Christ, as Paul says in Romans 8, with suffering
and with glory and honor. May this be granted to us all by our dear Lord
and Savior, Christ Jesus, amen.

[**1244** 3, 455^57. On the day of the beheading of John. W. xm,
282s-2827. **1245**]{.underline}

**On the day of the beheading of John.**

The gospel on the day of the beheading of John you will find on the
feast of John the Baptist. [See above Col. 1158 ff.]

**On the day of St. Matthew. ***

**Matth. 9, 9-13.**

And as JEsus departed from thence, he saw a man sitting at the receipt
of custom, whose name was Matthew, and said unto him, Follow me. And he
arose and followed him. And it came to pass, as he sat at meat in the
house, behold, there came many publicans and sinners, and sat at meat
with JEsu and his disciples. When the Pharisees saw this, they said to
his disciples, "Why does your Master eat with tax collectors and
sinners? When JE heard this, he said to them: The strong have no need of
a physician, but the sick. But go and learn what this is: I am pleased
with mercy, and not with sacrifice. I have come to call sinners to
repentance, not the pious.

This is a short but very good gospel, both because of the history, that
we hear how the Lord calls the publican Matthaeum to the apostleship;
and then because of the sermon which the Lord preaches when the
Pharisees are angry that he eats with sinners and tax collectors. For
both history and preaching serve that we may actually learn Christ and
what his ministry is. He who can do this may well boast that he knows
the best and highest art. For it is the art that came down from heaven,
and serves us to come up from and out of the earth also to heaven, and
to live forever; as Christ Himself says, John 17:3: "This is life
eternal, that they may know thee, that thou only art true God, and whom
thou hast sent, Jesus Christ." According to this doctrine, which is the
highest and best, the Lord teaches us how we should behave and keep
ourselves, if we want to enjoy His ministry and be true Christians.

2. but at the first we want the history

*From the Commentary on Matthew.

look at him. Matthew himself says what his actions and nature were: that
he sat at the customs and dealt with his food and trade, and thought
neither of Christ nor of heaven. Now we know what the customs officers'
trade was, that they, as the most powerful merchants and partners,
accepted and passed the annual income of a city or country for a named
amount from the Romans, and then brought it up as high as they could
best enjoy it. It can be assumed that everything they did was based on
money, and that they let avarice ride and drive them.

(3) Therefore it was a common saying among the Jews, when they would
say of a man who was openly a sinner, and asked neither after God nor
his neighbor, that they called him a publican. As can be seen in the
Pharisee, Luc. 18, who boasts so highly of his piety and scolds other
people for being robbers, unjust, and adulterers, the tax collector must
also serve as such a person, since he thinks he cannot fail or do him
wrong,

**1246 L.3, 4S7-4SS. On the day of St. Matthew. ' W. xm, 2827-2830.
1247**

when he accuses him of being a sinner. And we ourselves, if we were to
judge this tax collector Matthew, what else could we think of him?

4 And therefore it is an excellent work that our dear Lord Jesus does
not let this man sit as a public sinner, but calls him to Himself, not
only to forgive his sins, but also to place him in the most glorious and
greatest office, and to make him an apostle, who afterwards shall also
help other people to come to forgiveness of sins and eternal life.

(5) But what thoughts will you draw from such work? Will you also take
it for what the Pharisees thought, that God does not want such people?
Is it not true, just as we cannot deny that Matthew and his like are
poor sinners, so we cannot deny that God wants to be merciful to
sinners, to accept them, and to help them from sins through His Son
Christ Jesus? For here it says both: Matthew is a tax collector, a poor
sinner, who takes where he can take; and yet Christ accepts him
graciously and makes an apostle out of him. This is the one consolation
that all sorrowful sinners should take, that Christ will not cast them
away, but will gladly accept them in grace, provided (as we will hear at
the end) they follow Matthew's example, forsake sins, and follow the
Lord Christ.

(6) But this consolation is the greater, because Christ did not show
bad grace to Matthew, but appointed him an apostle, who was such a great
sinner, that he should not be hoped for on account of his great
ministry, nor should other sinners despair, but should also accept the
Lord Christ. For see here with diligence. Who are they, our dear Lord
Christ's nearest servants, and his chiefest counsellors, whom he hath
in his kingdom? They are all poor sinners who, because of their
righteousness or good works, should be in the pit of hell. Therefore,
even though I and you are poor sinners, neither Peter nor Paul can boast
against us or despise us. Cause them

We must also remember that they have not always been pious, and have
sometimes held themselves against our Lord God, it would have been
better.

(7) This is also the reason why the Pharisees are so very angry. For
they judge according to the law, and are hostile to sins and sinners,
and make believe that the Lord accepts such sinners, eats and drinks
with them, which is against the law of God and wrong. And it is true
that where something is done contrary to God's law, there is good
reason (as reason judges) to be angry about it, for it is done contrary
to God. Such anger continues to this day. For as soon as we praise and
extol God's grace, everyone cries out that such preaching makes people
safe and lazy, that they do no good. So that the Jews, that is, the
works saints who deal with the law, consider the gospel to be an
annoying sermon. But the Gentiles, that is, the rough and sure people,
consider it a foolish sermon. Therefore they rage against it, as against
the highest heresy; these mock and laugh at it, as if it were a useless,
futile delusion. The former consider it a blasphemy, the latter a fable.
But the Christian church and its head, our dear Lord Christ, go through
the midst of it, and neither allow blasphemy to enter their right ear,
nor contempt to enter their left ear, but live in true faith, and thus
honor their Father in heaven.

8 Therefore it is a beautiful and comforting picture that our dear Lord
Christ sits there among the tax collectors and sinners, like a good
companion, who has all pleasure and joy in them and is heartily fond of
them. On the other hand, the Pharisees stand around and look sour,
grumble and reproach themselves about it, and judge and condemn both
Christ our Lord and the poor sinners: they want to judge Christ
according to the law, when he neither can nor wants to be under the law;
for he is a master of the law, and deals with it, yes, that is why he
came on earth, that he also wants to make us free and free from the law.
This is the first part of this history, and the strange profession that
the publican Mat-

**[1248 L. 3, 459-461. On the day of St. Matthew. W.xm, 2830-2832.
1249]{.underline}**

thäo becomes an apostle and evangelist; as a sign that Christ wants to
accept sinners and help them.

(9) The other is the preaching. For when the Pharisees would not keep
such vexations among themselves, but poured them also into his
disciples, saying unto them, "Why doth your Master eat with publicans
and sinners?" the Lord must answer for his disciples also, that such
vexations be not kept among them; and he divides the responsibility into
two parts. The first is taken from reason, and by it the Lord wants to
indicate that it is his office to deal with sinners: therefore they
should leave him satisfied and not speak anything to him in his office.
"The strong," saith he, "have no need of the physician, but the
sick." As if to say, If ye were sick in a bed, and a physician were
with you, how should it please you so well, that the physician should be
put away from you, and not left with you? For it is true that the
physician and the sick person belong together. Therefore, just as the
sick person cannot be without the doctor, so the doctor should be happy
to be with the sick person. But whoever would wish it ill of the
physician that he would gladly let himself be used by the sick person,
must be either a fool, or an envious, evil, poisonous person, who does
not begrudge the sick person his health. This is a reasonable trade, and
if the Pharisees cannot oppose it, they must let it be good.

10 Now notice how the Lord interprets this likeness. For he means this
much: He who is a sinner has a more dangerous and harmful disease in his
soul than any pestilence, French disease, leprosy, or any other such
disease can be to the body. Now, if it is true about sinners, that they
are so dangerously sick in their souls, what should be done against
them? Shall they be made to lie thus, and to die and perish in sins? Not
at all; but the greater and more annual the damage to the soul than to
the body, the more diligence, effort and labor should be put into
helping the poor sinners, and restoring them to health by the right
medicine of repentance.

that is, to be brought to grace. This is one thing that the Lord
indicates here: that sin is not a bad harm, but a dangerous disease, by
which body and soul are damaged for eternity.

(11) Therefore, we should not be safe in the face of such great harm.
When pestilence reigns, we see how to protect ourselves with medicines.
So there may easily be some clumsiness of the body, so we run to the
physicians, seek advice and help, so that we may escape the misfortune
in time and it will not become worse. But why don't we do the same
here, since there is a thousand times more driving to be done? For
bodily sickness only harms the body and must finally cease. But the
sickness of the soul, sin, brings eternal death, where one does not come
forward and needs the right physician. But there you see how everyone
despises such driving. He who lies in avarice, fornication, gluttony,
envy, wrath, pride, disobedience and other such sins, all of which are
mortal sins, for which the wrath of God comes upon the disobedient
children, surely goes about as if he lacks nothing; and it is often the
greatest concern and highest complaint of blind, miserable people that
they do not have cause enough for such sins. Well, whoever believes
Christ here and confesses to be a sinner, will see that he does not give
too much room to such a soul sickness and let it sit too heavily, but
looks around in time for the remedy and the right physician.

Who is now the same physician? Here you hear it: No one, except our dear
Lord Christ Jesus. For since the devil is the beginner of sins and has
led man into sin, it is in vain to seek help from men against such harm,
who all, none excepted, have such harm in themselves. Therefore such a
man belongs to it, who is mighty over the devil and is his lord. This is
our dear Lord Christ, true man and eternal God, who is the right
physician, and has the certain art, yes, also the command and the
office, that he should help us sick, poisoned people. As he says at the
end: "I have not come for the sake of the righteous.

**1250 8. 3. 461-463. On the day of St. Matthew. W. xm. 2832-2835.
1254**

For the sake of those who think they are pious for themselves and do not
need anyone to help them, but for the sake of sinners. Notice this.

(13) For first of all, it is so that you may learn to know God
rightly. For, as has often been said, our hearts are naturally under the
delusion that God does not want to show mercy to sinners. As the law
also teaches, God wants to be merciful to the pious and those who do His
will; the others He wants to punish in disgrace. But if this were God's
will, Christ would not have come to earth thinking that he wanted to be
the sinner's physician and bring them to righteousness. He would have
left them stuck in sins, without grace and help, and would not have come
on earth and become man at all. But because he becomes man, and here
freely confesses: As a physician belongs to the sick, so he belongs to
the sinners; even the Pharisees will not let themselves be rejected by
such a thing: there one sees how God's counsel and will is not other
than to help the sinners and to prove mercy to them.

14 Secondly, this serves to teach us to beware of false and erroneous
teaching. For all the world is concerned with how one can get rid of
sins and become free of them. For this the Turks need their Alkoran, the
Jews their law, the pope his orders, masses, fasting, confession,
pilgrimages, indulgences and other things. But a Christian who
understands this gospel sees that such things are lies and deceit.
Cause, here he hears that the only physician who can and should help
from sins is our dear Lord Christ, and no one else.

Therefore, the verdict is soon reached. Of the dogs, the Turks, it is
not necessary that we speak. But Moses and the law have a good
appearance. The divine service in the papacy also. But because the Jews
do not want to say that their Moses and law is Christ; the papists must
not say that their works, orders and worship is Christ: so a Christian
concludes roundly and badly that all this does nothing for the
forgiveness of sin. Cause, the only physician is Christ, and no one
else. Whoever

If anyone seeks help against sin other than from Christ, he will not
find it; it is in Christ alone, and in him alone will it be found.

16 How does this physician help? what kind of medicine does he need? The
Lord shows this finely at the end, when he says that he has come to call
sinners to repentance. For before Christ comes with his medicine, that
is, with his word, the holy gospel, one sees that the world lives and
floats in all security, in sins, and there is neither hearing nor
keeping. Not only is there no repentance because of sins, but there is
still pleasure and joy in it, and one cannot be full of evil. But when
Christ comes and communicates to us his medicine, that is, his word, by
which the Holy Spirit punishes the world for sin, righteousness and
judgment, the wrath of God is first revealed to us, that man recognizes
his sin and is displeased with it, and wishes he had not done it. But
this does not yet help the disease, and yet it must be. For without such
recognition, grace and comfort are of no account. When the hearts are so
frightened and distressed that they hold on to themselves, are sorry for
their sins, and strive to amend them, then it is the right time to come
with the medicine and to restore and comfort the troubled consciences.
But this is done only by seeing how Christ suffered for us, and paid for
our sin by his death, and gave us eternal life and righteousness by his
resurrection.

This is the only remedy that the Lord calls "repentance" in one word,
by which we are delivered from the harmful disease of the soul, sin. If
we accept this with a right heart, and trust that it is certainly true
that God will be merciful to us for Christ's sake, that He will not
remember our sins, and that He will accept us in grace and make us
blessed, then a right, serious obedience will follow, so that we will
beware of sins and no longer desire to anger God, who has done such
grace for us and given us His Son.

(18) So then sinners are rightly helped, that instead of sin there is
a double gift.

**1252 2.3, 463-465. On the Day of St. Matthew. W. XIII, 2835-2837.
1253**

There is justice. As the holy evangelist praises our physician Christ
and says: He is full of grace and truth; not only for his person, but
that he wants to communicate and give us grace and truth. "Grace" is
that sin is forgiven us. "Truth" is that we do not, like the
hypocrites, become pious in appearance, but from the heart, and gladly
and willingly do what we know, since God is pleased with what happens.
On the other hand, the hypocrites, who pretend to be righteous, keep
their sin, and all their holiness is only lies and hypocrisy. .

(19) Let us diligently remember this, and thank God for His grace,
that we have found the right physician, praise be to God always, and
have received the right medicine, by which we are helped from sins and
are made holy, not only because of the works we do in the faith of
Christ, and God is pleased with them, even though they are not yet
perfect; but because of the grace that through faith in Christ all our
sins are forgiven us, and we have become children of God.

(20) This is the first part of Christ's responsibility, so that he
teaches us what his office is, namely, that he is a physician for sins,
and therefore will not be driven away from sinners, but will remain with
them, care for them through his word, and help them from sins. This is a
very comforting and useful sermon.

The other piece of responsibility is based on the saying of the prophet
Hosea, and is also exceedingly comforting and beautiful. For this saying
goes completely against the law and the highest service of God in the
law; therefore it needs its own sermon.

(22) First of all, we should pay special attention to the word *volo*,
I am pleased. For here think, who is speaking? Is it not true, the high
majesty, God himself? If he is pleased with something, then the whole
creature and everything that exists must also be pleased with it.
Therefore, this single saying would be sufficient to teach us God's
will, and we would not need any other books. For here

It is so round and fine that God says, "This is what I want, this is
how I am minded, this is what pleases me, I delight and delight in you
being merciful to one another.

(23) Is it not a wonder above all wonders that men have put so much
diligence, effort and labor into how they might serve God and live to
please Him? One has done one thing, another another; one has become a
priest, another a monk; one has said mass, another has fasted: and yet
no one has looked at this bright, clear text, that our Lord God says
here: "This is what I want, this is what I am pleased with, that you
may be merciful. For this single word, if we were to consider it
rightly, would bring down to the ground all monasteries, religious
orders and services that have been in the papacy up to now. For, tell
me, is it not true that all these things began because we thought: O
that I might know how to serve God? One thought, "It will please Him if
I put on a cap. Another thought, "It will please Him if I fast a lot,
pray a lot, go on pilgrimages. In sum, the whole world has followed the
one word that is written here: "I am well pleased"; everyone has
sought it and would have liked to know it. Now the Lord wants it
unconcealed, but free and open, and tells us here what he is pleased
with, namely, mercy. But everyone passes by as if he did not mean it, or
as if he had mocked us.

(24) This is now the great lamentation and the annual, horrible
blindness, that we seek to serve God through our own thoughts; and since
He Himself tells us how we can and should serve Him, no one wants to
believe Him, no one wants to follow Him. That is why, as Isaiah says
Cap. 65, 1.: "I am sought by those who do not ask for me", that is,
they do not want my word, and yet they want to be with me and be
considered holy. "But I," he says, "am found by those who do not seek
me," that is, who accept my word and do not follow their own thoughts.
For it grieves God greatly, and justly, because he has revealed himself,
and desires to be found.

1254 **D. 3, 465-468. On the Day of St. Matthew. W. XIII, 2837-2840.**
1255

We do not want to follow such revelation, but we want to follow our own
thoughts and follow them.

(25) This is the first word in this saying, which is very much needed,
as you hear. For by this one can know God's heart and will. Now the
prophet continues, and names the child, and says what it is that God is
pleased with, and says: "I am pleased with mercy. Let this word also be
commanded thee, and mark it diligently and well against all works that
have a great appearance, but are not mercy. For we see here that the
prophet diligently remembers mercy in this way, but that God will not
put up with the highest service of God in the law, which He Himself has
ordained; how then should He put up with other works that we do without
God's word, not to serve people with them, but so that we may be pious
and holy and praised by everyone?

26 Everyone knows well what mercy is, namely, when your neighbor is in
trouble, you take care of it as if it were your own affliction and help
as much as you can. Therefore, only look at your neighbor's lack and
need, and you will soon know what mercy is. The greatest and highest
need is the lack of the soul or the sickness of the soul, of which we
have heard above, sin.

(27) If you want to show mercy, that is, to serve God and to do him a
kind and pleasant work, you must not run away from sinners, flee and
avoid them, as the Pharisees do here, but stand by them, instruct them,
admonish them, punish them, comfort them, and even be patient with them
and carry them. Behold, there are many ways in which mercy can be shown
in this particular case, since the monks, fleeing such toil and labor,
have shut themselves up in the monasteries and have engaged in other
works that have improved no one, regardless of the fact that God says
here in clear, unambiguous words: He is pleased with mercy.

After such illness are also diseases of the body, melancholy and others.
Since

you can also help and serve your neighbor in many ways: if not with
money and goods, then with a good word and a kind heart, so that you
would like to help wherever you can. And it is certain, where you do it,
that God in heaven laughs at it, is happy and in good spirits, and says:
"Right, my son, continue in this way, this pleases me, I have pleasure
and love in it. But don't you think, if such honor could be bought with
money, that one could know for sure that God would be pleased with us:
we would not let anything take our time and would gladly put everything
into it? Now it is written loud and clear: "I am well pleased with
mercy." But we hear it and do not believe it; otherwise we would go in
leaps and bounds, and with joy and love we would urge ourselves to help
and advise poor, miserable, afflicted people, and thus come to the glory
that God said to us: I am pleased with your life. That is why the
Pharisees and all the works saints are poor wretched people, that they
still flee from such honor, and do not want to wear this holy shield or
umbrella on their heads. For the fact that the saints are painted with a
shield or splendor around their heads is nothing more than an indication
that they have walked in God's word and that all their lives, deeds and
actions have been included in God's word.

29 Thirdly, we learn that people not only suffer in their souls and
bodies, but also in their goods and food. One can also show mercy in
many ways, with food, drink, clothing and other things, as the Lord
Himself finely tells us, Matth. 25, 35. f.: "I was hungry, and you fed
me; I was thirsty, and you gave me water; I was a guest, and you gave me
shelter; I was naked, and you clothed me". 2c. None of these good works
are found in the works saints. For they not only give nothing, but
devour other people's goods, as Christ says of the Pharisees, and have
good days in their holiness. Therefore, these false saints should have a
devil's muck painted on their heads instead of the sheen or shine; that
would be their proper emblem and visor.

**[1256 L. 3, 468-470. On the day of St. Matthew. W. xm, 2840-2843.
1257]{.underline}**

(30) Thus, your beloved ones have what to do when they want to serve
God and do His will with outward works: nothing else, but to show mercy
to their neighbor. For it is the neighbor who needs our works; God in
heaven does not need them. For what will we or can we give him, who have
nothing; for we receive everything only from him? But this is what we
need above all that God gives us here on earth, that He also give us His
word, so that we may learn to know Him and His will. With the same, God
is also served, for it belongs to His glory. Therefore, it is written in
the prophet Hosea that we should show mercy to our neighbor, and thus
please God; and after that we should be commanded to know God, that is,
we should accept the gospel and believe it. For it is through this alone
that one knows God. Thus one has God's will. But the Lord does not
mention such a thing, for he speaks here only of some of the things we
owe to the people. Nothing is to be a good work, nor is it to be called
a good work, for mercy alone is within, that the neighbor may be helped
in his need.

Now God does not leave it at that, that he alone said: "I am pleased
with mercy"; but adds: "I am pleased with mercy, and not with
sacrifice"; and with the knowledge of God more than with many burnt
offerings. This is a very strange and probably half-heretical appendix,
if the Pharisees were allowed to say so. Cause, sacrifice and burnt
offering have been in the Law the most distinguished services of God,
which God Himself has chosen and commanded to perform. Therefore, it
would be coarse enough if the prophet said: God is more pleased with
mercy than with sacrifice. But to say that God has no pleasure in
sacrifice is too much and very heretical. Whether the Pharisees like it
or not, whether they are angry or not, Christ does not mince words, and
says freely: "I am pleased with mercy, and not with sacrifice."

32) Now the question arises: Why did God so discredit the sacrifices in
this place?

damme, which he nevertheless at much fathers very well put up with? To
this, then, learn to answer: In the eighteenth Psalm there is a verse
which reads thus: "With the saints thou art holy, and with the pious
thou art pious, and with the pure thou art pure, and with the perverse
thou art perverse." Item, Paul says, "That which is not of faith is
sin."

(33) Therefore, one must look at the persons here and make a
distinction between those who are holy and the others who are unholy.
For since the saints keep themselves righteous toward God through faith
and toward their neighbor through mercy, God is pleased not only with
their sacrifices, but with other lesser works, all their work, eating,
sleeping, and other things; and so much so, even though they are not yet
pure in all things, and often fall and sin out of weakness, that such
things do not harm them, but are given and forgiven. For God is holy
with the saints, even when they sin; but that they do not persist in it,
but by faith keep themselves again in God's grace.

34. On the other hand, because the wicked do not keep themselves
righteous, but wicked (for they have neither faith nor confidence in
God), they do not respect love toward their neighbor, and go about with
their sacrifices, with their own chosen worship and piety, seeking
thereby their glory and honor: so it comes to pass that God is also
perverse with such perverse people, and says: Because ye will not obey
my commandment of faith and love, in which I am well pleased; neither
will I suffer your best works and highest worship, your sacrifice; and
not only shall your sins hurt you, but also your best works shall become
the greatest sins. Cause, I do unto you even as ye do unto me; and as
the world saith, If thou boast here, I boast here. You do not like what
I command; I do not like what you do: so we are parted. Since you have
the greatest desire for sacrifice, I have the greatest dislike for it.
For you are not such people as I can have any pleasure in.

**1258 V. 3, 470-472. On St. Michael's Day. W. XIII, 2843-2846. 1259**

35 Therefore, hear your love, how comforting this sermon is to poor
sinners, that Christ is with them, helping them, leading them to
repentance and making them blessed. On the other hand, you also see the
perilous condition of those who think they are not sinners. Therefore,
let us get right down to business, recognize our sin, ask God's
forgiveness, and be ready to forgive.

and hope for forgiveness through Christ, and so prepare our lives to be
called mercy, serving our neighbor as best we can. In this way, God will
have pleasure and love for us, and for the sake of Christ, His Son, He
will make us fully pious and blessed through His Holy Spirit. May God
grant this to us all, amen.

**St. Michael's Day.**

**The first sermon. From the angels.*)**

(1) The feast of the angels was instituted in the Church for the sake
of the young people, or, if I may say so, for the sake of all
Christians, so that they might learn to remember the dear angels and
thank God for having ordained such great lords to be our servants and
serve us. As the epistle to the Hebrews therefore calls them ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for the sake of those who are to inherit
blessedness.

It is true that God could preserve us and protect us from the devil and
all misery, for Himself, without the service of angels. Just as he could
make us human, like Adam and Eve, without father and mother; just as he
could govern land and people without princes; just as he could give us
bread without sun and stars, without plowing and farming and other work.
But he will not do it; but he has so ordered that one creature shall
always serve another. Just as we should thank God for giving us father
and mother, worldly authority, sun and stars, grain and all kinds of
creatures, so that they serve and help us in this life, so we should
also learn that God protects and helps us through His angels, and we
should also be grateful to God for this.

3. for your love has often heard that

*) Held in the house, in 1532.

the devil is everywhere around men: in the courts, in houses, in the
fields, on all roads, in waters, in wood, in the fire; in sum,
everything is full of devils, who do nothing but want to break
everyone's neck at any moment. And it is certainly true that if God did
not fight the evil enemy without ceasing, he would not leave one grain,
neither fish nor flesh, not a drop of water, beer or wine unpoisoned.

4 Therefore, when a man loses an eye or a hand, or when a man is
strangled, or when a pestilence comes upon him, or when another disease
comes upon him, these are the devil's blows and casts; he throws at one
man's head, and at another man's. If he hits, he has it; but if he
does not hit, it is really a sign that God is feeding him through the
good angels. If he hits, he has it; but if he does not hit, it is
actually a sign that God has fed him through the dear angels. So, when
unexpected cases happen, that one falls into a fire, the other into
water, these are vain blows and throws of the devil, who is always
stabbing and throwing at us, and would gladly inflict all kinds of
misfortune on us.

Against such a wicked, poisonous, mischievous enemy, God has ordained
the dear angels to watch, so that wherever a devil strikes and throws
pestilence, fire, hail, 2c., an angel may be there to defend. For it is
a constant battle between angels and devils. The devil would like to
have everything

**1260 D. 3, 472-474. St. Michael's Day. W. XIII, 2846-2849. 1261**

As we see and experience every day, many a person breaks a leg on the
ground, many a person falls down a staircase or stairs, so that he
himself does not know what has happened to him. Such and other things
the devil would probably always do if God did not intervene through the
dear angels. For this reason, he lets us see such individual pieces from
time to time, so that we may learn that if God did not intervene every
hour, such things would always happen, and therefore we should be more
diligent in praying and more grateful to God for such protection.

For God is a God of life, who wants to save and help where we need it.
But if we are wicked and do not ask for His word, nor thank Him for His
fatherly protection and care, then He becomes angry and keeps His angels
at home, and leaves room for the devil to tame wicked boys with
pestilence and other misfortunes, because they do not want to do any
good; so it is over with us. Just as if you pull off your hand and will
not give your children food, clothing or anything else, they are already
poor and corrupt. So God also punishes the ungrateful, wicked wretches
by not intervening and keeping His angels at home.

7 So we see that it also happened to the pious Job. For in his history
it is written that our Lord God asks the devil: "Where did you come
from? The devil answers and says, "I have wandered through the land."
There is no doubt that it will not have gone without harm. For as the
journeyman is wont to go about, Peter says, seeking as a lion where he
may feed and choke. Then the Lord speaks further: "Have you not taken
care of my servant Job; for he is not like him in the land, wicked and
righteous, God-fearing and shunning evil." Satan answers GOD again,
saying, "Job hath been well godly: for thou hast kept his house and all
that he hath round about, and hast heaped a wall about it." With such
words he means: The dear angels must be around him, and look at his
wife, child, field and cattle. As if the evil enemy wanted to say: "I
would have come to that, where you did not defend yourself.

Now our Lord God lets him try, he shall do with Job's goods as he
pleases. In a flash the devil comes, arouses some evil men, who drive
away Job's thousand oxen and donkeys and slay the servants. Then he
causes fire to fall from heaven and burns seven thousand sheep,
shepherds and all. Third, he arouses the Chaldeans, who invade with
three bands and take three thousand camels from Job and slay what they
find.

(9) All this happened in one day, and it was not enough. For Job had
three daughters and four sons; and while they were together, merry and
of good cheer, behold, the devil stirred up such a tempest as threw the
house into a heap, and slew all that was therein. The devil was able to
do this, but not before God had allowed him to. So it can also happen to
us. When our Lord God calls the angels back, ours is not, it is dead in
a moment.

010 But what did Job do when he heard such affliction? He made himself
very miserable, tore his clothes, pulled out his hair; but still he fell
to the ground in all humility, prayed and said, "I came naked from my
mother's womb: naked shall I go again. The Lord gave, the Lord hath
taken away, the Lord be praised." That makes me a very good and holy
man. But what happened next? "It came to pass in the day," saith the
Scripture, "that Satan stood again before God, and the Lord said unto
him, Whence comest thou?" This way of speaking the Scripture has here,
that it speaks of a thing as it happens with us and we think of it. For
God must not ask, he knows all things beforehand, even before they
happen. Satan answers, "I have compassed the land round about." Here
you hear once again that the enemy is not idle nor does he celebrate, he
is always creeping after us humans. We must learn this and therefore
beware of him and take good care of ourselves.

11) The Lord asks Satan again, saying, "Have you also taken care of my
servant Job? for it is his fault.

**[1262 L 3. 474-476. On St. Michael's Day. W. XIII. 284S-28S2.
1263]{.underline}**

He is not a wicked and righteous man in the land, fearing God, avoiding
evil, and still holding to his piety; but thou hast moved me to destroy
him without a cause. Satan answers the Lord, "This is no miracle; all
misfortune is yet to be overcome, because it is not skin deep here. But
let me attack him on his skin, on his flesh and bones; what does it
matter? the good words will remain behind; he will let himself be heard
differently than now, since it has not gone over his own skin, but over
others. Now the Lord also allows Satan to do this, saying, "Behold, he
is in your hand; attack him in his body, and afflict him as you will;
but spare his life, and do not kill him." This is a particularly
comforting piece, that nevertheless our Lord God has caught the devil in
such a way that he cannot go any further than God allows him to go. What
happened? The devil went out and struck poor Job so full of evil swarms
that there was not a single spot on his skin, from the soles of his feet
to the top of his head, that he sat down in the ashes and scraped
himself with broken pieces.

The pagans do not know where such misfortune suddenly comes from. But we
know that it is the work of the devil, who has such halberds, lead
bullets and guns, such spears and swords, so that he shoots, throws and
stabs among us, if God allows him. Therefore, no one doubts it; where
there is a fire, that a village or house burns down, there is always a
little devil sitting there, who always blows into the fire, so that it
should become bigger. So if someone dies of pestilence, drowns, falls to
his death, the devil does it and God forbids it, because otherwise we
would become too evil. As you can see, even though such punishments are
carried out, the world does not turn away from them.

(13) Therefore we need such punishment and examples, so that we do not
live so boldly and recklessly, but ask God for the protection of the
dear angels daily and thank Him for it. For although He could protect us
by Himself without the help of the angels, He will do so through the
angels: they are like a chariot around us, so that the

Devil does not break in on us every moment and do harm.

(14) Therefore let us learn and know that the devil harms us all in
body, goods and honor: he does it by himself, as when he attacks Job in
the body; or by his servants, the wicked men, as when he attacks Job in
the goods, and arouses the Chaldeans and others against him. For our
Lord God, as reported above, is a God of life, and can do nothing but
good through Himself. But this serves us, that we should not be insolent
and sure, as if we were alone and the devil were a thousand miles away
from us. No, you are not alone; the devils are swarming all around, as
Paul says: They fly in the air like jackdaws and crows, shooting and
throwing at us without ceasing.

15 But there is the consolation: they cannot strike rather than God
wills it; otherwise we should fear to death. After that there is another
consolation, as we see in Job, that God does not let the devil have his
way all the time, as if we deserved it and God was angry with us; but
that he wants to try us, whether we will also be patient and hold on to
his goodness.

16 After this, the third consolation, of which we are particularly
concerned today, is that against such evil and harmful actions of the
devil, God created the dear angels to serve us and protect us. For they
are kind, merciful, benevolent spirits, who gladly let themselves be
used to hinder the devil's activity. Therefore, if the dear angels were
not in the courts of emperors, kings and princes, the devil would not
tarry long, but would cause all misery, so that they would fall into
each other every hour. But our Lord God allows it to happen that great
lords become divided; he sometimes lets the devil light a fire, but
there are the dear angels who extinguish it again and make peace. But
where God withdraws His angels because of our sins or other causes,
there it goes badly, with murdering, burning, ravishing women and other
things, and the devil takes pleasure in it. So there would be no peace
in the household either,

**1264 L. 3.476-478. On St. Michael's Day. W. xm, 2852-2854. 1265**

but an eternal discord, stealing, unfaithfulness, neglect 2c.; nothing
would go right, but everything would be full of misery and heartache,
where it should follow the will of the devil. But God controls him
through his dear angels, even though he has sometimes lit a fire,
stirred up mischief and other things, so that he must give way and
desist.

(17) Therefore let no man be safe; for all things are full of devils,
which would gladly hurt the body, the goods, and the soul, with
bitterness, hatred, wrath, jealousy, and other things, that they might
bring us down to hell. But that this does not happen, we have to thank
our gracious Father in heaven, who, through his angels, the high and
excellent spirits, prevents the devil: that nevertheless more good than
harm always happens; that there is more peace than war; that more grain
remains and grows than is destroyed by frost, hail and other things;
that more houses remain standing than burn down; that we humans have
more healthy limbs than sick ones. If the devil attacks an eye, a foot,
an arm, the other body is healthy. Thus, more of them are left to die
than die of pestilence.

18) But that it does not go so purely, and the devil does harm now
here, now there: God allows this to happen, so that he wakes us up, and
we open our eyes, look around, what we have and keep besides such harm
for grace; and thank God for it, if war, pestilence or other misfortune
goes, that it has not gone to failure, but still something, and most of
the part, has remained. As the prophet Jeremiah does: he admonishes his
people to be silent and not to complain that they have been punished and
led away; for this is a great mercy, he says, so that we are not
completely destroyed. For this is how the devil would like it: he is not
content to break your leg, he would like to tear your neck off. He is
not content that one or two of a house should die; he would gladly clear
the house. As it also happens from time to time; as a warning to us that
we should live in the fear of God and ask for the protection of the dear
angels. For we are too weak for the enemy. Therefore, where a

If such an accident occurs, we should get used to it and say with the
pious Jeremiah: "Well, if a child has died for me, if an eye has been
spoiled for me, praise God that the others will remain and that not
everything will be lost. For with this, God wants to teach us what the
devil would dare to do if he were not defended by the dear angels.

Therefore let us learn that we are in great danger day and night, and
that we are like a target to the devil, who always has a cocked crossbow
and a loaded rifle, and aims at us, so that he shoots among us with
pestilence, with the French, with war, with fire, with hail, with
storms. But our dear Lord God, through His dear angels, makes the
crossbow fail him and the rifle burst or fail. He also lets him be
struck at times, so that we may learn that we are not nobles and that
not everything is in our hands, and therefore pray all the more
diligently that God will not leave the devil his space, but will
graciously ward him off through his dear angels.

20 We are to learn this today, that our Lord God has appointed His
angels, so that every Christian has not one, but many angels to guard
him; just as every one has his own devils who creep after him; and where
they cannot do more, they give you evil dreams, hang evil mouths on you,
which are to deceive, hinder and revile. Then know that all this is
called the devil's trick; *) and beware lest thou live as the heathen
do: they also see and experience such calamities, but they think they
happen by chance, for they know nothing of the devil. But learn thou,
and say, This is what the wretched devil hath done. Again, when thou
seest that a thing is well done, say, He hath had a good angel;
otherwise it should be worse done. As when a man comes out of a flood,
or a stone falls on him and does him no harm, this is not called good
fortune, but the work of angels.

(21) Now there is a difference both among the angels and among the
devils.

*) Gerick - young brood. D. Red.

1266 L. 3. 478-480. On St. Michael's Day. W. XIII, 2854-2857. 1267

Princes and lords have great and excellent angels, as is seen in Daniel
10; children and wicked servants have lesser and meaner angels, for one
is always greater, stronger and wiser than the other. So also the
devils. For this very reason Christ says they have one kingdom, Luc. 11.
For as to one kingdom belong many persons and unequal offices, so are
there unequal offices among the devils. These are lesser devils, who
attack with fornication, avarice, honor and the like; but these are
higher spirits, who attack with unbelief, with despair, with heresies.
Such devils have to deal with the pope, where they otherwise do not all
have to deal with him, and with the spirits of the rotten. Therefore, it
is highly necessary that we get used to prayer and faithfully cry out to
God in such high journeys that He will not take such protection of the
dear angels from us. Otherwise we are finished; we are much too weak for
the devil.

(22) But this also belongs to prayer, that one may live in the fear of
God and beware of sins. For the dear angels are holy and pure spirits,
and therefore they cannot suffer where one leads an ungodly life, lives
in fornication and other vices.

wanted. As it is also evident that God punishes such vices very
severely. That is why the 34th Psalm v. 8 says: "The angel of the Lord
encamps around those who fear him and helps them out. For whoever does
not want to fear God and is in trouble and distress, the angels will
leave him in the lurch and will not help him. For their protection shall
be such that God's word and order shall not be shattered, and the
wicked shall not go unpunished for their sins.

(23) Therefore, if you want the angels around you and with you, fear
God and be godly; as the Lord Christ says in the Gospel, that they
rejoice over sinners who repent. From this must ever follow, where there
is an impenitent man, who continues in sins forever, that the dear
angels see their sorrow, and have vain grief and displeasure from it,
and cannot remain with such people, though they would gladly; their kind
and nature cannot endure it. Let this be preached by the angels this
time, so that we may learn to thank God for such glorious protection,
and pray from the bottom of our hearts every day that God will not take
it from us, but will graciously rule over us, amen.

**St. Michael's Day.**

**Second Sermon.**

**Matth. 18, 1-10.**

At that hour the disciples came to Jesus and said: Who is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a child to him, and set him in
the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. He therefore that bringeth himself low, as this
child, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whoever receives
such a child in my name receives me. But whosoever shall offend the
least of these that believe on me, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
deepest part of the sea. Woe to the world because of trouble. Trouble
must come, but woe to the man by whom trouble comes. But if thy hand or
thy foot offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee. It is better
for you to become lame or crippled, than to have two hands or two feet
and be thrown into eternal fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it
out, and cast it from thee. It is better for you to enter life with one
eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell. See that
you do not despise any of these little ones. For I tell you, their
angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.

**1268 8.3. 480-482. On St. Michael's Day. W. XIII, 28S7-2860. 1269**

This gospel tells at the end about the young children and their angels;
therefore, in order that one might have cause to speak of such
protection of the dear angels, it was placed on this feast.

(2) It has two main parts. In the first, he chastises his disciples
for their pride in always wanting to be above one another, saying, "If
they desire to enter the kingdom of heaven, they must not seek how they
may be held high and glorious, but how they may be brought low, and in
that case become like children. As your dear ones have just heard of
such a thing on St. James' Day and St. Bartholomew's Day. For this
reason we will leave it at that. The other part of this gospel is a
warning: first, how Christians are not to cause trouble to anyone, and
especially how they are to be careful not to offend the young people;
and second, when they see trouble in others, how they are to be careful
and not be deceived by it. We will also say a little about these two
warnings.

(3) Now for the first, it is more and more a pity that this gospel
should be preached to such people as take it not to heart, and mean it
diligently. For it is an excellent word that the Lord says here of the
children, saying, "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little
ones: for I say unto you, that their angels which are in heaven do
always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven."

(4) It would be much enough to say, They have their own angels. But he
makes it even greater by saying, "These same angels see the Father's
face in heaven. As if he wanted to say: I command you the young people,
that you do not anger them, but rather pull them well, because God is
much concerned about them. But if you despise them and do not want to
spare them, spare their angels and fear them; and learn, because these
same great spirits serve them gladly and do what is best for them, who
always stand before God's eyes, always hear him and see him, that you
also do the same, who are far, far inferior, and do not annoy them, but
wait for them and serve them gladly.

(5) If we had nothing more than this one saying, when Christ lets
himself be heard, how God, his Father, is so concerned about the young
people, we should conclude that among all good works there is no greater
nor better than to raise young people rightly. For who would not
consider it great to serve those whom the angels serve, who are always
before God? Therefore, father and mother, servants and maids,
schoolmasters and preachers, and all those who deal with young servants,
should be heartily willing and cheerful for such service, and not let
anything spoil it; because these great princes of heaven are not ashamed
to serve the young servants and to look upon them. This is the first
thing to be learned from today's Gospel, besides the teaching about the
angels.

The other is that one should not only gladly serve the youth, but one
should also not annoy them, neither with words nor with deeds, but draw
them to the best, so that they learn to pray, to be chaste, moderate,
obedient, faithful, quiet and true, not to curse, not to rebuke, and to
keep themselves finely virtuous in words and deeds. This is what God
wants from us old people, that we should train the young and diligently
prevent them in all ways from becoming carnal, naughty, wild people. As
it happens very soon, where one does not prevent it by diligent
discipline.

007 For this we see by experience, that youth is like tinder, which
overmuch easily catcheth that which is evil and grievous. Therefore it
is necessary to take special care that both the children and their
angels are watched: the angels, that they be not deceived; and the
children, that they be not offended. For hear further how the Lord takes
care of these things.

8. "He that receiveth such a child," saith he, "in my name receiveth
me: but whosoever shall offend the least of these that believe on me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the deepest part of the sea. There are two
things in common: He who takes a child seriously and nurtures him so
that he learns to know God,

1270 **L. 3. 482-484. On St. Michael's Day. W. XIII, 2860-2863.** 1271

I promise him," says Christ here, "that he will receive me himself and
love me as if he were carrying me in his arms and caring for me as my
mother cared for me. This means to preach sweetly and to entice kindly.

9 But why does the Lord do this? Only because he knows well how the
young people like to hear lewd things and are soon seduced; so they find
evil mouths that gladly help them. And God be lamented in heaven above,
one finds boys and maidens of ten or twelve years of age who curse
torture, Veltin, Frenchmen, and other vile oaths, and are otherwise
shameful and coarse with words. From whom do they learn it? From no one,
but from those who should prevent them, from father and mother, and from
the shameful evil servants. For they would rather learn it and realize
it much better than the Lord's Prayer. That is what the old evil tinder
does, the corrupt nater that is in us. But what judgment will follow?
"Better," says Christ, "would it be if they were drowned in the sea,
where it is deepest." This is to indicate that such offense and sin
will be punished not only with temporal death, but with eternal
damnation.

010 Therefore be more careful and deliberate with the young people, and
speak not all things that are spoken and done. As the pagans also said:
Maximam reverentiam deberi juventuti: Before young people one should be
ashamed most of all. But how many are there who do this? That is why it
is so bad everywhere in the world that there is no more discipline, no
more respectability, no more faith, no more loyalty among the people.
Cause, the old do everything without shyness and speak, and let the
young watch; they then let themselves think that they also have power,
what others, and especially the parents, do, that is also forbidden to
them. But that our Lord God should laugh at this, you can learn here
from the sermon of our Lord Christ. For since the world thinks that it
is without a special duty to curse, or to let out a coarse, shameful
word in front of the young, it is not forbidden to do so.

People; then Christ says it would be better to have a millstone on your
neck and lie in the middle of the sea.

011 So we ought to serve the young gladly, and not to offend them: not
only that we do no evil in their sight, but also that we keep them from
evil, and keep them diligently in discipline. As when a child curseth,
or speaketh a shameful word, let it be earnestly spoken unto him,
saying, Be ashamed in thine heart, and do it no more. For thine angel
standeth, and heareth, and is afraid of such a curse, and looketh sore
upon it. If then your angel is terrified by it and sees it sourly, and
he stands before God's face, do you not think that God will notice it,
who otherwise sees and knows everything, and will therefore also see it
sourly and be angry about it? Therefore, do not do it at all. With such
and other words the youth can be drawn, because otherwise they grow up
in their sod *) and learn and practice all naughtiness. But where such
words and faithful admonition will not take place nor help, parents have
orders to beat them with their fists and not to let the children keep
their courage.

(12) This is what the Lord would have us old men do, that we should
take heed to the young, and guard against naughtiness, because we can
still defend ourselves. For if it is overlooked once, it is not helped
afterwards. And so much more diligence and attention is needed, that, as
said before, youth is a tinder that catches very soon. If you utter a
curse or a rude word, and think that the child has not heard it, he is
soon caught, and if you are not there, he will repeat it to you and
never forget it for the rest of his life. So it happens very soon that a
young person is corrupted, if one does not prevent this with special
diligence and has good respect for himself.

Now it is no joke, the Lord puts a great punishment on it. Again, he
says that what is done to a child in such a case is done to him. Both of
these things should move us so that we do not make up our minds.

*) Growing up in one's own sod - growing up in a raw way". D. Red.

1272 **L. 3, 484-486. St. Michael's Day. W. XIII, 2863-2866.** 1273

but as Christians hold ourselves. For if we do not, they say: It would
be better for you to lie in the sea where it is deepest. Again, if we do
it and do not offend the young people, but by our example accustom them
to God's word, to discipline and shame in word and deed, this pleases
God, who will pay for it with His blessing; whereas those who offend the
young people and do not spare them shall have neither happiness nor
salvation.

14 Let this be said recently of the one passage from today's Gospel,
that everyone should beware of anger, and especially see to it that he
does not offend the young people who, because of their age, are not yet
able to govern themselves properly. For the punishment sufficiently
shows how great a sin this is. God Himself has not inflicted a greater
corporal punishment on the slayers than that they should be judged with
the sword and their lives taken away. But the Lord says here that the
punishment of those who offend the young people should be such that they
should rather be drowned in the sea. Therefore, we are not to joke here,
but we are all to take special care of ourselves in speech, in
everything we do, and in everything we do when young people are present,
so that we do not offend anyone.

(15) To this teaching and exhortation the Lord adds another, saying,
Let not the world turn to such a warning, but let it do what it pleases,
and let no man or woman be offended. Because it cannot be otherwise
because of the evil world, trouble must come; so the Lord teaches and
admonishes how Christians are to conduct themselves, and makes a fine
comparison, saying: Is it not true, that if thou wouldest keep both feet
and hands, thou must either go into hell fire; or if thou wouldest go to
heaven, thou must cut off one foot or one hand: thou wouldst much sooner
have the foot or the hand cut off, than heaven and blessedness forgive
thee? So it is much more likely to lose one eye than to keep both eyes
and go down to hell. But now it is true, and cannot be

otherwise, hell belongs to trouble. Therefore, whoever gives trouble or
follows trouble has forfeited heaven.

16 But how shall Christians keep themselves? In the world, trouble will
come by force, and yet it soon happens that people are deceived by it.
Here the Lord answers and teaches us all, saying, "The journey is
great. For where there is trouble, there is hell and death. Now if you
want to escape such a journey, you will have to attack yourselves, and
you will have to suffer as much pain as if an arm or a leg had to be
taken off you. For it shall come to pass that thou hast a good friend,
when thou shalt think that thou canst sooner take an eye, or a foot, or
a hand, than that thou shouldest take such a friend and let him go. But
if thou wilt remain a Christian, if thou wilt go to heaven, and keep
thyself from hell, turn not to any man, be he father or mother, lord or
lady, prince or emperor; if he be in trouble, beware, follow him not;
let there be a spiritual journey upon thee, as high as it may be. For
the spiritual danger is much higher, so that whoever follows the trouble
must fall from life into death.

17 So that the sum of this warning is that we should stick to our word,
hold fast to it, and not ask any man whether we can enjoy it as much as
we like, or whether we must pay for it as much as is always possible.
For no journey nor profit nor benefit can be so great as that journey
where one allows himself to be led into trouble. Whoever does this lets
a small temporal benefit move, and gives himself into an eternal
journey.

18 As we unfortunately learn today, not in few. For how many do you
think are at royal and princely courts, and know well that there is no
reason for the papist religion; and yet, before they anger their prince,
or want to burden themselves with a few dangers for the sake of the
confession, they stay with the trouble and do not want to touch it with
the least word? They let themselves think that it would endanger their
lives.

1274 **L. 3, 486-488. on the day of Simonis and Jude. W. XIII,
2866,2867,2874,287S.** 1275

It would be a matter of hands, feet and eyes, where they should turn
away from their prince and flee from idolatry. So it is a very common
trouble with the priestly people: they do not lack that they do not know
what is wrong; they know very well that their conjugal life cannot exist
without trouble and great sin; they know that the consciences should not
be weighed down by food, that the sacrament should be given in its
entirety, that the dead saints should not be called upon 2c.But there
they persist in the midst of and in such vexation; and nothing keeps
them, but that they are sorry, if they should leave the life of the
priests, it will be their loss, they will no longer be able to feed
themselves, they will have to go begging, like the lame, the blind and
the crippled, who cannot gain their bread. They do not want to hurt
themselves, they do not want to suffer anything for the sake of the
gospel; and, as the Lord says here, they would rather go down to hell
with both hands, feet and eyes than with one hand.

hand, one foot, one eye want to go to heaven.

19 So this warning of our Lord Christ goes both ways. Let us beware lest
any of us be offended: for it were better that a millstone were hanged
about thy neck, and that thou weret sunk into the bottomless pit of the
sea. After that, one should not let the anger tempt him, but should
stick to the word and not do anything against it, regardless of what
other people say about it, whether they laugh or look angry, whether
they can do harm or help. This is what our dear Lord Christ commanded
his Christians to do. For he sees how much is so very much at stake, and
yet how soon it is done, that one either gives offense, or allows
offense to seduce one. May God, the eternal Father, through His Holy
Spirit, for the sake of Christ JEsu, graciously protect us from all
trouble, and in right faith in His Word, without all trouble, graciously
preserve us and make us eternally blessed, amen.

**On the day of Simonis and Jude.**

**John 15:17-25.**

This I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hates you,
know that it hated me before you. If ye were of the world, the world
would love its own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember my
word which I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept
my word, they will also keep yours. But all these things shall they do
unto you for my name's sake: for they know not him that sent me. If I
had not come and told them, they would have had no sin; but now they
have nothing to excuse their sin. He that hateth me hateth my Father
also. If I had not done among them the works that no one else has done,
they would have had no sin; but now they have seen it, and yet they hate
both me and my Father. But that the saying might be fulfilled which is
written in their law, They hate me without a cause.

(1) In today's Gospel, there are two particular things that we are to
learn: the first is the command by which Christians are to conduct their
lives if they want to live rightly and godly; the other is, if they are
in trouble and have to suffer in the wicked world, what consolation they
should take, and how they should be able to

of such suffering, that it may become small and easy for them.

2) From the first part we should know that the Lord has summarized our
whole life in the one commandment of love, that we Christians should
live kindly among ourselves and help one another in whatever way we can.

[1276 **8.3, 488-490. on the day of Simonis and Jude. W. xm,
2875-2878.** 1277]{.underline}

For this is the way of love, that one neither thinks nor speaks evil of
anyone, but does all the good that one can and is able to do. If you, my
Christians," says Christ, "do this, then you have done enough and must
not look for a greater or better service; God will be satisfied with you
and will be pleased with you in the best way.

(3) This is a short, simple command, according to which Christians are
to judge all their doings. For they have great cause, not only because
of the example that God has shown them all love and mercy; as we heard
in the Gospel of the two servants, that God has forgiven all our sins,
and above that has given His Son for our own: but also because we
Christians are brothers among ourselves and children of God, who are all
called to an eternal inheritance, and have a common enemy who opposes us
and would gladly deprive us of such an inheritance. Therefore we should
be all the more diligent in assembling ourselves together, and not help
such an evil enemy against the Christians to his will of courage; but
think: Behold, this is also a Christian, and has the very enemy who is
creeping after him to his eternal destruction, as he did after me. What
then would I do to myself and to him, that I should first of all press
him also, or do him evil? I want to help him, be kind to him, show him
all love and loyalty; in this way I do what is rightfully mine and what
Christ, my Lord, has told me to do.

(4) Therefore, we Christians must not look far to see how and by what
means we are to serve God; as the world looks around and tries and
undertakes all kinds of things. As we see in the papacy, there is so
much and so many different ways of serving God that everyone has his own
way of serving God, and yet it is not a service. For what do you think
that God is served by a monk running into a monastery, needing special
food, clothing and other things? God does not ask for such works; He has
commanded you to hear His word diligently, to be baptized, to seek
forgiveness of sins from Christ, and to receive His Supper. If you have
done these things, you have done everything that God wants you to do for
His sake.

Although God commands us to do this, so that it may benefit us, and so
that we may come to the knowledge of God, to the forgiveness of sins and
to eternal life, we must not give a penny for it, except that those who
serve us for this purpose may receive their wages or remuneration as
devout, faithful servants. That is a small thing! Apart from this, God
has no need of your money and goods, nor does he want it.

(5) Therefore, it has been a vain fare that the world has thought that
if one built churches, decorated them beautifully, and made great
endowments, then God would be pleased and served by them. No, you cannot
serve God with money and goods; He does not want your money, but your
heart, so that you consider Him to be a God, put all your trust in His
goodness, and fear Him. If you do this, he will have enough and will not
want more from you for himself. But after that he wants you to love your
neighbor and help him with your money and goods; or if you cannot help
with money and goods because you yourself are wretched, poor and a
beggar, that your heart may be kind to your neighbor. If you do this,
God will acknowledge that you have done it for him and will accept and
pay for it as his own service.

(6) This should make us Christians willing and joyful, that after we
have rendered God His own service with our hearts, He does not expound
more to us than that we should love one another. This is a service that
rich and poor, small and great, high and low can render; indeed, what is
more, the most powerful and greatest lords need such service just as
much and rather more than the least and poorest. Emperors and kings are
great lords; but if they do not have people who love them rightly and
mean them faithfully, their power and wealth are of no avail. For love
is such a service that all men need, and all men can perform it if they
will. Maid and servant in the house are in a very lowly profession or
station; but a maid with her cooking, washing, and other things, a
servant with his work-

**[1278 L. 3, 490-492. on the day of Simonis and Jude. W. XIII,
2878-2881. 1279]{.underline}**

The people who work together can only prove their love and serve their
neighbor well. As we have experienced, faithful household servants are
held dear and valuable everywhere. So children can serve their parents,
one neighbor can serve another if he has a kind heart. And so
everything, all hours, in all places, and toward everyone, could be done
in service, if we would look to love and do what is necessary and useful
for our neighbor.

(7) But how many are they that do it? We all forget our love for
others, and think only of our love, that we do what is profitable for
us. But by this we testify that we are not Christ's disciples;
otherwise we would esteem his command greater and higher, and in all our
dealings, in buying and selling, look to the love of our neighbor, and
not to our own use and advantage alone.

Now, everything can be done here for a while. There is no lack of
teaching or preaching; you are told faithfully and often how you owe
such obedience to God, and that on the last day he will pay for all
kindness to the poor, and that everything we do for our neighbor will be
praised on the last day as having been done for him. But to whom do
these things go to the heart? who believes them? who keeps them? For if
we believed it and let it go to our hearts, there should be less
unfaithfulness, miserliness, transgression, deception and damage in the
marketplace, in stores and in homes.

(9) Well, everything can be done for a while, but what judgment will
finally follow, Christ says in Matthew 25, that he will call such
unmerciful Christians, who have no love, to go into the eternal fire
prepared for the devil and his angels, where they must burn forever. He
does not say, the Lord, that such fire is prepared for men. For even
though they are all sinners and guilty of eternal death, God wanted to
prevent such misery by giving His Son to die for us and then revealing
His loving word to us, so that we would know what to do if we wanted to
serve God and live to please Him. Thus, our dear Father desired to have
us blessed, and for this reason he has given us

not eternal fire, but heaven and eternal life decreed.

(10) But there we go, we consider the forgiveness of sins through
Christ to be a small treasure; if we had enough money and good things,
we would be more interested. Again, what God tells us to do and serve
Him with, we have no desire to do. It must follow, because we are so
much in the devil's way, and follow his will more than our Lord God's
word, that we must also bear the same judgment with him; we do that to
ourselves. We could do better, but we do not want to do better.

(11) Let this be enough of the first thing which the Lord commanded
his disciples here at the last supper, when he was to be taken captive
that night, and to be crucified in the morning, that they should love
one another; and he commanded them thus, saying, I command you. As if to
say, If ye will not do it, ye shall do me the highest disobedience, and
therefore shall bear your punishment.

The other is the consolation. For here it says: If Christians do what
they want, the world will still be hostile to them and hate them. But we
know what follows from this, especially when it is such people who have
the ability and can do harm. There it does not remain with the bad will;
it follows also bad works that one causes harm where one can. Now it
would not be a bad thing if the Lord had named these people and said,
"If you are Christians, the servant and maidservant in your house, or
your neighbors, or a whole village, or a whole city will be hostile to
you and do all kinds of evil. For we experience every day what evil a
single neighbor, maid or servant can do. But the Lord makes it even
harder and more severe, and says, "If the world will punish you. For
"the world" does not mean one man, one village, one city, but all men:
that a Christian, coming whithersoever he will, shall find the host, the
devil, at home; who shall not fail, and shall give him so much of
enemies, of temptations, and of miseries, that he shall not know
whither.

**1280 L. 3, 492-494. on the day of Simonis and Jude. W. xm, 2881-2883.
1281**

(13) If therefore, saith the Lord, ye would gladly shew all love and
friendship to every man, but every man is an enemy unto you, and would
gladly do you all manner of hurt, learn here what ye ought to think, and
how ye may put yourselves into such a perverse life, that ye be not
vexed thereby, and depart from the faith and the word. For as it says
there in the parable of the seed, the persecution of pieces in
particular is one thing that hinders the seed so that it cannot continue
and perishes. For this reason, when the cross and persecution come, it
soon happens that one thinks, "If I have no more of my faith than that
everyone should be hostile to me, I will rather abandon such faith and
keep the favor of the people. As we see at court, where the lords will
not tolerate the gospel, some prefer to be in favor with their lord
rather than with the gospel. This is how it is in the world. Therefore
the Lord will comfort and warn his disciples here, that they do not do
so, but stand fast in the word, and draw comfort in persecution and
suffering, from causes such as these.

014 The first cause that he hath set his own example before us, saying,
If the world hate you, know that it hated me before you. Item, after
this he says: "The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept my word,
they will keep yours also." As if to say, "Surely it would be a
wretched servant to see his master content with dry bread and a drink of
water, or lying on a hard straw, who would not be content with such
things, but would have it better. Therefore, when things go badly for
you, you do everything to people, but they do everything badly to you
and are bitterly hostile to you; see here how I, who am your master,
have fared, how the world has treated me, and what I have earned with my
service and faithfulness: the gallows and the cross. If this is how you
are, do not be lazy, but thank God that you are like me, and that you
are as I was. For if the world shall bear with you, as it hath with

If my father has kept himself against me, do not doubt that he will keep
himself against you as he has kept himself against me, so that he will
give you pleasure in this suffering forever. Without this, it is the
same in the world: at court, no one is ashamed of his prince's color;
everyone wears it gladly and thinks it is an honor for him. Now I am
also a king and have my courtiers, the Christians. Would they be ashamed
of my color, which I have worn in the world? That would be an eternal
disgrace.

(15) Therefore let no Christian say it of himself; but let them be
merry and willing, and think, Now am I like my Lord Christ, now do I
wear the ornament which he wore in the world. If the world considers it
a disgrace or a misfortune, what do I ask? My Lord Christ in heaven,
God, and all his angels and saints consider it the greatest, best
adornment and the greatest happiness. As we see in the apostles, Apost.
5:41, they left the council at Jerusalem rejoicing when they were
beheaded. Why is that? One should not laugh, but weep after the beating.
But, says the evangelist, they rejoiced because they had been worthy to
suffer shame for the name of Jesus. Therefore they were not deterred
from preaching with beating, but taught the gospel of Christ every day
in the temple and now and then in houses. So shall it be with us. It was
a disgrace that they were beaten, just as it is a disgrace among us when
one is beaten with rods. And yet they rejoiced, and with their preaching
gave cause that they should suffer more. For this reason they did not
consider suffering to be a disgrace or a harm, but a great honor and a
precious thing, as it truly is. For Christ Himself bore such adornment
for and for. This is the one cause.

The other is that the Lord says, "If you were of the world, the world
would love its own. But because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." Here the
Lord makes two different kingdoms: one is called the world kingdom,
where the devil is the king of the world.

**1282 D. 3, 494-496. on the day of Simonis and Jude. W. XIII,
2883-2886. 1283**

The other is called the kingdom of heaven, where our Lord Christ is
supreme. These two kingdoms are such that they can never get along with
each other. And because the world empire with money, goods and power
here on earth is superior to the kingdom of heaven and the Christians,
it is because of this that the Christians have to suffer and be crushed
by such a world empire. Such a thing has a hard, sour appearance and is
very painful to the flesh. But, says the Lord, it is a very good sign;
for it is certainly true that if you belonged to the world and under the
devil's kingdom, he would be well pleased with you, and the world would
love you. But that the devil does not leave you satisfied, and the world
is hostile to you, is a sure sign that you belong to Christ's kingdom.
It is like this: here on earth it is poor and miserable, whereas the
world is powerful and rich; but such power and riches last no longer
than here on earth, and are followed by eternal suffering and misery;
whereas Christians must suffer here with poor Lazaro for a little while,
and afterward shall reign and live with the Lord Christ for eternity.

17 Thus the Lord makes the cross and suffering a certain sign and emblem
by which we can know that we belong to the kingdom of God and eternal
life. On the other hand, the world and reason judge the cross and
suffering as an indication of God's disgrace and wrath. But Christ
cannot lie. "If you were of the world," he says, "the world would
love you. But since ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you from
the world, therefore the world hateth you."

(18) Who then would be afraid of suffering? and not rather lift up his
hands and say with the apostles: O dear Lord Christ, I thank thee that I
have become worthy to suffer for thy name's sake? You yourself wore
this ornament, and I, if I also wear it now, can thereby realize that I
belong to your kingdom and under your banner, otherwise the world would
hold me differently 2c. Therefore, whoever wants to be afraid of God's
grace, of heaven and eternal bliss, he may be afraid of the cross and

of persecution will also be frightened. But Christians will rejoice and
thank God for it, as Paul says that Christians glory in tribulations.

19 The third reason is that the Lord says, "They will do this to you
for my name's sake. This is no small comfort in truth, if we will
consider it aright. The world, even though it does not have Christ nor
wants to have Him, cannot be exempt from all suffering; it must
sometimes take its stand and bite into a sour apple. Two great
misfortunes coincide here; the suffering itself is heavy and painful;
and the evil conscience is added to it, so that one must say: Behold,
God is punishing your sin; if you had been more pious, it would not have
happened to you. But with the Christians, says the Lord, it shall have
another opinion. They too are poor, weak, frail sinners, but the world
is not hostile to them for that reason, nor does it punish them for it.
But the fact that they have to suffer is for my name's sake, so that
they believe in me, keep my word, confess me, and place their salvation
in me. Then they know well that they are doing right and pleasing God.
Because they have to suffer for this alone, they cannot have an evil
conscience because of this suffering, for they suffer for a good cause.

That is a very necessary consolation. For our reason and nature do not
remain behind. As soon as a misfortune comes under our eyes, we look
around and think what we have done to deserve it. The devil also stirs
things up, for he is very anxious to make our hearts heavy and our
suffering all the greater. But let Christians diligently remember the
word of Christ, "All these things shall they do unto you for my name's
sake." This is always clearly stated what is to be done. For two things
are spoken: They will do these things to you for my name's sake, and
for your sin's sake.

The holy and pious martyr John Hus himself complains a lot about his
sins in his writings. Well, one can see how he is, that he is burned so
miserably and shamefully. Now when he himself says

**1284 8.3, 496-499. on the day of simoni and jude. W. XIII, 2886-2889.
1285**

If he would say, I suffer these things for my sins, let him not do so;
for he suffers for the name of Christ, and for his sins nothing at all.
Therefore such suffering and shame shall not make him
conscience-stricken; but he shall, as he does, rejoice with the
apostles, and be of good cheer, that he is worthy to suffer anything for
Christ's sake. For though he be a poor sinner, yet the pope persecuteth
him not for that; he persecuteth him for the right doctrine. Therefore,
he should not be troubled by such sin. For he is not in the world under
the devil's kingdom, where sin and death reign; but he is under the
Lord Christ and the kingdom of grace, where there is forgiveness of sins
and all grace within.

(22) The fourth cause, which we must consider, and therefore be
confident and of good cheer in suffering, is this, that Christ says,
"Those who persecute Christians do not know the Father; and what is
more, they hate both the Father and the Son. This is especially against
the great trouble that Christians see and suffer in the world. For
behold, who were they that persecuted the apostles, and would not suffer
the gospel? They were the chief priests of Jerusalem, who had the Word
of God, the right worship, the profession and the office in the church.
So, who are they today who persecute us? The pope, his cardinals,
bishops, monks, priests, who have and bear the glorious name that they
are called clergymen and the Christian Church. If they were loose boys,
whom the whole world considered wicked, godless people, and who publicly
let themselves be heard in such a way that they did not ask about God
and His word, that would not move us very much. But they boast of God,
and all their crying is that they want to keep to God, to His word and
to the right worship. Therefore it may occur to a simple-minded, yes,
even to a great and learned Christian, that he thinks: "Dear, they are
also people, they also mean well; who knows whether you are so right in
your cause 2c."? ? Such thoughts put a heavy strain on the heart. This
is what the name of God does to them, and their office and profession,
so that they are highly respected in the eyes of the world.

23 Christ sees this and comforts his Christians. Be of good cheer, saith
he, and fear not: let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them be
cowardly. I tell you, they praise God's word and name as they will; but
if they cannot bear my name and my word, but rage against it and
persecute it, doubt not, they know not the Father; yea, that is more,
they hate the Father. For there will never be any other way: He who
hates the Son hates the Father.

(24) Let us diligently remember the verdict. Turks and Jews boast much
about God, and want to have a better faith than we Christians. For they
say that they cannot fail to believe in the one God who created heaven
and earth and all things; this cannot be wrong, they think. But Christ
concludes here: He who hates me hates my Father. Since Turks and Jews
persecute Christ and his word, it is certain that they also hate the God
who created heaven and earth, do not believe in him and do not honor
him. For Christ is the same one God; whoever then denies Christ has
denied the true, one God's Son; as he says, "The Father and I are
one." And here he says: His works testify that he is God, which they
saw, but still did not want to believe. It is the same with the Pope: He
boasts of God, His name and His word very highly; he also boasts of the
Lord Christ and His suffering. But if one preaches: Christ died for our
sins, his blood alone washed away our sins, through him alone we come to
grace and eternal life; therefore, mass, saints, indulgences, fasting,
going on pilgrimages, and other things do not serve the forgiveness of
sins: the pope and his crowd do not want to suffer such preaching,
persecutes preachers and listeners over it.

(25) These things, saith the Lord here, let them be a sure sign unto
you; that he glorieth in my name, and in the name of God, as he will;
that he knoweth not God, but is at enmity with God, and with the Lord
Christ in his heart, doubting him not. Therefore, do not be frightened
by their boast and great pretense. I do not know them; neither do they
know me. There-

1286 **3.499. Zoo.** On the day of the consecration of the church. **W.
XIII, 2889-2892.** 1287

You have the consolation that because you love my word and love to hear
it, you honor me and serve me; that you honor my Father and serve him.
He will not leave you as his dear children, but will reward you and make
you blessed. Therefore, do not be concerned about suffering; thank God
that you are not among the multitude who not only do not know God, but
are still enemies of Him. But you know him, and he also knows you. You
love him, and he also loves you. Therefore, do not be disputing whether
the world is hostile to you. Such enmity will not be able to harm you so
much; God's friendship will help and benefit you a thousand times more.

(26) That it is thus decided: Whoever wants to know God, love God,
worship God, serve God, let him know Christ rightly, love Christ,
worship Christ, and serve Him. Apart from Christ, it is impossible to
know, love, worship or serve God. This is the comforting sermon that
should be dear to us Christians, because the cross will not remain
outside, so that we may comfort ourselves with it, and in patience
overcome all evil, and through Christ may finally be saved. May God
grant this to us all, amen.*)

*) Here the edition *a* closes the sermons with the words: "GOD the
Father, GOD the Son" 2c. and still brings the common form of the
prayer.

**On the day of the consecration of the church.**

**Luc. 19, 1-10.**

And he went in, and passed through Jericho. And, behold, there was a man
called Zacchaeus, which was a ruler of publicans, and was rich; and
desired to see JEsum, who he was, and could not before the people; for
he was small in person. And he ran before, and climbed up a mulberry
tree, that he might see him; for there he should pass through. And when
Jesus came to the same place, he looked up, and perceived him, and said
unto him, Zachaea, come down quickly: for I must return unto thy house
this day. And he came down with haste, and received him with joy. When
they saw this, they all murmured that he was entering a sinner's house.
And Zacchaeus stood and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded any, I restore
fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come unto this
house, because he also is the son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost.

1 This gospel was taken for the consecration of the church because the
Lord says here, "Today salvation has come to this house"; yet the Lord
does not speak of stone and wood, but of Zachaeo, the father of the
house, and his household. Salvation has come to them, not through the
bishops' grease, that the Lord has anointed the house, as the bishops
anoint the walls; but through the Lord Christ and his holy word. This is
the right Chresam and the right consecration, in which hearts are
consecrated and sanctified so that they may know God, receive
forgiveness of sins through faith in Christ, and be saved.

will be eternally blessed. This is where the gospel should be
interpreted and people should be directed to such salvation, that is, to
the holy gospel and pure doctrine. But the papists do not, indeed, they
cannot, and in the meantime they go about their foolish work, making a
special festival and ostentation of the fact that this church is
consecrated in his name, another in the name of another saint. Then the
idolatry goes with power, and especially the holy scripture must be
pulled with the hair; because they interpret it all on the walls, on
stone and wood, which God preaches and promises of his living church,
the right believing Christians.

2. but the pope has not been able to deal with such a church.

**1288 L. 3, soo-502. On the day of the church consecration. W.xm,
2892-2395. 1289**

The consecration of the churches was imitated by Moses, who had a
special command to consecrate or sanctify the priests, the Levites, the
tabernacle, and all the clothing and vessels that belonged to the
service of God. Such a command of God made this consecration not only
glorious and great, but also necessary; for what God commands, even if
it is no more than picking up a straw from the earth, everyone should
consider it delicious and glorious. But where will the pope and his
bishops prove that God has also commanded such consecration to them?
They must confess that Moses was commanded to do it; but what does that
bind them to? Why do they accept it? But if they accept this command,
then it must follow that they must also do everything else that was
commanded of Moses for the sake of worship: that they must slaughter,
perform their priesthood at Jerusalem, and do other such things. For it
is not to accept this one command and leave the others behind.
Therefore, it is only a mere man's work and folly that they have caused
such a great pomp and worship with the consecration of the church; for
they have no command, God did not tell them to do it. Therefore, if they
consider it a service of God, let them consider who will reward them for
it.

3 And as the service is, so is the fruit that comes from it, that
especially in the countryside the peasants come together, all the
taverns are full, everyone revels and drinks, until finally, when they
are full, it becomes a fight and a quarrel. So much so that a saying has
come out of it: Let the peasants have their church festivities alone.
That is a laudable fruit that follows from such a service. For this
reason, the Christian authorities should, ex officio, abolish the
consecration of churches, such drudgery and disorderly living, and
punish them severely, since nothing good has ever come of it.

(4) As for the church and the proper worship, that is, to hear the
word of God, to come together, to pray with one another, and to
distribute the Lord's supper, the same shall remain proper; for it
mends the people, and cannot even be called a "church".

without fruit, although the least part of it takes it seriously.

Therefore, let us look at this time: What comfort and teaching today's
gospel holds out to us. In such, we know, God will be pleased, and we
will be improved by it, if we perform such service with earnestness. The
evangelist says here about a tax collector Zacchaeus, who was the chief
among the tax collectors and very rich. But now your loved ones know how
hard the Lord speaks, Matthew 19, when he says to his disciples (v. 23,
24): "Truly I say to you, a rich man will hardly enter the kingdom of
heaven. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God." You also hear here that the disciples themselves and other people
also judge Zachaeus in this way and are therefore displeased with the
Lord, because he does not know how to find any other host in the whole
city of Jericho than this rich usurer. All of them consider Zachaeum a
sinner who is not only not worthy of heaven, but he is also not worthy
of being dealt with by a pious man.

But what happens? Our Lord Jesus does nothing about it. And since
Zacchaeus could not hope to speak a word with Christ, the Lord asked to
be his guest. And when he came to his house, he made an absurd judgment,
saying, "Grace has come to this house today. This is said that
Zacchaeus has a gracious God; and he honors Zacchaeus with a glorious,
beautiful name, calling him a child of Abraha, that is, an heir of the
glorious promise made to Abraham, that through the promised seed he
would be delivered from the curse and inherit the eternal blessing.

7 Finally, the Lord answers with a very serious word, and wants to be
unpunished by the people because he accepts Zachary. My office, he says,
is to come to such poor sinners and help them from death and sin to
eternal life; as we also heard such responsibility on the day of
Matthew.

**1290 D. 3, so2-sl)t. On the day of the consecration of the church. W.
xiii, E-E. 1291**

(8) What else do we conclude from all this, but that Christ Himself
concludes with this example by His own testimony: that He does not want
to exclude rich people from His kingdom, along with other sinners; but
just as poor people should not pay for their poverty, God wants to be
their God through Christ and help them to eternal life: so the rich
should not pay for their riches either, God wants to accept them gladly
and make them blessed; as the Lord also says according to the hard
saying of Matthew 19, which you heard before.

9th For when the disciples were astonished at such a severe judgment,
and said, "Lord, who then can be saved?" Jesus looked at them and
said, "With men it is impossible, but with God all things are possible.
For that he says, "With men it is impossible," is saying this much: As
they are men by nature, they cannot do otherwise than cling to their
temporal goods and serve mammon. But if they are to come to God's
kingdom, they must become different, so that God may stir their hearts
through His word, and the Holy Spirit may work in them. 2c.

(10) Therefore, rich people should beware of thinking that God does
not want them in His kingdom because they are rich; He only wants to
have them if they repent and desire His heart.

(11) And they also have need of them. First of all, because God has
blessed them abundantly, they should take care of the churches and
promote them, so that they are the better appointed; as Isaiah says Cap.
49, 23: "Let the kings be thy nurses, and their princes thy nurses."
For since the church office is a difficult one, in which one cannot wait
for worldly affairs and especially for food, it is highly necessary that
such persons have their proper providence and can attend to their
office. Rich people should do their best, because the poor do not have
the means, and it is undoubtedly a special service and pleasure for God.

12) Secondly, our Lord Christ also needs the rich to help raise up
fine, skilful boys for teaching and godliness. For this he-

We generally find that the children of poor people are more capable of
learning. But where they are not helped to do so by rich people because
it is not within their means, they have to stay behind and cannot get
ahead.

Thirdly, there are other poor, needy people who cannot provide their
food due to illness or other accidents. Rich people should do their best
and help them gladly. For this is why God has given them more than
others, so that they may be faithful stewards and make good use of such
blessings.

14 This is the first thing we are to learn from today's story: that our
Lord Christ does not throw away the rich Zacchaeus because of his
wealth, but invites himself to him, and thus draws him to himself with
special diligence, as if he were more interested in him than in other
people. Since Zacchaeus could not have dreamed that the Lord would be so
friendly to him, he was content just to see him: the Lord desired to
accept him as a guest, and posed as if he could or might stay with no
one else but him. "Come down in haste," he says, "for I must stay at
your house today." This is as much as if he could not stay with
Zachaei, whom all others shunned as a great sinner, and would have
nothing to do with him. This is the first teaching. A wonderful,
beautiful comfort, especially for rich people, that they should believe
that they also belong to the kingdom of Christ, that God will also be
merciful to them and make them blessed for the sake of His Son Christ
Jesus.

The other, and even more important, is the example of Zacchaei, in which
a special useful lesson is given to all rich people: if they want to
enter the kingdom of Christ, how they should go about it. In the papacy,
your loved ones know what rich people have been exhorted to do. For it
has been proclaimed from all pulpits that if they want to be saved, they
should build churches, decorate them, buy indulgences, endow masses, and
do other such things. And such preaching was well advised to the
priests.

**1292 L. 3. 504-507. On the day of the consecration of the church. W.
XIII, 28S7-2900. 1293**

For there we have learned that everyone gave most abundantly, and they
almost brought the whole world's goods and money to themselves. For
everyone thought what money and goods he would have if he had died;
therefore he spent it on such worship, which was so highly praised, in
the hope that God would pay for it in that life. But such a thing is
called being led to the ice, and not only deceiving and lying to the
people, but also leading them to eternal harm and damnation.

(16) For it is written in the gospel of this day, which is the only
and right way that every man should go if he would be saved. Namely,
that we should follow the example of Zachariah, and not let the Lord
Christ pass by in Jericho, but run after him, and seek how we may see
him. That is, rich people should not care so much about their trade,
business and food; they should first and foremost keep to the word,
follow it, listen to it diligently, take it seriously, and let it be
their greatest treasure. As we see here in Zacchaeus, as soon as he
hears that the Lord Jesus is in the city of Jericho, he does not let his
trade and business stay at home, but rushes to the square and wants to
see what kind of man he is.

17 When he came to the place where the Lord was, the evangelist said
that he had to go away again, because he was a small person and there
were many people around the Lord Christ. Therefore, thinking of a
special advantage, he runs and climbs a tree in the street, where the
Lord should pass through, so that he could see him well and truly. From
all this we must sense how this man had a special heart for the Lord
Christ, and how he was so earnest that he only wanted to see him. Just
as he did with Christ, who at that time walked and preached in the flesh
on earth, so rich people should also do with the word, esteeming it as
the highest treasure, pursuing and running after it; this is the right
way to Christ and to eternal life.

18. but here we find two major obstacles

The evangelist reports the following facts. The first: that Zacchaeus is
too small; the other: that the people are too many and he cannot see
over them. These two defects are found in all the rich, and hinder much
beyond measure. For just as Zacchaeus is small in person and is hindered
by not being able to see Christ properly, so all rich people have very
small, narrow hearts that cling to their possessions and become so
entangled with worries about food that they cannot see Christ before
them or grasp and keep his word in their hearts. As the Lord also says
in the parable of the seed that falls among thorns, that the thorns
overgrow it, that it cannot come over itself, it must remain small and
be pressed down. Therefore the prophet exhorts with special diligence
and says: If great goods fall to you with heaps, do not hang your heart
on them. (Ps. 62:11) That is, your heart should not be concerned about
temporal things, but should be concerned about God's word and about
eternal things; you should diligently pursue them. But most of them, as
I have said, have too small, lowly hearts for this, or let their own
unbelief and despair drag them down, so that they do not trust to come
to Christ; they think that they are lost, they are great sinners; they
cling down to the temporal, they do not want to go up to the Word and
that which is eternal.

19 The other defect is that Zacchaeus is not only small, but there are
many people, which also hinders him, because he cannot look over the
people. Now this is the trouble that goes on everywhere in the world,
especially for money and good things: everyone does not look to God's
word for what it means and wants, but to his nearest neighbor. What he
does, we let ourselves think, we also have power. It follows that there
is neither a measure nor an end to miserliness, ruthlessness, oppression
and scraping. As we can see, miserliness has unfortunately gained the
upper hand in all classes. This is the people who stand in the way of
Zachaeo, so that he cannot see the Lord Jesus.

020 What therefore doth Zacchaeus? He has the grace to see that it will
not happen in that place; therefore he does not stay among the people;

**1294** L- s, 507-509. On the day of the church consecration. W. xni,
2900-2903. **1295**

Nor is he deterred from returning, as if he could not come to Christ,
but runs ahead to another place where there is room, climbs a mulberry
tree, so that, although there are many people around Christ, he may
nevertheless remain unhindered and actually see him.

21 So shall we also do. We are not to follow our weak little heart, nor
are we to follow it. Neither shall we endure the vexations of the world;
but tear ourselves away from such vexations and evil examples, and go to
another place, where we are not hindered. That is, if other people do
not want to come to the Word and the Lord Christ, we should not hinder
ourselves; we should not therefore also become unbelievers, or despise
the Word, but rather think, "Well, if the whole world would be covetous
and despise the Word, I will not do it. This means to tear yourself away
from the people with Zachaeo, and to climb up the tree and into the
heights, so that we remain unhindered by the people. Where this happens,
and you commit yourself to God's word with all your heart, you let
yourself love it for everything, you esteem it the highest and greatest
treasure, which you will enjoy for eternity: then Christ will look upon
you and become aware of you, like Zachaei; and he will invite himself to
you, preach to you in your heart by the Holy Spirit, so that you become
a different person than you were before. For it is impossible for anyone
who is thus attached to the word with heart and earnestness, that Christ
should not dwell with such a man by his Spirit and impart all kinds of
grace to him.

22 Therefore it is all up to us to take Zachaeo seriously, and to desire
with all our hearts to see Christ, that is, to hold to His word with
earnestness; so Christ will look at us again, and come to us through His
Spirit. As Isaiah says in Cap. 66:2: "I look upon the wretched, and the
brokenhearted, and fearing my word"; that is, he who thinks highly of
my word, and would not willingly do or undertake anything contrary to
it; he is a dear guest to me, where I love to be; he is my right temple
or church, which I will sanctify to myself, that I may have my order
there.

Then other delicious fruits will follow. For this guest does not come in
vain; he wants to bring great gifts and even make new hearts, as we see
in Zacchaeus. Before he came to the knowledge of Christ, he was a stingy
merchant who did nothing but think of his own profit. Now he forgets
this and thinks of other people, how he can help them with his money and
goods. Behold," he says to the Lord, "I give half of my goods to the
poor. Where does another heart and other thoughts come to him so soon?
Before, no one could fill him; now he thinks it cannot fail him. Before
nobody could enjoy his for a farthing; now he wants to give to
everybody. It comes from nowhere else but from the word of our Lord
Christ, which he has put into his heart. For we must not think that the
Lord's only concern was to eat with Zacchaeus and to fill his belly. He
had other food to eat, as he said to his disciples at the well in John
4, that he preached a sermon to Zacchaeus in his house over the table,
turned him away from avarice, and led him to right obedience to God.

Zacchaeus accepts such a sermon with earnestness; he recognizes that he
has lived badly in many ways up to now; he is sorry for it; and since he
has previously taken from others and, as the miserly, has maltreated and
scraped where he could, he lets go of it and now wants to consider the
needs of poor people and help them. For he hears from the Lord Christ
how money and goods can be invested and used far better than he has used
them so far. For it is common for rich people to spend their money and
goods for splendor, to build splendidly, to dress deliciously, and to
seek all pleasure with food, drink, and other things. But this is called
misusing money and goods; for it is a vain temporal thing, which does
not remain, or, to put it right, since we do not remain with it; we go
away and leave it all behind. And often we burden those who do not thank
us for it and we do not grant it to them, just as much as others whom we
do grant it to. Zacchaeus sees this and for this reason wants money and
goods.

**1296 L.3.S09-5H. On the day of the church consecration. - W. xm,
2903-2905. 1297**

Do not misuse it in this way, but invest it wisely and buy an eternal
treasure for yourselves. As the Lord teaches in Matt. 6:20, "Lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

25 Do you ask how this happens? Christ teaches you very well, Luke 16:9,
when he says, "Make friends of unrighteous mammon, that, when ye have
offered, they may receive you into the eternal mansions. For Matthew 25
says that what we poor Christians do too well is not lost, but that he
himself will praise and pay for it on the last day before his Father and
all the angels. Zacchaeus learned this from the Lord Christ; therefore
he thinks he will use his money and goods in this way, and says: "I
give half of my goods to poor people. That makes me a good holy man.

(26) If you had ten thousand guilders, would you not think that you
would become a beggar if you gave away five thousand guilders and
distributed them among poor people? But Zacchaeus not only thinks it is
a small loss, but he also thinks that he cannot invest money and goods
much, nor make a greater profit from them; and this is also the truth.
For thus also Solomon says Prov. 19:17: "He that hath mercy on the poor
lendeth to the Lord usurpingly, and he shall repay him with good. This
is ever a certain debtor, since we can doubt neither the principal good
nor the profit. And we have the advantage that with the temporal we buy
the eternal. But no one believes it, except little Zacchaeus and those
who desire to see the Lord Christ from the heart.

27 Now Zacchaeus said he would give half, and not all together. This is
also right. For God does not want you to give to poor people, so that
you and yours also have to beg and then lie on other people's necks. He
demands nothing more than that you give from what you can get without
harm and is superfluous. As Paul also says: Non ut aliis remissio sit,
vobis autem molestia (Not that

The others have rest, and their tribulation), 2 Cor. 8, 13. "Your
abundance", he says, "shall serve that lack"; so it goes in a moment.

(28) But let us beware lest we follow the example of the world, in
which the eyes are always wider than the belly; if we have many thousand
florins, it is called abundance; one, two, or three thousand florins is
considered a small thing. Christians should not go so far as this, but
should be satisfied with their daily bread and help poor people with the
rest. Thus the wise man also teaches, Prov. 5:15: "Drink water out of
thy pit, and rivers out of thy well." This is as Paul says, Create
something upright with your hands, that you eat not a stranger's bread,
but your own earned and acquired, Eph. 4:28. After this Solomon goes on
to say, "Let your wells flow out, and the rivers of water upon the
guests." This is as Paul also says in the same place, Thou shalt also
give to poor people. But such giving shall be with measure, that, as
Solomon saith here, thou have thy wells alone, and no stranger with
thee. For thou shalt not give it all away, but thou shalt always keep so
much that thou mayest keep thyself with thine own, and also give to
others that are in need. This is the one fruit that we see in the
Zachaeo, and rich people should be accustomed to it and also help the
poor abundantly; because it is for God's service. For he has commanded
it, and we shall enjoy it forever.

29 The other fruit is that Zacchaeus offers that if he has deceived
anyone, he will restore him fourfold. Rich people should do the same, if
they want to be God's children and true Christians. For with
unrighteous goods, if it is possible, nothing else should be done,
except that they should be restored to those to whom they belong.
Whoever wants to give alms should do it from his own property and not
from other people's property. For, as Isaiah says, "God hates robbery
or stolen offerings."

(30) Here again we see how Zachaeus' heart is quite different from
what it was before he came to Christ and his word. For before this was
his opinion that he could not

**1298 L. s, sii-513.** A wedding sermon. **W. xm. 2905-2908. 1299**

He asked whether it was right or wrong for other people, if he could
only have great profit; then it was all up to him. As we can see, this
is unfortunately the case everywhere in the world. But now not only does
he not want to cheat or overcharge anyone, but where he has done so
before, he wants to pay for such damage fourfold. Learn to do the same
to Zachaeo.

(31) But it will be found that many a one would hardly walk along in a
double coat, wearing marten hoods *) every day, if he were to return
unjustly won goods only falsely. That is the example of Zachaei followed
badly. Therefore, such kingdoms may watch how it will happen one day.
For the examples are sufficiently before eyes, how it comes to an end
with unjust property and the shameful avarice: that often not only the
property, but also body, life and soul together disgracefully.

32 But behold, what a wonderful treasure Zacchaeus has. Through faith in
Christ he becomes a child of Abraha, that is, his sins are forgiven and
he is a child of eternal life. This is the highest and best good. On the
other hand, because he helps poor people abundantly, and protects
himself from

*) Coat of tan fur. D. Red.

If he keeps his life from unfaithful, deceitful dealings, he not only
has a good conscience about it, but also a certain hope that God is
pleased with his life and that he will enjoy it for eternity.

(33) Let this be a great glorious thing, and learn to do the like. If
God has given you good food and rich blessings, beware that you do not
set your heart on them; seek rather the eternal treasure. Thereby the
Holy Spirit will come into your heart, so that you will also become a
child of Abraha, and receive the blessing and be delivered from the
eternal curse. After that, other beautiful fruits will follow: that you
will even lead a new life, help poor people, act honestly and
Christianly with everyone, and God will have a special pleasure in you,
and will hold temporal and eternal blessings over you. May our dear Lord
God grant this to all of us for the sake of Christ, His Son, through His
Holy Spirit, amen.*)

*) Here the edition *b* concludes the sermons with the words: "GOD the
Father, GOD the Son" 2c. The edition *d,* however, has the following
remark: After that follow a wedding sermon and two funeral sermons, put
in form for the simple pastors, so that in both cases they can safely
see where they should direct their sermons. For it is not necessary to
preach such sermons all the time, but it is enough to stick to only one
piece at a time, depending on the time and the person.

**A wedding sermon.**

**Hebr. 13, 4.**

Marriage shall be kept honest among all, and the marriage bed undefiled;
but fornicators and adulterers God will judge.

(1) Marriage has always been considered an honest and praiseworthy
life by sensible and disciplined people, even among pagans. For sensible
and disciplined people are naturally pleased when they see two married
couples living together in discipline and unity, bringing up their
children in the fear of God, and working for discipline and honor.

The children are to be kept in good health, one assisting the other in
times of need, and being helpful with all the advice and action one can
muster. Again, where people live in fornication, sin and shame outside
of marriage, do not take care of their children or keep them in line,
and the boys run one way and the other the other way, and neither show
true love nor faithfulness to one another: such is the case.

[1300 **L. 3, 513-515. A wedding sermon. W. XIII, 2908-2910.**
1301]{.underline}

All reasonable people consider illegitimate life evil and shameful by
nature.

Nevertheless, one sees how the young servants and the rabble fall away
and flee the married state as a difficult and unpleasant life, and wants
to love such wild, insolent servants more and more the free and
uncaptured life, rather than such a conscientious, chaste and
praiseworthy life in marriage. But in the course of time the punishment
is all too much. For besides the fact that such servants willingly
defile themselves with sins outside of marriage, and make enemies of
God, there are also other bodily punishments: that not only do money and
goods wear out with such,*) but they must also pay with their skin. For
in such lewd lives are found many terrible diseases and plagues;
sometimes open shame and vice, sometimes also murder and other misery.
The world is full of such examples, so that God may show a special
earnestness that he wants the marriage state to be kept pure and
unnoticed. But where sometimes such temporal punishments do not follow,
and God lets the bad boys go according to their will. If, however, such
temporal punishments do not follow, and God lets the wicked go according
to their will and remain with dignity and a healthy body and great
goods, there is certainly more trouble to come, namely, God's wrath in
that world and eternal damnation.

(3) Just as the mad young world flees the marriage state for the sake
of such a free, wanton life, so it is also found on the other side that
the devil has so deceived some that they, out of sheer holiness, as
those out of vain wantonness, despise the marriage state and have chosen
an illegitimate life. As Paul prophesied in 1 Tim. 4, 3: "It will come
to pass that some erroneous spirits will forbid marriage for the sake of
their holiness. As we see in the pope, in all his bishops, priests,
monks and nuns, who swear to the marriage state, and for the sake that
they live without marriage, spiritual people want to be praised, who do
not live in a carnal state, as they judge the marriage state, but in an
angelic or spiritual state, and for this reason alone.

*) Wear out - come apart in fasem.

D. Red.

The first is the one who called them clergymen, as if those who are
married could not also be clergymen.

4 The reason for this is that the married state is so common and has no
special standing in the eyes of the world. That is why the priests or
clergymen have abandoned such a bad common life and have done something
special that would have a greater reputation than for a citizen to sit
at home with his spouse, to nurse his children with sour work, and the
like. For this is the way of the world: What is common, it does not
respect; on the other hand, what is strange and something special,
everyone wants to have. No one considers it special that the sun comes
out every day; but since the thick darkness lasted so long in Egypt,
they undoubtedly learned and found that it is a wonderful, beautiful and
great blessing for the sun and its light. So we do not consider it a
special grace when it rains; but since in the kingdom of Israel in the
time of Elijah there was no rain in four and a half years, they learned
how it would be a great blessing. The same is the case with holy
matrimony among the papists; because it is such a common state, where
any peasant may come to, the pope's clergy have despised such a common
life, and have devised and performed a peculiar one, which would have
great prestige before the people; as Nicolaus de Lyra says in the 12th
chapter of Daniel: "The Antichrist will therefore take no notice of
women, that he may make himself a greater semblance of holiness." But
the good that comes of this is that we should learn from their example
that the married state is a glorious and holy life; for the very reason
that they despise the married state, they are punished with all kinds of
abominable and blasphemous sins; for in no play have they so defiled
themselves against all reason and nature as in this very play.

(5) Now, because the married state is a thing of refuge among the
saints of works, or hypocrites, and the rude people of the world, and is
thought to be either an unholy and common life, or a hard and captive
life, it is necessary that from the word of God concerning the married
state a right and holy life be found.

**1302 L. 3, 515-517. A wedding sermon. W. XIII, 2S10-2S13. 1303**

The first thing is for the young servants to learn what the married
state is for, and then to know how they should conduct themselves in it.
So that one does not remain only with what the world says and holds
about it, with its mad saints, but what God and his word says about it.
Although the Scriptures are full of such sayings, in which the marriage
state is gloriously praised, let us now stick to the saying in Hebrews
13, which reads: "Marriage should be kept honest with everyone, and the
marriage bed undefiled. But fornicators and adulterers God will judge."

(6) This saying is very short, which, in addition to speaking
gloriously of the marriage state, and severely threatening those who
despise the marriage state, also makes one think why he wants this state
to be held so honestly, because otherwise it is generally despised and
fled in the world, as we have heard. For this is the opinion of this
saying: that marriage is a glorious, beautiful and delicious thing, so
that all who are in it should regard their life as a noble, glorious and
beautiful ornament and consider it the same in the eyes of the world,
and the world should say what it wants about it.

(7) Such divine work of the marriage state, as everyone sees, is far
different from what the world thinks of it. For if the world held the
marriage state to be so delicious and honest, it would not flee from it
and live without marriage; but, as one otherwise strives, where
something good and delicious is to be expected, one would also reach for
the marriage state with love and joy, and not so resist it with hands
and feet, like a deer before the dogs. For the fact that the world thus
resists and blocks itself, and now considers one thing and now another,
is all an indication that it neither knows nor believes God's word
about the marriage state; otherwise it would probably take a different
stand on it.

8) The reason why the world is so reluctant to marry is partly
explained above: that no one likes to be bound, and is afraid that it
might turn out badly. Therefore it will be necessary that

We will also look for the causes here in this section and show them: Why
the holy scripture praises the marriage state so honestly and so highly.
And especially the Christians should think about these causes and move
them, so that they can meet the world and defend the marriage state
against the world's blasphemy.

9 So this is the first cause: that one can prove from God's Word that
marriage is instituted by God Himself and implanted in our nature. As
this is clearly indicated in the first book of Moses; and Christ in the
New Testament, Matth. 19, 4. 5., says: "He who in the beginning made
man, made that there should be one man and one woman, and said,
Therefore shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his
wife"; and continues in v. 6: "That which is joined together in
marriage, that God hath joined together. Let this be to everyone a
glorious, great glory and praise of marriage, that it is not a work of
man by his own will, but of God, for which God Himself created man; that
a married couple can boast of this before God with all truth, that they
are in a state that pleases God, which God Himself has established and
implanted in nature; and because they live in such a state, that they
live in God's work, yes, also in God's right and actual good pleasure.

(10) The pope and his crowd do not have this glory. For they can
nowhere indicate that God has commanded them to live without marriage:
therefore the contradiction follows, because they remain outside of
marriage, that they live apart from and against God's word, will,
commandment and good pleasure, and in their own will; which can never
please God. Therefore, when things go badly for them, as they deserve,
it is not possible for them to have the comfort that married couples
have, who can admonish God in all kinds of misfortunes and concerns: O
Lord, this misfortune and that misfortune oppress me 2c. Now you know
that such misfortune befalls me and comes upon me in the very state that
you created and established with man in paradise. Therefore help that we
in such

**[1304 L. 3,817-519. A wedding sermon. W. XIII, 2913-2918.
1305]{.underline}**

Life, established and created and preserved by you, may be delivered
from this and that misfortune 2c. With such prayer, the spouses may come
before God, since they live in their own devotion contrary to God's
word and will, and therefore may not wait for comfort nor pray to God
properly.

(11) Therefore, if the pope and his celibate company praise their
monasticism and celibate life very much, praise rather this celibate
life, to which hangs the glorious name and title that it is a divine
life, created and commanded by God and His Word; which no monk nor
priest will ever be able to boast of his celibate life.

(12) Now this is the first and also the highest reason that one should
keep the marriage state honest, as the text teaches. For since there is
nothing besides nor above God, there can be nothing higher nor better on
earth than what He has ordered and created Himself; as the text reports
in the first book of Mosiah: "And God saw what He had created, and
behold, it was all very good." Under this creature, which is all very
good, is also the married state. Unmarried life is not among them; the
devil has invented it, if one wants to take it for a service of God and
force the people to it, as the pope does.

(13) The other reason is that God has not only instituted the marriage
state, but He has also given His blessing to it. This same blessing is
not merely that God gives children, for apart from marriage children are
also born, but that God delights in the children of marriage and in the
whole community, and gives grace that they may be properly brought up
and well nourished and preserved. Therefore, the 128th Psalm includes
this among the blessings of godly husbands and wives: that they may
nourish themselves with the work of their hands and see their
children's children. That is, godly husbands and wives shall have the
blessing of food and children, that they may abide, and that they may
have a continuance, whereas money and goods in unmarriage are broken and
all kinds of misfortune follow.

This should also move us to gain pleasure and love for this state,
because we are not alone in doing God's will,

but also find all kinds of blessings in it. And certainly there is
little happiness or salvation to be expected from people who despise
such comfort and God's promise and prefer to leave their free and
wanton life to themselves. It is also to be feared that those who
persist in such contempt for a long time may be so provoked by God's
wrath that, even if they enter into marriage afterwards, there will
still be neither happiness nor salvation with them. As is often the case
with fornication and other bad habits in one's youth that cause one not
to have much good time in marriage, and that both wife and child turn
out badly. For as stated above, God wants to keep the marriage state so
that all those who live in fornication and cause trouble will be
punished. Therefore, the young people should take care in time, and keep
themselves in the fear of God and in pure discipline, so that they
themselves will not hinder or endure such blessings that God has
attached to marriage.

(15) The third reason that the married state is to be kept honest is
this: that in this state almost all the greatest saints have spent their
lives, as the whole of the Old and New Testaments testify. But if you
want to know why they have all lived in marriage, I cannot give you a
better reason, nor a more certain one, than that all godly people have
always kept to God's will and word. Because God Himself instituted and
commanded the married state, they, as obedient people who needed such an
order from God, gladly entered into the married state for the sake of
God and their need, regardless of the fact that the world and the rabble
loved the free and unashamed life more. Now this is no small glory, that
he who is in marriage can say with a clear conscience that he is in the
same state as the holy patriarchs, prophets, apostles and other saints
all lived in. Since, on the other hand, the celibate life was first
practiced by some heretics, so that they made a pretense of special
holiness with it; and then confirmed by the pope, as the arch father of
all hypocrisy, and praised for a spiritual life.

1306 **L. 3, SIS-S21. A wedding sermon. W. XIII, 2SIS-2S18.** 1307

16 For John the Baptist and others like him, who have abstained from
marriage for the sake of the kingdom of heaven, as Christ calls it, have
a special opinion. We are talking here in general about all those who
want to be Christians and cannot live chastely apart from the married
state. It is very comforting to them that they see before them so many
great examples of saints who have all lived in the married state and
have gone before in this holy order. In truth, this is a great praise to
the conjugal state. For who would not prefer to be found with such a
large group of holy people in the same life, status and nature, than
with the pope and his whole group, who in this and other ways live so
publicly against God's commandment and His holy examples?

(17) The fourth reason why the married state is honestly and
gloriously kept and not to be despised is this: that without the married
state we cannot well live without sin and in a good conscience. For thus
Christ himself says, speaking of those who live without marriage, "This
word cannot be grasped by everyone." And Paul commands, "Let every man
have his own wife, avoiding fornication." For through original sin
human nature is so weakened and corrupted that few can live in good
conscience apart from marriage.

18 Since the married state is a medicine which God Himself created and
ordained for this purpose, as His word indicates, so that we may stand
in good conscience and live chastely, who would be so rude and impudent
as to consider this state unholy, as the pope does? But, as reported
above, he has received his deserved reward. In order that the papists
might hold everyone sacred, they have conspired marriage, and thereby
fall into the greatest sin and disgrace, so that all the world finds out
about their desolate life and says. It serves them right: why do they so
wickedly despise God's creature and order? But we should also, for this
reason, hold the marriage state in high esteem, and thank God with all
our hearts for such a means, which serves us so that we may not, through
fornication and other immorality, become a slave to God.

and thus not fall into God's judgment and terrible sentence, of which
we will report below.

The fifth and last cause is this: that the marriage state should also be
kept honest, so that it is such a life, which, if it is kept right, is
thoroughly full of vain good works. For the very love that exists
between husband and wife is one of the special good works that God has
commanded and allowed to remain in nature, and helps with His Holy
Spirit so that one may perform it properly and not grow weary with it.
Therefore St. Paul also exhorts to such love, saying, "Husbands, love
your wives, and do not be bitter toward them. Col. 3:19, and Eph. 5:28:
"Husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies." Therefore,
whoever holds fast to such love and does not allow himself to be driven
away from it by anger or anything else, is doing a right good work that
is pleasing to God. For his word is written here, which says to you,
"You shall love your spouse. And not badly loved; but, as Christ
repeats in the gospel, a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave
to his wife.

(20) Where are the shameful papists who flee married life as a carnal
state, as if one could not serve God in it? For love, without which the
married state cannot exist, is a great and high service of God, which
God, as we have heard, so earnestly demands of us in His Word. So, the
love and faithfulness that parents show to their children, namely, that
they feed them, clothe them, train them in respectability and godliness,
teach them, care for them in sicknesses, lift them, lay them, cover
them, and what is more like that, is also a delicious and pleasing work
to God, which the married couple must practice daily, yes, even every
hour and almost every moment. Now, if we were to think of our own life,
conduct and character in the right way, and learn that these are all
good works in the sight of God, we would not only be more willing to
marry, and to do such works, even though they are tedious, we would also
be more patient, more confident and more joyful, even though it is
sometimes necessary to

**1308 L. 3, 521-523. A wedding sermon. W. XIII, 2S1K-2S2V. 1309**

would not be able to do so. For when a husband and wife consider their
status and life and are godly, their hearts, eyes, hands and feet must
be full of good and holy works all the time.

(21) But there is the misfortune of which I have spoken before:
Because these are so mean and bad works, they are not respected; on the
other hand, what seems to be glorious and brave, even though it is not
worthy of a vetch in itself, is nevertheless considered glorious and
great; as we see in the pope's ceremonies and worship: yet the least
work in the married state is in itself better than all worship there;
for in the married state one remains in God's word and command; for God
wants it so, that one should serve the other gladly from the heart. This
goes on without interruption in the marriage state. If a child is ill,
the parents are ill and distressed beforehand. If the husband is ill,
the wife is as much distressed as if it were her own distress or
illness. Diligence, care, fidelity and love go out of their hearts in
the purest way, and do not sour them; they still have desire and longing
for how one may advise the other, help, improve and ward off misfortune.
Again, where there is happiness in the distress of children or in other
distresses and journeys of theirs or of the little children, there is
heartfelt, pure and perfect joy; no one can be so well off, the other
rejoices from the heart and indulges him even more. Who will not say,
then, that where hearts are so finely attuned in joy and sorrow, there
are not all good works of love? In contrast, in the celibate life, God
is not pleased with either love or sorrow, although it is in itself a
straw love that breaks and tears every hour from a single word, if only
one looks at the other crookedly.

(22) These good works of the married state remain in the home among
the spouses and their children. After this come first of all the great
good works, that out of this estate, as from one source, come all kinds
of persons by whom the land and the people are governed and protected,
the churches are supplied with preachers and other ministers, and all
the offices in the world and in the kingdom of our Lord Christ are
appointed.

be. For since it is especially in the state of marriage that children
are raised to fear God, honor and virtue, it must be confessed that the
state of marriage is the source of such good deeds for all. Whether or
not a great deal of wanton servants grow up among them, that is not the
fault of the marriage state, but of the wicked, godless people who do
not send themselves properly into the marriage state. For he who begins
it in God's name will also have happiness and prosperity in child
rearing and other things.

23 But that one wants to say: In married life there are many cares,
worries, journeys and burdens, which one may be subjected to apart from
marriage, since each one has nothing more to care for than his own body:
well, let it be so; nevertheless, this cause should not deter any
Christian from married life.

24 For first of all, though thou be not married, yet shalt thou not go
out free from all things; yet shalt thou suffer all manner of things, if
any harm come unto thee now, either to life or limb, or to honor, or to
goods. And such suffering will be all the more grievous to thee when
thou art out of wedlock and alone; as the scripture saith, "Woe to the
man that is alone; for if he fall, there is none to help him up again."

(25) Secondly, even though there is more trouble, care and concern in
the married state than otherwise, the married state should not be
despised or shunned for this reason. Reason: It is useful and good for
us, indeed highly necessary, that God should come to us with the cross
and that we should be tempted in all kinds of ways. For apart from the
temptation and challenge, we are in great, noticeable danger. We become
secure and cold and lazy against God's word, prayer and other things.
Because in the married state there are all kinds of hardships and
dangers, now with the wife, now with children, now with the servants,
now with food and other things, the married state is like a school for
Christians, in which they are finely trained so that they do not become
fainthearted in temptation and adversity, nor do they drop their
courage; but open their hearts to God, pray and desire help. This is
also a good work, for which the married state very often gives cause.
For the very reason that much distress and

**1310 L. 3, 523-525. A wedding sermon. W. xm, 2920-2923. 1311**

If they are otherwise God-fearing and true Christians, the spouses are
urged to pray with all earnestness and to trust and hope in God's help
and grace alone.

When such hope is fulfilled, then other good and holy works are also
found, that one thanks God for His help and grace; that one praises His
goodness and also puts other people at ease about it. All these things
are fine services and delicious good works, which the marriage state
gives daily under the hands; that faith and prayer do not celebrate, but
must go in constant practice, because now joy, now sorrow, now need, now
help and salvation can be seen every day, and cause either thanksgiving
or prayer.

27. Therefore, the text here says with truth: that marriage is a noble,
glorious and delicious life, which not only God has ordained and graced
with His blessing, but also all the saints have praised and presented to
us with their lives and beings as a glorious work of God; but marriage
is also to be praised because it is thoroughly full of good works, as is
now said: that a husband and wife can do nothing so small in their home,
which belongs to the housekeeping and the care of the children, they are
all holy and pleasing to God works, which go according to God's word,
will and order, and because of that happiness and salvation must be
found in it.

28 Therefore Christ himself holds marriage so gloriously that he comes
personally with his dear mother and apostles to the wedding at Cana in
Galilee, and there reveals himself with a glorious miraculous sign, that
he turns water into wine. That he might testify both with his own works,
that he loved the marital state, and that he most desired his blessing
to go therein. Such blessing shall remain with the married couple
forever, provided that they, as the 128th Psalm teaches, fear God and
walk in His ways. For where people despise God's word, knowingly live
in sins, and do not practice the love that should especially go between
husband and wife, but instead rebuke and beat one another and do all
kinds of harm: there is no wonder, although

instead of blessings, misfortune and all miseries follow. For what good
can one expect, since there is no fear of God? indeed, since one does
not want to have God, but closes the door to Him and His blessing
through various sins?

(29) Therefore the text does not say here in general: Marriage is a
delicious, glorious thing; but it also adds the word: "And the marriage
bed undefiled. With this he wants to delicately illustrate how marriage
should be, which he has praised so much, and wants first of all to
completely forbid the right defilement of the marriage bed among
Christians, so that one should beware of fornication and adultery, as it
is called afterwards. For this is the grossest and greatest defilement
of the marriage bed, so that one defiles the glorious and honest state
of conjugal life and disrupts God's order, and gives cause to all
misfortune here bodily and there eternally. After this, the defilement
of the marriage bed may well be called everything that causes the hearts
between spouses to be torn apart from each other, and to be moved to
anger, hatred and other unkind lives. For it is from such things that
gross defilement commonly follows, as we have now said.

(30) Wherefore, if the husband and wife desire to keep the marriage
bed pure and clean, as it ought to be kept, they shall flee all cause
that they may be provoked to ill will and wrath. Do not be insolent or
insolent in words, do not make a mockery of all things, but overlook and
overhear one another. Not only to keep friendship, but also to know that
God's will is so, and that God's word and command require it of us.
For as soon as the hearts are embittered, the devil has already found a
hole where he can separate and tear the marriage further without effort,
so that the bodies are also divided.

31 Therefore the modesty between husband and wife is to be used here,
since Peter says, 1 Petr. 3, 7: that men should dwell with their wives
with reason, and give them, as the weakest instruments, their honor, so
that prayer may not be hindered by displeasure or anger. For a man as
the head

**1312 L.3, S2S-S27. A wedding sermon. W. XIII, 2S23-2S26. 1313**

It is incumbent on him not to rule tyrannically but modestly and
sensibly, and sometimes to translate and overhear the weakness that is
especially found among the womenfolk, and not malice or willfulness.
Again, it is also due to women that they recognize such inherent
weakness and do not indulge in it too much, but keep themselves in check
with diligent attention, so that the man is not moved to cheap anger by
frequent misconduct. A kind word and obedient silence can quiet many a
quarrel, since otherwise anger and blows, and thus all harm, will follow
from backtalk and murmuring.

(32) Now where these two things are between husband and wife: that
they be chaste and modest, and that they be modest and kind to one
another in word and deed, then marriage, as the epistle to the Hebrews
calls it in this place, is a noble, delicious and glorious being, since
not only sensible people, but also God Himself in heaven with all His
angels and saints, have air and love. But where there is a lack of one,
that either by adultery and fornication the marriage bed is defiled, or
by unkind and wild attendance the hearts are moved against each other:
then one must fear that God will come as a judge and punish such
fornication or disorder. For it says here, "But the adulterers and
fornicators God will judge."

(33) Because the devil takes special pains among husbands and wives
either to cause fornication or to arouse the least amount of displeasure
and dissension, we should not only fight against this temptation daily
with diligent prayer to God and seek help, but also keep and accustom
ourselves with all diligence so that we ourselves do not give cause to
the devil's work and intentions through immodesty. For this is not the
least piece of divine blessing, where such conjugal attendance is
maintained in constant unity and friendliness. And the spouses
themselves must not give cause for ill-will among themselves by unkind
gestures or words; enough cause will be found every day of themselves
and unsought, by which one might be moved to ill-will, quarreling and
cursing and other things.

That one has enough to do, how to defend oneself with prayer and
humility and not allow the devil to take over.

Therefore, it is a very fine and Christian order to wish God's blessing
on the new married couple before the whole church and to make a common
intercession for them, so that they will begin their marriage in God's
name and that it will turn out well. Such a blessing, if it could be
bought, should not take money. But now the church does it without money.
And yet there are some people who are so rude that they would rather do
it without money. They may be let go. But those who are Christians will
enter into marriage all the more confidently for the sake of such
intercession.

For the married state, if the marriage bed remains undefiled, is ever a
glorious and delicious state, because God Himself has ordained and
established it, and has also given His blessing to it; and in general
all the saints point us to such a life, in which one has all kinds of
cause to serve God and one's neighbor, all hours with heaps, as we have
heard before.

(36) Therefore, if anyone would not be moved to marry by such a
glorious preaching, let him be moved by this, that the text says of
those who live apart from marriage or otherwise in fornication, with
bright words: "God will judge the adulterers and fornicators. For here
you hear, if there were no man on earth who knew or could punish such
fornication of you, that you nevertheless should not escape, but before
God's judgment you must go; he then will judge as he finds you. So Paul
says 1 Cor. 6, 9: "Do not be deceived; neither fornicators nor
adulterers will inherit the kingdom of God." Here he finely touches the
thoughts which are in people, that they think it is no special sin to
live apart from the state of marriage, and yet commit fornication; as
you see that the world holds such sin in exceedingly low esteem. But if
you want to know, if one does not want to convert, what the end shall
be, then listen here: You shall not inherit the kingdom of God. This
will be God's judgment on the adulterers and fornicators.

Now think what you will keep,

**[1314 L. 3, 527-629. a brief exhortation to married couples. W. xm,
2926-2929. 1315]{.underline}**

when you have lost God's kingdom. Therefore, everyone should beware of
such a judgment and sentence from God, and do it in time to improve his
life and avoid all fornication. Otherwise, although no temporal
punishment follows, God's judgment should not remain outside. For there
is a twofold sin: that one shuns the marriage state for the sake of a
small cause, and that one defiles oneself with sins the longer the more
contrary to God's will. Finally, God's judgment must follow. For here
is no other remedy nor counsel, but that thou forsake fornication, and
bring thyself hither into this state; and therefore not by words alone,

but also praise the marriage state gloriously and highly with your work
and deeds, and keep the marriage bed undefiled by chastity and friendly
attendance.

(38) Let this be said as a lesson and warning, not only for the sake
of the young people who are yet to be married, but also for the sake of
those who are already in the state of marriage: that they both know what
they should keep such a marital state for, and how they should send
themselves into it godly, so that God may be with them with His blessing
and they may have a good conscience about it. May God grant this to us
all, amen.

**A brief exhortation to the married couple on how to conduct themselves
in matrimony.**

1. You know from the word of God where the marriage state has its
origin, namely: that it is an order of God that man and woman should
dwell with each other and spend their lives together. First of all, so
that by this means sin and the flesh may be warded off and we may live
in good conscience. For God has severely forbidden fornication and
immorality, and, as can be seen in all history and daily experience, has
punished them horribly. Secondly, so that God's kingdom and the Church
may be preserved: not only by God's giving children in marriage through
His blessing, but also by the children being raised by the spouses to
fear and in God's Word, so that God's knowledge and the right worship
of God may always be inherited from one to the other, and thus many may
attain salvation.

2. because the marriage state is against sin and for the increase of
the kingdom of God, you and all who come to the marriage state should
thank God from the bottom of your hearts for this grace, that He has
given you such a heart and mind that you do not desire fornication and
sin as the ungodly world does, but fear God and desire all fornication.

To avoid. For this is a great mercy, because it is an example of how
Satan has many strings to keep hearts apart from the state of marriage,
so that they remain in sin and an evil conscience. But what kind of
judgment will follow against those who commit fornication, Paul says in
1 Cor. 6:9: "Neither fornicators nor adulterers will inherit the
kingdom of God." You, praise God, have now escaped such an abominable
judgment, if you keep together according to God's order and stay with
one another.

(3) But against this you shall not yet be sure. The evil enemy,
because he has not been able to hinder your heart and divine purpose,
will subdue himself in another way, how he may come between you and
break up such marital union, or at least make it difficult and
troublesome. And this especially is his hold, how he may tear the hearts
from one another, that as ye now have lust and love one toward another,
so he may cause unkindness and enmity. And the evil enemy finds in us a
great advantage for such his purpose. For we have been accustomed to
this from our youth through sin, so that each one likes to have the
right to

[13163 , S2S-S31. A brief exhortation to married couples. W. xm.
2sss-2ssi. 1317]{.underline}

and is reluctant to give way to the other; this does not lead to unity,
but to discord. For this reason, the spouses should guard against it
with special diligence, and first ask God for His Holy Spirit to govern
them in this way and to bring their hearts together in this way, so that
the evil enemy may not sow his seed between them and separate the
hearts. Such prayer is highly necessary, that it may go on daily among
husbands and wives, always asking one for the other, that God may
protect us from such evil.

(4) But because few people consider this, and there are far fewer who
do it and pray diligently, it is seen how the evil enemy plays his game,
that there are very few such marriages where there is no quarreling,
quarreling, cursing, reproaching, fighting, and beating. The same people
do not see that the devil likes it that way and creates it that way;
otherwise they would not only pray against it, but also defend
themselves, and where any anger wanted to drive them to scolding or
beating, they would not impose it as a real devil's work, which, if
followed, always makes things worse and brings one evil upon another.
For this is certainly true: through such a beginning the evil enemy
brings it about that in the end the hearts separate and love is even
lost. A miserable life must follow, where two should be with each other,
and yet cannot be with each other. And yet such plague is very mean in
the world. Where does it come from? People do not look at the enemy, the
devil. That is why they do not pray that God will defend them. And they
themselves do not know, when they are angry, when they insist, when they
do not give way to one another, when they do not want to get out of the
way, that they are only giving the devil his way. Now if you want to be
protected from such evil, if you desire to have a peaceful, friendly,
united marriage with your spouse, learn to ask God to rule your hearts
through the Holy Spirit, to ward off Satan, and to keep you in right
unity.

5 In addition to such prayer, special diligence must also be used. Peter
teaches about this, 1 Petr. 3, 7. "Husbands," he says, "dwell with
your wives with understanding, and approach the female as the weakest.

The husband is to begin and help to maintain unity and love in the
marriage. This command is especially directed to the husband, who is to
begin and help to maintain unity and love in the marriage. But this is
done so that he may proceed with reason and not with force, and overlook
the wife. The reason is that women are weak creatures and do not have as
much courage and a strong heart as men; they are quicker to be
challenged, quicker to take things to heart, quicker to be moved to joy
and sorrow than men. A man should notice this, not be hard on them,
sometimes overlook them, overhear them, help them with a good word and
spare them.

(6) But the world considers this modesty to be a womanish thing, and
thinks that if one is angry, if one beats with fists, that is a man's
duty. Well, St. Peter sees what is best for a man and what he should do
best. It is not called beating with fists. Needs reason, he says. And
that is even more, he means to give the woman her honor, that is, to
spare her and give in to her, that she is a weak tool, she has a small,
weak, soft heart, can be upset with a word, moved to anger. Learn that
and spare it. In this way you will not only obtain unity, but also win
its heart. For good words always do more for the right people than
blows. But whoever does not think well of the woman, always cursing,
beating and the like, what does he accomplish? He helps the devil to his
work, so that where there should be unity, love and joy, there becomes
enmity, hatred and suffering. This in itself is a serious matter, and
without a doubt the greatest evil that can befall people on earth in
worldly matters.

(7) But there is another and greater hindrance which prevents prayer.
For where there is disagreement, one cannot pray properly. Cause, the
Our Father or prayer is not for us alone, but for all the world. And
especially we include in it: we want to forgive our debtors, as we
desire that God will forgive us.

**1318 3, S31-S33. A brief exhortation to married couples. W. xm.
2931-2934. 1319**

How can disunited people do this? How can they pray for each other,
since one is so bitter against the other? But if prayer is gone for them
and others, what comfort and protection can they have? Since we cannot
meet and escape the devil except through prayer, and otherwise have no
comfort or help in all distress, since we can hold on.

8 Behold, in such temporal and spiritual miseries thou bringest thyself,
if thou wilt be Han's unreasonableness, not needing modesty, but
beating and biting like the evil horses. Peter does not call you, but
the devil likes it. Therefore beware of this; you can still be a man,
even if you do not lash out like this and ever think a word to your
spouse is good. Let the husband do this, and God will be pleased with
it; but to the husband and wife it brings all good and all blessing into
the house.

But what should the woman do? Should she misuse such oversight and
sensible attendance, and do whatever she pleases wherever she goes? No;
that would also be against God's command. For so Peter also preaches to
them, "Wives are to be subject to their husbands." "To be subject"
does not mean to rule, to create and to command. This is what a wife
should do to her servants and children, but to her husband she should be
subject, be commanded and follow. This is also a good thing that helps a
great deal in unity, when a wife looks after her husband, does his will,
does what she knows he likes, and avoids what she knows he dislikes. For
by this she wins the husband's heart away, that he may have pleasure
and joy, that he may go home again and to his wife. On the other hand,
where women are disobedient, obstinate and domineering, the man is
afraid of his own house and thinks that when he comes home he will have
to go to war and among the enemy.

(10) But it is not possible, it is sometimes overlooked; for we are
all frail, and especially women more than men. Let the woman beware lest
she persist in wrong and disobedience, but let her transgress.

Say: Dear husband, this and this happened to me in anger, forgive me, I
will never do it again 2c. Women should do this especially, because they
are more infirm. And not only the benefit should drive them to this, so
that they prevent disunity; but the strong command of God, as Paul says,
Eph. 5:22, 23, 24, where he says: "Let the wives be subject to their
husbands, as to the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife, even
as Christ is the head of the church. Therefore as the church is subject
to Christ, so also the wives are subject to their husbands in all
things." Item: "The woman fears the man." There you hear that it is
God's order: You shall recognize your husband as your lord and honor
him through fear and obedience. And Peter says in the place reported,
"The holy women of old adorned themselves, not with silver and gold,
but that they put their hope in GOD, and were obedient to their
husbands; as Sarah was obedient to Abraham, and called him lord. The
same daughters," says Peter, "you have become, if you follow their
example."

(11) This saying should be especially noted by women. It is true that
most of the misfortunes of marriage come upon them; they lose their
freedom, and in the married state they must suffer much hardship and
misery in bearing and rearing children, which they would have to endure
if they were not married. But Peter says: "This was the ornament of the
holy women, that they put their hope in God. That is, they had
confidence that he would help; for this reason they called upon him and
asked for help. Do the same, and you will be gloriously and beautifully
adorned in the sight of God and all His angels and saints, and you will
no longer be allowed to ask for good works. Be obedient to your husband,
let him be your command, look to him for what he desires and wants from
you; thus you serve God and preserve peace and unity in your house.

12) It will also follow that God will be with you and your spouse with
His grace and blessing, and will do you all good; as the 128th Psalm
says, "Blessed is he who fears the LORD, and trusts in His

[**1320 L. 3. 533-535.** The first funeral sermon. **W. XIII, 2934-2937.
1321**]{.underline}

Because of goes. You will feed on your handiwork. Blessed art thou, for
thou hast it good. Your wife will be like a fruitful vine around your
house, your children like the olive branches around your table. Behold,
thus is blessed the man that feareth the LORD."

(13) Therefore learn to send yourselves into matrimony, and you will
be provided for in every way. You have escaped the devil's snare,
fornication outside of marriage, and therefore you can have a good
conscience before God, because he himself has ordered such a married
life. And because you ask God daily to be with you with grace and to
preserve love and unity, and also with special diligence to accustom
yourselves to be quiet and peaceful and to keep each other's daily
faults too well, your attendance will be kind and loving, so that you
will have pleasure and joy in it. And even though it will not remain
outside, the cross will also be found, that now and then, now and then,
evil will come in and evil will happen; yet you can lift up your hands
with each other in such common distress and cry out to God for help. And
is the promise

Christ says, Matth. 18, 19: "If two of you become one on earth, why
should they ask, it shall be done for them of my Father in heaven. Why
would you then shy away from the need, because help is promised to you,
and the only thing missing is that you and your spouse, as a true, whole
church of God, ask for it? Then you know how necessary it is for us
Christians to carry the cross; otherwise we would never be aware of
God's gracious help.

14 Therefore, as I have said from the beginning, give thanks to God for
this grace that you have come into holy matrimony; and pray that God may
govern and guide you in it with grace, protecting you from sins and all
harm. And be careful that you do not let Satan creep in through anger
and unwillingness, so that your prayer, the highest consolation, will
not be hindered, and you can cry out to God for help in all distress,
and keep His blessing, grace, protection and protection forever; until
God calls you with yours to a different and better life, amen.

**The first funeral sermon.**

How Christians should take comfort over those who have died.

1 St. Paul says in Romans 15:4 that the Scriptures are for our learning,
so that we may have hope through the patience and comfort of the
Scriptures. Since it is natural for us to grieve for departed dear
friends, we should in such cases turn to the Scriptures and seek a
certain and right consolation from them against such grief and sorrow.
For outside of it we may seek comfort in all kinds of ways, but we will
not find a lasting one that can satisfy the heart and rightly ward off
displeasure. Only the Scriptures are able to do this. Cause: It is the
book of the Holy Spirit, which is the only one.

and right master who can change our hearts and bring comfort and joy
instead of suffering and sorrow.

(2) Therefore let us now take before us the history of the widow's
son, whom the Lord Christ raised from the dead, and set beside this
consoling work the testimony of the Scriptures: that we may learn to
comfort ourselves rightly, not only in the case where we lose dear
intimate friends, but also for ourselves, when it shall be time for us
to depart, that we may know what we shall hope and wait for at that
time. The history writes Lucas at 7, 11-16. and reads thus:

1322 **L. 3, P35-537.** The first funeral sermon. **W. XIII,
2937-2S40.** 1323

**Luc. 7, 11-16.**

And it came to pass afterward, that he went into a city called Nain; and
many of his disciples went with him, and much people. And when he was
come nigh unto the gate of the city, behold, a dead man was carried out,
which was an only son of his mother; and she was a widow; and much
people of the city went with her. And when the Lord saw her, he was
sorry for her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he came and touched the
coffin, and the bearers stopped. And he said, Young man, I say unto
thee, Arise. And the dead man arose and began to speak. And he gave him
to his mother. And fear came upon them all, and they praised GOD,
saying: There is a great prophet risen up among us, and GOD has
afflicted His people.

This is a very comforting story, in which both are very finely and
actually depicted: first, what we humans are wont to do with the dead,
and second, what our dear Lord Christ wants us to do. Experience shows
that when a dear person or friend passes away, we, like the widow here,
can do no more than weep and cry. Cause, we let ourselves think like
her, we have lost such a person, it is over with him, we must be
deprived of his presence and kindness from now on. This is our way and
nature, how we see ourselves and others; we cannot and do not know any
better about ourselves.

But what does this history teach us first, and then the Scriptures and
the Word of God by all means? Are such thoughts of this widow also true?
Item, does she also have cause for this, that she is so heartily grieved
and sorrowful, as if she had lost her son altogether? For our dear Lord
Jesus Christ comes and comforts her, not as we do with one another in
such sorrow and soften others with us; he has compassion for her, but he
does not like the weeping, for he has in mind to help her. Therefore, he
says, she should not weep like this. He goes to the bier and says,
"Young man, I say to you, get up!" Immediately the dead man gets up
and speaks, and he gives him back to his mother. There we see that this
woman had no reason to be so distressed, and that her thought was
completely wrong and erroneous, that she thought she had lost her son.
For before half a day is gone, her son is alive again and is fresh and
healthy. This happened at that time in the city of Nain, before the
gate, and everyone who was present saw it with his own eyes, that the
widow had lost her son.

Son was dead; but by this one word from the Lord Christ JEsu he was
raised and came to life again, as if he had only been sleeping on a bed.

5 Now the holy prophets and apostles, and the preaching of our dear Lord
Christ Himself, testify everywhere that our dear Lord Christ wants to do
just such a work with all those who believe in Him, that He will not
leave them in death, but will raise them from death to eternal life
through His word; as He says John 5:28, 29. 5, 28, 29: "The hour is
coming in which all who are in the graves will hear the voice of the Son
of God, and those who have done good will come to the resurrection of
life, and those who have done evil will come to the resurrection of
judgment." Therefore we also speak and confess in our holy faith: I
believe in the resurrection of the flesh and eternal life. That
therefore we should not only believe that as the Lord Jesus raised up
the widow's son here, so he will also raise up us and all Christians;
but we should believe still more, namely, that he will raise us up to
eternal life, since he was only raised up to this temporal life.

For this reason St. Paul continues his exhortation and teaching when he
writes to the Thessalonians (1 Thess. 4:13): "I will not keep you from
them that sleep, lest ye sorrow, as others which have no hope. With
these words, St. Paul makes a great distinction between Christians and
all other people, and concludes: "Those who are not Christians are
those who do not believe in Christ, do not consider him their Savior,
and through his death alone receive forgiveness of sins and eternal
life.

[1324 **L. 3, 537-540. The first funeral sermon. W. XIII, 2940-2042.**
1325]{.underline}

They have no hope and cannot have any comfort in death, neither for
themselves nor for others; they must remain in eternal death and be
damned. For this reason it would be necessary that they themselves, and
others with them, should think and care for the sake of such eternal
misery. But the Christians, on the other hand, are a peculiar people,
adorned with a glorious and delicious ornament. For they have a hope and
can comfort themselves, not only when other dear people are lost to them
through death, but when they themselves are to die.

But such hope is not a worldly hope, as one sees that sometimes some
prefer to die, or worry about others the less, that they have lived in
honor and dignity, have well cared for their children and left them well
2c. Worldly children sometimes comfort themselves in this way, but it is
a miserable, beggarly comfort that brings no hope against death. But
this is the hope and consolation of Christians, when they lose someone
dear, or die themselves, that they believe that Jesus Christ died and
rose again, and that God will bring with Him through Christ those who
have fallen asleep. This, I say, is the right consolation, which we
should well remember and imagine, diligently keep to it, and with it
build up our hearts against the displeasure and sorrow that arise from
the death of those who are related to us or dear to us.

8 For just as Christ here raises this widow's son from the dead and
restores him to her, when before she thought she had lost him, weeping
and wailing for him, so do you ever hear from all Christians, even
though they challenge God with death. You lose your dear child, your
dear husband, or any other good friend; do not weep, do not grieve, do
not let yourself think that you have lost him. For it is certain that,
if you are and remain a Christian, it will be restored to you. Our dear
Lord Christ himself will take him with him on the last day, and thus
help you together again, so that you will henceforth remain undivided
and with each other for eternity. This is a real hope and a certain
comfort that will actually follow.

where you enclose him properly in your heart, so that the sorrow must
disappear and the displeasure vanish.

(9) And though it is not possible that flesh and blood should not
grieve greatly in such a case; as we see that the holy patriarchs and
fathers heartily mourned for their parents, for their spouses, and for
their children: yet this hope shall make a difference between our sorrow
and grief, who are Christians, and the unbelievers. For those have no
hope nor comfort at all, since they neither have nor know the word of
God. And if they already believe that body and soul die together, their
displeasure must be all the greater. For there they cut off all hope for
themselves: What once is gone, that is gone and will never come back.
Therefore, the dearer someone has been to them, the greater is the
suffering. But if they believe that there is life after this life, they
can be even less satisfied. For on what will they rely, on what will
they hope for forgiveness of sins, since it is impossible that they
should not have an evil conscience because of sins?

(10) But Christians have a certain hope, since it is impossible that
they could fail. They know that whoever believes in Jesus Christ, that
is, whoever believes him to be a Savior, takes comfort in his death and
desires forgiveness of sins from him, that he will certainly have
forgiveness of sins and that God cannot be hostile to such people for
the sake of his Son. For God's command is clear, that we should believe
in Christ, accept Him and put our trust in Him. Therefore, although
death comes and takes such a person away, as it does others, Christians
know that death cannot hold him, but must restore him in his time on the
last day. Therefore, although flesh and blood are concerned about such
death, the Spirit is there who sees from God's word and concludes: Well
then, if I no longer have you here on earth, we will be reunited there;
Christ will restore the afflicted widow to her son. Therefore let there
be moderation in weeping and mourning 2c. So that the Christians

**4326 L. 3, 540-542.** The first funeral sermon. **W. XIII, 2S42-2S45.
1327**

Weeping is such weeping, because there is a glorious hope with it, which
finally outweighs the suffering, that it must disappear and melt away.

(11) Therefore all power is in this, that we take hold of such a hope
and form it firmly in ourselves; then we will not worry so much about
our dear brothers and friends who are dying, and we ourselves will be
all the more comforted, even if we have to go. And it is no one's fault
but our own if we leave such hope out of our eyes and hearts. For our
dear Lord Christ has put all his work with his Christians so that they
would be sufficiently assured of such hope, and would always have cause
to remember it and practice it.

012 For first, behold thy baptism. Why were you baptized? Why are others
baptized? Why do we like to be present in all discipline and reverence
when one baptizes? Is it also a thing by which one should receive money,
goods, power, or other such things? No. St. Paul thus says to the
Romans, Cap. 6:3: "Know ye not that all we which are baptized into
Christ are baptized into his death?" That is, baptism serves the
purpose, even though we must die as well as unbelievers, that it should
be a pledge, a sign and assurance to us that Christ died for us, and
that we should enjoy his death and live with him forever.

13 Therefore, when you remember your baptism, remember this hope also.
If you know that your good friend has been baptized, has taken comfort
in his baptism, and would reluctantly have forgiven himself for it, for
his sake let go of all sadness. For now, with his death, it has come to
pass that he may enjoy his baptism and be rightly made partaker of the
death of Christ. Therefore you have no cause to grieve for his sake, but
rather to rejoice. Moreover, consider how you are also preparing
yourself for this blessed journey home, commanding your spirit in a
right faith and confession of Christ, and immediately having a desire to
depart from this world and be in Christ 2c.

14 Just as baptism leads us to this blessed hope, so does the supper of
our dear Lord Christ. For

There we hear not only this great comfort: that the body of Christ was
given for us, and his blood poured out for the remission of sins; which
should ever be enough to comfort us against sin and eternal death; but
just such a sacrifice for our sin, namely, the body and blood of Christ,
is put into our mouths by the power of his word in bread and wine for
food and drink; so that, as the holy fathers also spoke of it, our
mortal bodies here on earth are nourished to eternal life by immortal
food. For this reason, it has become the custom among Christians for
sick people to be preserved with such living and eternal food and drink,
so that they may grasp the hope of the future life all the more surely.

(15) Therefore it is not true, as the devotees of the sacraments say,
that in such a supper of the Lord one receives no more than bread and
wine. If the word and command of Christ were not there, no one would
receive more than bread and wine. But the word of our Lord Christ is
clear. And wicked people and harmful deceivers are those who interpret
this word differently, namely: that he takes the bread in his hands,
gives thanks and breaks it, that is, he distributes it and says: "Take
and eat, this is my body. Item, he takes the cup, gives thanks, gives
it, and says, "Receive, and drink ye all of it: this is the cup of the
New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you and for many for the
remission of sins." These words make it clear that all true Christians
must confess, although the mouth cannot judge otherwise, for it eats
bread and drinks wine; nor can the eyes see otherwise: that they
nevertheless eat and drink the body and blood of Christ in this supper;
not with the thoughts (as the devotees of the sacrament are sometimes
wont to cover their errors), but they eat and drink the body and blood
of Christ substantially or bodily when they eat this bread and drink
from this cup. For thus says Christ Himself, we must not give the lie to
Him.

(16) Now, as I said before, the purpose of such eating and drinking is
that we may be able in this

**1328 8.3, 542-544. The first funeral sermon. W. xm, 2S45-M48. 1229**

Hope that we will live forever and not remain in death, since our bodies
are fed here on earth not only with perishable bread but also with the
body and blood of Christ. If you now know that your good friend in such
a case has kept himself as a Christian, has not despised such eternal,
grace-filled food, which he has sought and enjoyed, then be satisfied
only for his person, he will not remain in death. Christ, as Paul says,
will take him with him on the last day, and will deliver him to you
again, just as the widow here received her son. Thus the Holy
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, point us to such hope that
we should be certain and doubt nothing.

(17) Indeed, the whole ministry of preaching is designed to foster
such hope in us, so that it may grow stronger and more certain day by
day. For why does God's word exhort us to believe in the Lord Christ
and to put our heart and trust in his suffering and death? Why does
God's word always urge us to show love, to beware of evil, to fight
against the flesh and sin, and to set a good example for everyone? Is it
not all for this reason that we may hold fast to this hope? Because
where there is no faith, no love, but rather misery and a sinful life,
one must fear God's disgrace and punishment.

18 In particular, the Scriptures have a very fine way of speaking of
death and people who have died. For where we speak according to our
manner: He is also dead, he is also dead, he is long decayed; but the
Scripture says (but only of Christians), He is asleep; so death is not
called death, but a sleep. This indicates that although Christians must
die as well as unbelievers, their death is a sweet, sweet sleep for
them, from which they will be raised again. For as it is impossible that
a healthy sleeping person should not wake up again, so it is also
impossible that a Christian should always lie in death, because he
believes in Christ, confesses him, desires his help, and is thus
departed from this world. Christ will save him [through his

He will certainly call forth the Word, like the widow's son, on the
last day, and bring him *] with him to the judgment of the devil and
the wicked on earth, and thus preserve him eternally.

(19) Since all this is so, let us now conclude what we should do and
how we should think about the deceased. Should we also grieve and weep,
as we usually do when a good friend encounters a particular misfortune?
Should we also think that we have lost them, that we will not be
together again? Certainly not! For how would this rhyme with the hope of
which we have now heard that it is presented and assured to us in so
many ways? It is certain that nothing bad will happen to Christians when
they die. For when they fall asleep and pass away, it will be their
blessed hour, since all their lives they have prayed and said every day:
Deliver us from all evil. This cannot happen unless we take our leave of
the world in the name of Jesus Christ; then we will be truly rid of all
evil, and it will finally follow that we, together with all Christians,
will be raised to eternal life through Christ. There we will come
together again and find those who were dear to us on earth. Yes, we will
become one household with the dear angels and the holy patriarchs,
prophets and apostles, and have all joy in God and in such joy give
thanks to Him and praise Him for eternity.

(20) Now consider whether we are not poor, miserable people, that we
let ourselves grieve so violently where any one's spouse, child,
brother, sister, or other good intimate friend falls away. If it is
much, he might have lived with you for another ten or twenty years. You
let yourself grieve so much for such a short time, and will not let
yourself be comforted or rejoice that instead of such a short time you
will dwell and remain with him forever in all joy and gladness; whereas
here on earth there can be nothing but trouble and sorrow, as we see
every day, especially in our households, among our closest and dearest
friends.

*) [*c]*

**1330 D. s, 544-546. The other funeral sermon. . W. XIII, 2S48-2S50.
1331**

The deceased experience that now this, now that is lacking, now that
becomes ill, another receives a damage otherwise. The deceased are above
all this, and lie in their brooding as in a gentle bed and quiet sleep,
and wait when our Lord Christ will come, knock at the bed and call out
to them that they shall live with all the blessed, with God and His dear
angels for eternity. Who would want to mourn for such people, since we
have joy over them and should thank God from the bottom of our hearts
that they have come so close to their hope; since we, who are still left
on earth, have so far to go and so much driving to endure before we come
to it. .

21 Let us learn this, for it is not fitting that we Christians, who have
such hope, should grieve so heartily and weep so bitterly with this
widow in the Gospel. She probably thinks that it is over with her son.
She does not know what a good guest is coming to her, who only needs a
word and her son will live again, be fresh and healthy. If she had known
or could have hoped for such a thing, her tears would have remained
behind. But we know it, and this hope, as you have heard, has been
presented to us in many ways and made certain. For this reason it is not
fitting that we should weep and grieve as much as the Gentiles for the
sake of those who have fallen asleep in Christ,

who have no hope. For it is certain that those who have fallen asleep in
Christ will not remain in death, but will rise again to eternal life.
There we will join them, provided we hold fast to faith, and thus live
eternally with them; and not with them alone, but with the dear angels,
with the holy patriarchs, prophets, apostles and all God's saints.

(22) If such a hope were firm and certain in us, don't you think we
would forget all sorrow and long with all our hearts for God to come
soon and take us away from this misery and bring us to such glorious
company? But flesh and blood keeps its kind, that does not stand;
therefore we do not let it go to our hearts. We have no desire for it;
on the contrary, we are stuck hand and foot in the temporal, we like it,
we cannot forget it.

For this reason it is necessary that we be continually encouraged by
word and sermon, and that we be often and much admonished that we do not
forget this hope, but that the longer we do so, the more and firmer it
becomes in our hearts, and so that we not only do not worry about our
dear friends, to whom no harm will come when they die, but also gladly
and willingly desire death ourselves, so that we may also attain to such
grace and blessedness. May God grant this to us all for the sake of
Christ, His dear Son, amen.

**The other funeral sermon.**

What the Christians should think when they go with the corpse, and of
some special cases, how we should comfort ourselves inside.

Your beloved ones have heard how Christians, for the sake of the hope
they have, do not want to mourn and weep so miserably, and how they want
to care for the dead as the pagans do. Cause: Just as Christ did to the
widow

As he raised his Son from death with a word, so he will also raise his
Christians on that day, that they may live forever with us, if we are
Christians in any other way. Therefore their departure from us shall not
be otherwise in our hearts, than as if they were from the dead.

**[1332 2.8. 846-548. The other funeral sermon. W. XIII, 2950-2953.
1333]{.underline}**

He has left our city and country for another country for some time, and
we are to follow him in his own time, so that we may again spend our
lives with one another. There you can see how natural it is to worry
about such departures. But besides the sorrow, hearts always hold on to
the consolation: "It is a matter of this little time, and then we will
be together again. So it should be here, too; then the sorrow and grief
for the sake of hope would be finely lost.

(2) But whoever does not want to give up his thoughts because of the
dead can think other and more useful thoughts, which rhyme with such
hope and improve us. As you will hear, the Scriptures themselves point
us to other thoughts.

For when you are with people who have died, or at the funeral, you have
great cause to remember with all your heart and earnestness that you are
also a human being; and as it has now happened to this friend,
acquaintance or relative, so it will also happen to you one day, that
God will claim you from this life.

4 Therefore, do not be sure to continue in deliberate sins, but remember
God's judgment, and prepare yourself for such a journey, so that you
will not be taken by surprise and overtaken by God's right but terrible
judgment, like unrepentant sinners. If you take such thoughts seriously,
you will have so much to do with yourself, you will find such misery and
sorrow in yourself that you will forget the deceased, not weep over
them, but judge them blessedly; but over you, who are still in such
burden and sorrow of sin, you will weep from the heart. Such weeping is
necessary and useful, for it brings correction; whereas that weeping is
useless and annoying, for it deprives us of the hope we have through
Christ, which should comfort us. Therefore the wise man says,
Ecclesiastes 7:3, 4, 5: "It is better to go to the house of lamentation
than to go to the house of revelry. In the latter you see how all men
come to an end, and the living take it to heart. It is mourning

better than laughter, for through mourning the heart is improved.
Therefore the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the
heart of fools in the house of joy." Remember this saying diligently,
and when you walk with a corpse, learn what your thoughts should be. You
must not worry about the one who has now finished his misery and has
fallen asleep in the right confession of the Son of God; but worry for
your own sake, remember, you must also go down.

How would you now be sent on such a journey? Behold, thou liest in
fornication, thou revels and boozes, thou scantiest and stingiest, thou
art in public hatred and enmity against thy neighbor. You have done
public harm to your neighbor and have neither repudiated nor refuted
such harm. This is a certain indication that you are not afraid of
death. But if he hastened you, as happens to many, how would you stand
before God's judgment? Therefore, let yourself go in time and send
yourself like a Christian, so that God may find a good will and a good
intention in you at least (because life and deeds are so bad). But what
happens? We go to the grave, we see that this one goes today, that one
tomorrow, since we have been around and around all the days; yes, we
know that death has never overtaken nor spared anyone, no one comes
again: and yet we go just like the blind, who see just as little in the
middle of the day as in the pitch dark of night; we do not let such an
example go to our hearts; we do not think that it will also be with us
today or tomorrow. Therefore we remain in the old skin, and always go on
in the old trot before us, like the old cart horses, which do not let
themselves be driven out of their stride. Therefore, because we have so
many warnings every day, but do not perceive them at all and improve
ourselves so little from them, we are truly in great danger.

(6) But Christians, remembering this and other things, may lose good
friends, though flesh and blood are in pain, so that they nevertheless
hold on to the joyful hope, knowing that they have not lost them
altogether, that God has only hidden them for a time and kept them safe.

**1334 L. 3, 548-550. The other funeral sermon. W. xm, 2953-295."
1335**

But he will bring them back with him through Christ and deliver them to
us again, provided we remain true Christians. Therefore, they are
satisfied for the sake of the deceased. But they think of themselves
when it is up to them and how God will find them. These are useful and
good thoughts, since certain recovery follows. Therefore the wise man,
that we may have cause for it, admonishes us that we should gladly let
ourselves be found in the house of complaint. For there we see the
example before our eyes, how it will end with us so soon and easily.

But the fools, that is, such people who do not accept God's word and do
not fear God, still shy away from it, cannot and do not want to be
around dying people, rather find themselves in the tavern, seeking joy
and amusement. But how do they finally get out? Because they do not see
such distress before them, and worry only about the world and what is
good for them, God's judgment and sentence suddenly overtakes them, so
that they do not know what is happening to them, and they are completely
desolate. This does not happen to wise, God-fearing people; they like to
be around people who are dying, because they do not laugh or rejoice,
but mourn and lament. For by this they are corrected and reminded that
they should also prepare themselves for such a journey home, live in the
fear of God, and wait for such an hour every day; for this reason they
are not safe, like the great multitude. When God comes to them, he does
not find them asleep, as those do, but alert and cheerful, who take good
care of their things and know how to get out. Whereas they, like a man
who is attacked in his sleep, do not know what happens to them, where to
go out or where to come in.

8. then it follows that they open their hearts and mouths to God,
confess their sin, and ask for forgiveness of sins and for the Holy
Spirit to strengthen faith in them, to kindle love, to awaken the hope
of eternal life through Christ, and to sweep out and dampen the
remaining sin; so that flesh and blood and the poisonous Satan will not
bring them back into his snares and disobedience, and thus out of God's
kingdom and grace.

(9) For with this the wicked Satan goeth forth without ceasing, to
provoke our flesh, and

The Holy Spirit drives us against God's word and will, and it would be
impossible for us to resist such an enemy if the Holy Spirit did not sit
with us and help us to fight. See, here you will find such thoughts
again, which will improve you excellently, and point from the deceased,
who now lies in God's rest, to yourself, and teach you how you should
prepare and send yourself properly for such a journey. Thus prays the
holy prophet Moses in the 90th Psalm. After he has made a long
lamentation about how miserable it is for us humans, who bear all kinds
of hardship and misery here on earth, and then still have to fear the
wrath of God, and have to wait for eternal death because of our sins, he
says: "Oh God, who believes that you are so angry, and who is afraid of
such your wrath? Therefore teach us to remember that we must die, that
we may be wise."

What kind of prayer is this? Should our Lord God teach us this first of
all? We see it before us every day, yes, we experience it daily, that it
is always leaning toward the pit with us. Why then does Moses ask that
God teach him and all of us such things? Answer: It is true, we all see
it before us every day; but it does not go to all of our hearts, we do
not consider it seriously that such things can happen to us every
moment; otherwise we would probably arrange our lives differently, we
would not be so concerned about the temporal, much less would we burden
ourselves with sins for the sake of it and be caught in God's wrath; We
would gladly help and serve everyone, be at odds with no one, harm no
one; but always deal with God's word, and ask God to keep us in it and
give us a blessed end. This is called Moses being wise. Again, this is
the greatest foolishness, that we do not remember God, God's judgment,
God's wrath and the eternal goods, but instead worry about the
temporal, which we must finally leave behind.

(11) Just as Moses prays and sets an example for all of us, that we
should not forget the last hour, but always pray that he may be with us
with his grace in his word.

**[1336 D- 3. sso-552. The other funeral sermon. W. xm, 29S6-2959.
1337]{.underline}**

and right faith, and comfort us by the Holy Spirit: so our dear Lord
Christ also teaches and tells us to pray in the Lord's Prayer, when we
say: Deliver us from evil. For this cannot happen sooner, nor in any
other way, for God will take us to Himself with grace and put an end to
this temporal life. But if you want to think seriously about how easy it
is for the devil to deceive us and throw us into sin, you will certainly
take the sixth petition with you, and ask not only for deliverance from
all evil, but also that God will not lead us into temptation, that is,
that He will stand with us in all kinds of trials and temptations, and
lead us out again through His Word and Holy Spirit, so that we do not
get stuck in them. Behold, thou shalt have so much to do with thyself,
if thou wilt otherwise keep thyself right with men that are dead, that
thou shalt justly forget the dead, and care for thyself alone, and weep.

12 Thirdly, this shall also follow: Where you are about deceased
Christians, that you should thank God from the bottom of your heart
first for the deceased and then also for yourself, that he has let both
of you come to the knowledge of his dear word, and in such confession
has preserved your dear friend to the end; for this is the greatest
grace and the highest benefit. But we should honor God in this case, and
put our trust firmly in Him that He will also grant us such an hour,
and, as we hope, not only preserve our dear brothers and sisters, who
have departed in the right confession, until that day, but also gather
us to them and let us live with each other for eternity.

(13) That is to say, to keep oneself rightly and Christianly with the
corpse: not only to make a measure of lamentation and weeping, but to
comfort oneself with this hope that through Christ she and we will
remain heirs of eternal life, and of the dear angels, patriarchs,
prophets, and apostles, and of all the saints of God who have ever been,
companions in eternity. For just as Christ here raises the widow's son
from death by his word, so Christ will raise up all those who believe in
him.

That is, those who take comfort in his suffering and death will also
awaken to eternal life on the last day. This is the comfort we are to
have in our dear brothers and sisters who pass away confessing Christ
and his word.

(14) But there are raw people who do not respect God's word in a
healthy body, who do not go to the reverend sacrament, but lie in sin
and public displeasure. And even though they are in a bad way, they let
themselves be persuaded against their will to call some church servant
and to receive the sacrament from him. They are not really serious,
however, and do it more for the sake of habit and so that they are not
thought to be unbelievers than for the comfort of their conscience. For
this reason, it often happens that they do not concern themselves with
God, but with money, goods and the like. For such people one may pray
with earnestness, because they are still alive, that God may enlighten
their hearts and turn them to His word. But it is a very dangerous trade
with them. And sometimes, by such examples, God wants to warn others who
are around and with them, so that in time they will refrain from sins,
keep the Word, and become devout. For from time to time there are many
indications that one must be concerned that such people will die and go
badly.

(15) Although the bodily loss, and especially the public display of
God's wrath against such persons, must be hard on a true Christian's
heart, and make him sorrowful and miserable (for the hope we spoke of
above is not there), let them see that God does so with a favorable
judgment, and that the world has good need of such examples, so that it
may learn the more earnestly and hurriedly to send itself to God's Word
and a Christian life. But they are to be moved to thanksgiving for
themselves by the fact that God has given them a different heart, and to
command Him the matter with those who die without light and cross, that
is, without knowledge and confession of God's Son, the Crucified One,
because they are certain that He is just and merciful; therefore no one
is wronged by Him.

16 Except in this case, however, it carries itself.

**[1338L. g, SS2-SS4. The other funeral sermon. W. xm, 2sss-2S6i.
133A]{.underline}**

It happens very often that we think that some people have an annual
farewell from this life. When people are sometimes found dead in bed, or
otherwise suddenly go to their deaths, we think to ourselves: Who knows
whether he also thought of God in such distress, called upon Him,
desired His help? If he had lain on a bed, and had only a few hours with
a person who had taught him God's word and comforted him with the holy
sacrament, there would be more hope that he would have come to a happy
end. So we commonly remember and grieve over them; for they have been
dear to us, and would not like that they had gone badly.

Item 17: It happens a lot, especially in the dying days, that people go
astray because of great weakness in the head and remain in such weakness
until the end. It helps nothing and is in vain if one tells them about
God's word for a long time. This also seems to be a dangerous dying,
since there is little hope or comfort.

(18) In such cases, we should focus on two things in particular, and
then eliminate all other thoughts. For we cannot lack these two things.
The first is to look at the lives of such people as they led while they
were still healthy and in good health. If you find that they have loved
the word, diligently kept it, not despised the holy sacrament, confessed
and loved the Lord Jesus, and comforted themselves, be satisfied if they
pass away suddenly. For though weakness and sin have come under, yet
trust in the Lord Christ has been there; the same is the right burning
fire, which consumes all sin and all filthiness, and purifies us.

(19) To such a hope serves the other part: that we should not take
away the name of our Lord GOD, and that we should leave the office of
the Lord Christ JEsu unhindered and unobstructed. What then is the name
of God? He is called merciful and gracious, and has testified to such
mercy and grace with His highest treasure, His only begotten Son, whom
He made man and let die on the cross for sinners. This is God's

Name and complete will. Besides, consider also: what the Son of God's
actual office is; namely, that he should seek the poor sinners, acquire
mercy for them, free them from sins and make them blessed. But how could
God come to lose such a name for the very reason that this man has
suddenly gone away or fallen into madness? Should he not be merciful for
this reason? Should he not help for that reason?

(20) Yes, the greater the need and the higher the journey, the more
you should believe that God, according to His name, has been with such a
person through His Holy Spirit, and does not want to judge him according
to how He found him at that time, since by chance he was no longer a
real person, but a half-dead person, or even a person deprived of his
reason. No, God does not want to be so tyrannical, he does not want to
judge us as we are, when we are weakest and most miserable. He is more
interested in public confession, in trusting in His Son, and in the fact
that you let the Word be dear to you while you were still healthy and
able, than in all the other sins and infirmities that went along with
it. So, how could the Son of God do that now, especially in such
distress, he should leave his office and not seek the poor sinner by his
grace, not help him and not assist him by his spirit, when he is most in
need and the distress is most severe and greatest? That would be to
revile the pious, gracious Lord to the highest degree, who would
consider him ungracious, since grace is most needed.

021 He saith, I will judge no man: but my word shall judge them that
believe not. This is not said of those who are now deprived of their
reason and are no longer true men, but of those who have their reason,
who can use their ears, eyes and other members according to their will.
If they go, do not ask for the word, despise the sacrament, they already
have their judgment. Because they do not want grace, they are not
helped; they will not find another word or another Christ. But here,
since one either dies suddenly, or goes out in madness

**[1340L .3, SS4-SS". The other funeral sermon. W. xm, smi-E.
1341]{.underline}**

If a person falls into weakness, there is no need, because it is known
that such people in a healthy body have loved God's word, have not
despised the sacraments, and have not otherwise led an unchristian life.
For no one can be without sin and not have an evil conscience because of
sin. But such an evil conscience is helped by faith in Christ; where
this is, there is grace and forgiveness of sins. Yes, Christ says: He is
the physician of sins and will not be found anywhere else except in
sinners.

(22) Therefore in such cases every Christian should think thus:
Behold, there are two things; the first, that I die and after such death
through Christ shall be eternally blessed. The other: how, when or where
I will die, or God has set my death upon me. Now the first part: that I
shall die and be saved, that I know for certain, praise God! and neither
the devil nor the gates of hell shall take it from me; for Christ is a
Savior, he has paid for my sin, reconciled me to God, overcome death and
opened the entrance to life. This is certain; and wretched, yes,
condemned is the man who allows himself to be made uncertain of these
things. Since this is certain, we should not worry about the other thing
that is uncertain, namely, how God will take us from this life. If the
dear God will let me come to bed, then I trust in His graces, and I also
pray daily that He will keep me in the right faith in His word, which is
a power of God that makes alive and blessed those who believe in it,
until the end. But if he will take me away suddenly, this is good; for I
have a Savior who has promised me eternal life after my life, even
though he has not made sure how he will let me die. This is in his hand;
we are his, we die or live. Let us therefore not be anxious about it,
but give thanks to his grace day and night that we are provided for
after this life.

(23) But this shall be in all ways, because we are uncertain of our
end, when or how God shall require us to be in

We must keep our consciences clear and guard against public anger. We
will never be able to live here on earth without sin. But there is a big
difference between Christians and unbelievers. Christians recognize
their sin, are sorry for it, renounce it and ask for mercy through
Christ. The unbelievers do not do this; that is why they live in a very
great fare. If you have seen this in your dear friend, that he does not
knowingly and willingly want to do wrong; moreover, that he has
diligently kept the word, sought comfort in it, practiced it and
diligently kept to it, then let God rule. It is called well lived,
because one lives in the faith and word of God; and must also follow
that one dies well on it. For we have a merciful, gracious God, and we
know that our dear Lord Christ will not pardon himself for his ministry
to poor sinners, but will stand by them in all distress.

24. Because the distress is greater where one is suddenly and
unthinkingly attacked with death in bed or in other circumstances, or
where one is deprived of one's senses in such distress, do not doubt
that the right sin doctor will be there, and God will not judge such
people as He finds them in such distress: do not doubt that the right
sin doctor will be there, and the gracious, merciful God will not judge
such people as He finds them at that time in such distress, when they
are no longer real people; but as He found them before, when they were
fresh and healthy and in their right mind, heard God's word, rejoiced
in it, comforted themselves with it and confessed it. Therefore, such
death is not a terrible death.

(25) He is terrible to those who live or are caught in public
blasphemies; as some ungodly preachers in Berlin, Leipzig, Merseburg and
other places, blaspheming God and his word in the pulpit, suddenly fell
down and died like cattle. Item, those who live in public trouble,
despise the word and the sacraments, live and revel in drunkenness day
and night, practice fornication and other sins, and do not desist from
them.

When such people suddenly go there, it is a terrible death, since
eternal damnation must surely follow. For God does not want the contempt
of His word.

1342L .3, SS6-LSS. A common form. W. xni. 2W4-2W6. 1343

As Paul says in Gal. 5:19-21: "The works of the flesh are manifest,
which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, idolatry, sorcery, enmity,
strife, envy, wrath, strife, dissensions, divisions, hatred, murders,
boasting, devouring, and such like. Of whom I have told you before, and
still say before, that they which do these things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God." Therefore everyone in times of

and mend his ways before God's wrath and judgment overtakes him.

(27) Enough has been said for this lesson on how to deal with
Christians who have died. May the almighty, eternal Father in heaven,
for the sake of Christ His Son, through His Holy Spirit, graciously keep
us in His Word, and when our hour comes, grant us a blessed end, amen.

To God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Spirit, the one
true God, be praise and glory for this beneficial teaching and all His
benefits, forever and ever, amen.

**A common form of exhorting the audience to common prayer at the end of
the sermon.**

My friends!

Since we are now gathered in the name of our dear Lord Christ, and have
orders to pray, and promise: what we ask in the name of Christ JEsu,
that our gracious Father in heaven may gladly give it to us; let us
first consider the distress of all Christendom, and ask that God may
keep His word pure and true for us against all rottenness and heresies,
and graciously protect His poor Christendom against all the schemes of
the devil and tyrants. After that, let us also pray for this temporal
life that God will grace it with gracious peace and blessed weather,
protect it from theurge and pestilence, and especially ward off the Turk
for the sake of His name. Pray also for the Imperial Majesty, the Lord
of us all, and all other authorities, that God may enlighten their
hearts by His Spirit and Word, so that God's Word and honor may be
promoted through them and not hindered, and that we may have all the
more peace in their regiment. After this, pray for all princes and
states who have so far confessed God's word, that God will graciously
keep them in such confession without all vexation, and bring others to
it. Again, however, those who have persecuted it wantonly and still do
not desist from it, that God will defend their presumption and
graciously protect His Church against them. Especially, however, because
now and then in all countries many poor Christians are persecuted,
chased away, imprisoned, miserably tortured and strangled for the sake
of the Word, we are obliged to pray to God for them, that He may comfort
and strengthen their hearts by His Holy Spirit, keep them firm in their
confession, and blessedly help them in body and soul. Pray also for an
honorable, wise council, our lords here, that God may be with their
regiment, and give happiness and salvation to it, so that God's word,
honor and all respectability may be promoted, all trouble, of which
there is still much, may be averted, and the common good may be governed
well and peacefully. After that, pray also for our poor brothers and
sisters here and in the whole world, who are either seriously ill or in
great distress, that God will take care of them with grace. In the end,
pray for the poor people who still lie under the papacy in error and
with an evil conscience, and who do not have the blessed knowledge of
the divine word, as we do: that God may also lead them to such light of
His grace, and may make them eternally blessed with us through right
faith in Christ. To obtain all this, pray with devotion an Our Father.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all, Amen.
